CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

To Beam or Not to Beam: A Study of Remote 

Telepresence Attendance at an Academic Conference 

Carman Neustaedter1, Gina Venolia2, Jason Procyk1, and Daniel Hawkins1

1School of Interactive Arts & Technology, Simon Fraser University, Surrey, BC, Canada 

2Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA 

carman@sfu.ca, gina.venolia@microsoft.com, jep4@sfu.ca, drhawkin@sfu.ca 

 

to 

remotely 

and  used  Beams 

ABSTRACT 
Attending  and  presenting  at  conferences  is  a  core  part  of 
academic and industrial research. Yet it can sometimes be 
challenging to attend conferences due to travel restrictions, 
time limitations, or accessibility challenges. To understand 
how people may be able to attend conferences remotely, we 
explored  the  use  of  commercial  telepresence  robots  called 
Beams at Ubicomp/ISWC 2014. Seven people attended the 
conference 
attend 
presentations,  ask  questions,  and  participate  in  break 
mingling activities. We collected data of their activities and 
conducted  an  online  survey  with  the  broader  set  of 
conference attendees. Results show that telepresence robots 
supported attendance at a basic level and even empowered 
those with accessibility challenges. However, issues related 
to  identity,  interaction,  navigation,  and  privacy  emerged. 
We  present  recommendations  for  future 
telepresence 
attendance  at  conferences  focused  on  balancing  these 
concerns with the benefits participants received.  
Author Keywords 
Telepresence; robots; academic conferences 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.3 [Information interfaces and presentation]: Group and 
Organization Interfaces - Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work 
INTRODUCTION 
There  now  exists  a  whole  host  of  ways  to  be  present  in  a 
remote  location  through  telepresence  technologies.  This 
includes  a  range  of  basic  to  advanced  video  conferencing 
setups, the use of virtual environments and avatars [2], and 
the more recent emergence of telepresence robots that can 
be remotely controlled [27,31,32,35]. Such technologies are 
now  being  used  to  support  telecommuting,  distributed 
teams [35], remote meeting attendance [23], and conference 

Permission to  make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be  honored. 
Abstracting with  credit  is  permitted. To copy  otherwise, or republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819922 

418

attendance (e.g., [30]) where each activity has the goals of 
fostering interaction, awareness, and feelings of presence. 
The  2014  ACM 
International  Joint  Conference  on 
Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing (Ubicomp) and 2014 
International Symposium on Wearable Computing (ISWC) 
were  jointly  held  in  Seattle,  USA  with  approximately  800 
attendees.  As  part  of  these  conferences,  we  planned, 
organized, and studied telepresence attendance. Ubicomp is 
a multi-track conference focused on the study, design, and 
development  of  mobile,  wearable,  and 
sensor-rich 
technologies. ISWC is a multi-session symposium featuring 
cutting-edge  research  in  wearable  technologies.  Together, 
Ubicomp and ISWC featured three parallel tracks of paper 
presentations,  a  poster  and  demo  reception,  and  a  suite  of 
workshops  and  a  doctoral  consortium  preceding  the  main 
conference program.  

Figure 1: Beams at Ubicomp/ISWC 2014. 
The goal of telepresence attendance at the conference was 
to  allow  remote  attendees  to  see  presentations  and  engage 
in networking and mingling during the conference’s breaks. 
We  used  Suitable  Technologies’  BeamPro  telepresence 
robots  (Figure  1,  hereafter  called  Beams)  to  support  the 
remote attendance. Beams are telepresence robots that show 
a live video feed of a remote user and allow him or her to 
remotely  drive  the  robot.  Seven  participants  attended 
remotely  using  Beams.  We  studied  the  experiences  of 
various stakeholders to inform future usage of telepresence 
at  conferences,  as  well  as  future  telepresence  designs.  We 
observed  remote  attendees’  experiences  throughout  the 
conference  and  conducted  semi-structured  interviews  with 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

to 

issues  with  presenting  one’s 

them.  We  surveyed  the  local  attendees  following  the 
conference to understand their reaction to the telepresence 
attendance. 
Our  work  has  shown  that  both  local  and  remote  attendees 
saw value in offering remote attendance at Ubicomp/ISWC. 
Many reported on positives of the experience. Despite this 
praise, we found several challenges that should be mitigated 
in  future  telepresence  attendance  at  conferences.  These 
related 
identity  and 
identifying others in the conference venue, interacting with 
in-person  attendees  during  breaks,  navigating  through 
crowded  areas  and  maintaining  spatial  awareness,  and 
privacy  concerns  resulting  from  being  present  in  two 
different locations at once. 
RELATED WORK 
Telepresence Robots 
Since  Eric  Paulos’  work  on  “personal  roving  presence”  in 
1998  [25],  a  rich  body  of  work  has  explored  robotic 
telepresence  devices.  Such  a  device,  sometimes  called  a 
mobile robotic presence or mobile remote presence (MRP) 
[31,32],  combines  aspects  of  video  conferencing  with 
remote-controlled mobility to give a single remote user the 
ability to interact autonomously with a group of collocated 
people  [17].  Applications  including  office  workplaces, 
various  healthcare  situations,  aging  in  place,  and  school 
attendance have received formal study [17].  
Most closely related to our work are studies of workplace 
telepresence robots. We caution, however, that this setting 
is  not  the  same  as  the  conference  setting  that  we  studied.  
Yet it provides a very useful and relevant comparison.  In 
this  research,  Jouppi  [15]  found  wide  field  of  views, 
mobility,  and  audio  ‘whispers’  during  conversations  to  be 
important  in  workplace  settings  using  MRPs.  Follow-on 
work emphasized the importance of 360-degree views and 
the  preservation  of  user  head  height  and  posture  [16]. 
Kimura  et  al.  [16]  and  Paepcke  et  al  [23]  illustrated  the 
importance  of  visual 
feedback  along  with  socially 
appropriate vocalization levels for the remote person. More 
recently, wide angle and panoramic views have been shown 
to  improve  peripheral  awareness  and  task  completion, 
though  they  require  additional  cognitive  processing  by 
users [13]. Studies have also shown the importance of robot 
mobility on task completion [26] as well as the height of the 
robot as it relates to persuasiveness [28].   
Lee et al.’s [18] in-depth study showed how the mobility of 
telepresence  robots  afforded  a  sense  of  availability  and 
presence  awareness  amongst  co-workers.  Telepresence 
robots  helped  create  a  sense  of  social  connectedness 
between  remote  and  local  colleagues  by  enabling  casual 
interactions, though new social norms needed to be created 
around negotiations of space and control of movement (e.g., 
is  it  okay  to  push  a  robot?).  In  addition,  we  see  the 
importance  of  knowing  how  one  looks  in  a  remote  robot 
[18].  Lewis  et  al.  [19]  provide  a  series  of  heuristics  for 
evaluating  MRP  systems,  including  the  minimization  of 

 

419

driving costs, allowing flexible use, and ensuring safety and 
courtesy.  
Throughout our study findings, we point to past research in 
cases where our work validates previous telepresence robot 
studies or extends them. 
Academic Conferences 
Turning  to  academic  conferences,  we  see  a  number  of 
efforts to study the use of virtual environments for remote 
conference  attendance.  First,  Jones  [14]  studied  remote 
attendance at the Teaching in Community Colleges Online 
Conference  (TCC  1999)  and  the  V-Learn  Track  of  the 
Avatars  Conference  (Avatars  1999),  which  both  used  the 
virtual  environment  Active  Worlds.  Results  showed 
challenges  with  using  stock  avatars  to  represent  people, 
time zone differences, as well as the use of a chat channel 
for all conference interactions [14].  
More  recently,  Erickson  et  al.’s  [5]  2011  paper  describes 
the use of a version of Second Life for supporting avatar-
only  attendance  at  IBM’s  Academy  of  Technology 
conference  by  502  employees.  Employees  used  a  self-
created avatar and attended a series of single-track talks as 
well  as  plenary  sessions.  Social  challenges 
included 
creating an avatar with a desired representation, recognizing 
the  avatars  of  others,  and  moving  into  and  out  of 
conversations.  Participants  enjoyed  the  social  mingling 
provided  by  the  shared  spaces  and  avatars.  They  felt  that 
viewing  talks  via  video  streaming  would  have  been  more 
effective 
than  watching  with  an  avatar,  but  people 
especially enjoyed a poster session where they could walk 
around and view research posters. 
Shirmohammadi  et  al.  [29]  explored  mixed  attendance  at 
The Third International Workshop on Massively Multiuser 
Virtual Environments 2010. Here nine people attended via 
an  avatar  in  a  virtual  environment  while  another  10-20 
attended in person. Findings included positive experiences 
viewing  presentations,  yet  there  was  a  lack  of  social 
interaction  in  the  virtual  environment  when  compared  to 
those attending in person [29]. 
McCarthy  and  boyd  studied  digital  backchannel  usage  on 
Internet  Relay  Chat  (IRC)  at  the  ACM  CSCW  2004 
conference [20]. Findings showed most people used IRC to 
talk about the presenters and their presentation content. The 
largest amount of posts occurred during the opening plenary 
and  panels,  given  that  their  content  is  often  focused  on 
generating discussions. 
While telepresence robots have been used on a limited basis 
for  remote  participation  in  a  number  of  conferences  (e.g., 
Double telepresence robots were used at ACM CHI 2014 in 
Toronto, Canada),  to our knowledge, there has not been a 
formal study of telepresence robots in academic conference 
settings. This paper presents a first step towards filling that 
gap  by  focusing  on  a  major  international  conference  with 
several hundred local attendees. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

[10]  defines 

identity 

Social Theories 
from  a  sociological 
Goffman 
perspective as the mental model one has of him/herself. As 
our  results  will  show, 
this  mental  model  and  self 
representation  is  important  when  one  attends  a  conference 
using  a  telepresence  robot.  Goffman  explains  that  one’s 
identity is made up various characteristics including one’s 
appearance, attitudes towards others, beliefs, emotions, etc. 
and this is presented to others through their interactions and 
actions  (e.g.,  body  language,  speech)  [10].  In  this  way, 
individuals  are  presenting  themselves  like  an  actor  on  a 
stage to those around them [10].  
Our research is also in many ways a breaching experiment 
in-the-wild where we try to understand and articulate a set 
of  social  practices  and  norms  that  emerge  through  the 
introduction of a new technology that ‘disrupts’ the normal 
social  order  [3,6,21].  In  our  case,  the  Beams  purposely 
disrupt the normal social order of the conference setting in 
an  effort  to  increase  remote  attendance.    Throughout  our 
results,  we  showcase  how  this  ‘disruption’  affects  the 
behavior of both local and remote conference attendees.   
Lastly, our results explore situations that are articulated by 
theories of privacy in video-mediated environments.  Here 
we  see  that  privacy  is  often  a  balancing  act  between 
providing awareness and opportunities for interaction with 
others  [12],  and  having  a  sense  of  autonomy,  maintaining 
desired levels of confidentiality, and having some solitude, 
if  desired  [1,4,12,23].    Our  study  explores  how  privacy  is 
balanced 
the  mixed-context  of  remote  conference 
attendance and what issues emerge. 
STUDY METHODOLOGY 
The  goal  of  our  study  was  to  understand  if  and  how 
telepresence  robots  would  support  remote  conference 
attendance,  what  the  benefits  were,  and  what  social  and 
technical 
the  conference’s 
telepresence  chairs  and  support  staff,  we  planned  and 
organized  the  telepresence  setup,  and  then  subsequently 
planned  and  executed  the  study  of  it.    The  study  was 
approved by Simon Fraser University’s Office of Research 
Ethics. 
Remote Attendees 
We placed a general call for people interested in attending 
Ubicomp/ISWC  remotely  on  the  conference  web  site  and 
also  various  SIGCHI  mailing  lists.  We  asked  interested 
people  to  email  us  responses  to  a  series  of  questions 
describing 
industrial 
researcher, graduate student), the number of times they had 
attended Ubicomp or ISWC, and their reasons for wanting 
to attend remotely. Based on these responses, we selected a 
diverse cross section of participants including four faculty, 
two  graduate  students,  and  one  industry  researcher  with 
varying reasons for wanting to attend remotely.  
Three participants faced accessibility challenges that either 
caused  them  to  have  very  limited  mobility  (restricted  to 

job  position  (e.g.,  faculty, 

limitations  existed. 

  As 

in 

their 

being  mostly  at  home)  or  reduced  mobility  that  made 
conference attendance in person very tiring and/or difficult. 
One of the remaining participants was a paper presenter at 
Ubicomp/ISWC but unable to get a travel permit in time to 
present  in  person  at  the  conference.  Her  presentation  was 
done using a pre-recorded video at the conference and she 
used her Beam to address questions at the end of the talk. 
Two  participants  were  partners  and  had  recently  had  a 
baby; they shared a Beam throughout the conference.  
Three  participants  were  in  the  same  time  zone  as  the 
conference,  three  had  a  9-hour  time  difference,  and  three 
had  a  3-hour  time  difference.    Four  participants  had 
attended  Ubicomp  three  or  more  times  and  the  remaining 
three were attending Ubicomp/ISWC for the first time. 
All  remote  attendees  paid  to  attend  the  conference  at  half 
the  normal  rate.  Because  the  technology  setup  was  still 
experimental, we did not want them to have to pay the full 
registration fee in case there were technical issues and the 
experience was less than satisfactory, yet we also wanted to 
ensure they were committed to attending. We felt a reduced 
registration fee achieved these goals. 
We  purposely  selected  only  a  small  number  of  remote 
attendees. This was limited by the number of Beams at our 
disposal,  plus  it  also  reflected  our  desire  to  study  the 
experiences  of  each  remote  attendee  relatively  closely, 
indicative  of  qualitative  research  more  generally.  In  the 
remainder  of  the  paper,  participants  are  identified  by  P 
followed by their participant number. Some quotes are left 
non-attributed to preserve anonymity. 

 

Figure 2: The remote attendee’s view of the conference. 
Telepresence Setup 
Beams are telepresence robots, as shown in Figure 1. They 
are approximately five feet tall and contain a display at the 
top  of  the  robot  and  two  cameras.  One  faces  outwards  to 
provide  the  remote  attendee  with  a  first-person  view  and 
one  faces  down  towards  the  robot’s  base  to  aid  in 
navigation. The resolution of the webcam feed is 480p and 
field of view is 105°; the cameras were capable of 3x digital 

 

420

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

zoom.  Beams  also  contain  an  embedded  microphone  and 
speakers. The base of the robot contains wheels that allow it 
to move forward, backward, and turn. 
Remote users can connect to an assigned Beam robot using 
a web interface, shown in Figure 2. The view from the first-
person camera is shown at the top of the window. The top 
right  of  the  interface  contains  controls  for  muting  the 
microphone,  adjusting  volume,  etc.  The  view  from  the 
floor-facing  camera  is  shown  at  the  bottom  of  the  web 
interface along with a slider that adjusts the speed at which 
the Beam moves from slow to fast. Remote users can drive 
the Beam using a keyboard, mouse, or Xbox controller. The 
remote user can see how he or she appears on the robot’s 
display with the mirror feature in the bottom right corner of 
the web interface (in Figure 2, the person’s face is blocked 
to preserve anonymity).  
Beams connect to a WiFi network to transmit and receive 
video.  To  try  and  alleviate  network  congestion  issues 
during  the  conference,  we  had  the  conference  hotel’s  tech 
support  staff  set  up  a  dedicated  wireless  network  for  the 
Beams that was hidden from regular conference attendees. 
Occasionally  Beams  still  lost  connectivity  or  became 
unresponsive  during  the  conference  and  in  these  cases  we 
would manually reboot the robot.  
Methods 
Training and Orientation 
Remote attendees first completed an informed consent form 
that told them about the study. During the week preceding 
the conference, they participated in a training session with 
Suitable  Technologies  staff  to  familiarize  themselves  with 
the  operation  of  the  Beams.  We  emailed  them  the  hotel’s 
map,  which  showed  the  conference  room  layout.  The 
conference  spanned  the  third  and  fourth  floor  of  the  hotel 
with  stairs  and  elevators  connecting  the  two  floors.  There 
was a large foyer space that was used for providing drinks 
and snacks during the breaks between sessions. There was 
no lunch provided, so in-person attendees went offsite.  
Remote participants were instructed that they could attend 
all  portions  of  the  main  conference  (paper  sessions)  and 
would need to stay on the two floors of the meeting room 
area  where  the  conference  was  being  held.  We  did  not 
allow  participants  to  attend  the  conference  reception 
because it was offsite and would be too difficult to transport 
the  Beams;  network  connectivity  was  also  poor  at  this 
location.  Participants  were  also  told  they  could  not  attend 
the  Demo  Reception  on  the  Monday  evening  in  the  main 
meeting  room  area  of  the  hotel  because  we  felt  it  may  be 
overly  crowded  for  navigation.  Despite  this  request,  one 
person did attend the Demo Reception, albeit inadvertently 
(described later in our results).  
Prior  to  the  start  of  the  conference,  we  used  blue  tape  to 
section off areas of each presentation room floor where the 
Beams could park to watch the talk. This was always in the 
front left corner of the room (Figure 1, right). Our goal was 

 

421

them 

to  create 

the  Beams  could  see 

to  have  a  space  where 
the 
presenter/slides,  while  not  blocking  the  local  attendees’ 
view  of  the  talks.  As  discussed  in  our  results,  this  layout 
changed over time due to poor viewing angles and the need 
for increased autonomy. 
Personalization 
Prior  to  the  conference,  we  asked  all  remote  attendees  if 
and how they wanted to personalize their Beam. Our goal 
was to allow participants to choose their self-representation 
as best they could with the technology; in Goffman’s terms, 
we  were  allowing 
their  ‘actor’  for 
‘performance’ at the conference [10]. One person chose to 
have a scarf placed around the Beam’s screen and another 
asked to have a printout of her school’s logo affixed to her 
Beam.  The  rest  opted  to  not  decorate  their  Beams.  In 
addition, we affixed each person’s conference badge to his 
or her Beam under the main display, akin to how a regular 
attendee would wear the badge. During the conference we 
affixed  stickers  to  the  back  of  the  Beam  monitor  with  the 
remote  participant’s  name  and  affiliation  to  facilitate 
identification from all sides. 
Observations and Interviews 
We  observed  remote  and  local  attendees  throughout  the 
conference to see how they interacted with one another and 
to learn about people’s behaviors. Observations involved us 
watching the remote attendees during all of the conference 
breaks  and  checking  in  on  them  periodically  while  they 
were  in  conference  sessions.    We  did  not  stay  with  them 
throughout  the  sessions  because  they  mostly  sat  parked 
watching the talks.  We also observed them during several 
question periods at the end of talks, but not all.   
We  did  not  gain  informed  consent  from  the  general 
conference  attendees  as  part  of  our  observations  since  the 
conference was in a public setting (this was approved by the 
ethics  board).  However,  all  attendees  were  told  about  the 
telepresence  setup  and  the  fact  that  we  were  studying  it 
during the conference’s opening plenary. 
On the final day of the conference, we conducted one-on-
one  semi-structured  interviews  with  each  remote  attendee 
using the Beams [11]. Questions focused on learning about 
what  they  did  during  the  conference  and  understanding 
what  they  felt  worked  well  and  what  did  not  work  well 
about  attending  remotely.  We  also  asked 
them  for 
suggestions on future telepresence conference setups. 
Throughout  the  conference,  we  had  four  people  managing 
Ubicomp/ISWC’s  telepresence  setup  and  this  was  easily 
doable with each person only spending a total of an hour or 
so per day troubleshooting problems.  The remaining time 
was  spent  collecting  study  data.  Fewer  people  may  have 
been manageable, but it is difficult to know ahead of time if 
and  how  many  technical  problems  will  emerge  and  when 
they will occur.  

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Post-Conference Survey 
After the conference had concluded, as part of the general 
post-conference  survey,  we  asked  all  attendees  questions 
about  the  telepresence  setup.  Most  were  open-ended. 
Questions  focused  on  understanding  how  local  attendees 
interacted  with  remote  attendees,  benefits 
to  remote 
telepresence,  and  any  challenges  or  limitations  they  faced 
as a result of having remote attendees at the conference. A 
link  to  the  survey  was  sent  to  attendees  via  email.  We 
received  210  responses  (74%  male).  50%  of  respondents 
were  graduate  students,  21%  academic  faculty,  13% 
industrial  researchers,  4%  post-doctoral  researchers,  3% 
practitioners,  and  2%  each  undergraduate  students, 
programmers  and  designers.  These  numbers  were 
representative  of  the  general  conference  attendance  with  a 
large  number  of  male  attendees  (~73%)  and  students 
(~40%).  17%  of  respondents  had  seen  a  Beam  in  usage 
before  the  conference  and  2%  had  personal  experience 
using  a  Beam.  In  the  remainder  of  the  paper,  survey 
respondents are identified by S and a number. 
Data Collection and Analysis 
During  our  observations,  we  kept  handwritten  and  typed 
notes and recorded pictures and video clips periodically to 
aid  our  analysis  and  memory  of  events.  For  example,  we 
captured media about the locations where the Beams were 
parked  during  talks,  how  the  remote  users  navigated 
through  hallways,  and  how 
local  and  remote  users 
interacted  between 
talks  and  during  breaks.  Our 
observational data helped us understand our interview and 
survey data, and also acted as a lens throughout the analysis 
process.  We  did  not  explicitly  apply  any  data  coding 
procedures to our images and videos. 
Interviews with each remote attendee were audio recorded 
and  fully  transcribed.  We  used  open,  axial,  and  selective 
coding [2] to draw out the main themes from the interview 
data.  Here  we  iteratively  went  through  each  interview 
transcription  and  coded  participants’  quotes  in  an  open 
fashion,  generating  codes  as  we  went.  We  grouped 
codes/quotes  through  an  axial  coding  process  into  themes 
related 
interaction,  privacy, 
accessibility, and presence (along with various subthemes). 
Through selective coding, we selected the main results from 
our themes where we chose what appeared to be the most 
salient themes; these are presented in the paper.  Coding of 
our interviews was performed by three researchers and each 
reviewed  the  codes  and  themes  found  by  the  others.  Our 
analysis approach was based on analysis procedures found 
in Grounded Theory [2], but we purposely did not explicitly 
use  Grounded  Theory  as  a  broader  methodological 
approach given that we already had prior knowledge of how 
telepresence  robots  were  likely  to  be  used  (based  on  past 
research in workplace settings). 
Survey  data  was  analyzed  using  thematic  analysis  (by  a 
single  researcher).  Respondent  answers  were  iteratively 
read  and  grouped  according  to  common  answers  and 

to  navigation, 

identity, 

 

422

the 

for  communication  among 

themes.  We  compared  the  findings  from  our  survey  with 
our interview results.  
Without prompting, remote attendees created a backchannel 
chat  using  Google  Hangouts  on  the  first  day  of  the 
conference  and  used  it  throughout  the  conference  to  share 
information  among  themselves  and  with  our  team.  We  as 
conference  organizers  also  joined  the  backchannel  and  it 
became a valuable tool for providing technical support for 
the  remote  attendees.  In  comparison  to  McCarthy  and 
boyd’s study of an IRC backchannel at CSCW 2004 [20], 
our  participants  mostly  talked  about  the  Beams  and 
technical  or  social  tips  rather  than  the  presentations 
themselves. We recommend that conference organizers who 
are supporting remote attendance set up and participate in a 
backchannel 
remote 
attendees.  We  analyzed  the  text  within  the  backchannel’s 
log using thematic analysis. Again, we compared the results 
with our interview and survey data.  
In  the  following  sections,  we  detail  our  study  results.  We 
begin by articulating the general reactions that we received 
from  both  remote  and  local  attendees  to  the  telepresence 
setup.  Next,  we  step  through  each  of  the  main  social  and 
technical themes that our data pointed to. 
GENERAL REACTIONS 
Overall,  remote  attendees  reported  enjoying  the  remote 
telepresence  experience.  Their  time  in  attendance  ranged 
from being at two to three talk sessions per day all the way 
to  nearly  the  entire  main  conference  (including  plenary 
talks).    Those  with  large  time  zone  differences  found  it 
difficult to be at the conference into the evening and would 
sometimes  finish  days  early  as  a  result. 
  The  two 
participants who shared a Beam found it was easy to do so 
because they lived together. Here they could easily micro-
coordinate which talks they wanted to attend.   
Attendees  valued  being  able  to  attend  the  conference 
without  having 
travel.  Those  with  accessibility 
challenges  felt  especially  empowered  because  they  were 
able  to  attend  the  conference  in  a  way  that  was  not 
previously  possible  for  them.  It  also  alleviated  mobility 
issues that they normally faced when attending in person. 
The best part was that I was not able to come there so if I 
was not able and I missed the conference then it was really 
a  pity.  For  me  it  was  a  great  opportunity  to  at  least  be 
present partly in the conference and then don't miss it. - P5 
I’m  attending  some  conferences  via  Skype,  but  I  never 
really felt as if I was there. I would just hear. Sometimes I 
couldn’t see the presentations...So this is the first time I feel 
I’m a part of the conference….Attending through something 
like a web conferencing software, it isn’t- you don’t get the 
feeling  you’re  there….Because  you  feel  like  you’re  just 
hearing  maybe  something  on  the  radio,  or  something  on 
TV. But using telepresence like this, I have the feeling I’m 
there. I’m able to meet new people. I’m able to see familiar 
faces. - P4 

to 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

the 

telepresence  experience.  89%  of 

Actually it was a peculiar situation for us with a newborn 
baby and so for us was a bit of a way to participate as a 
family, so it was also that. I mean, we cannot be physically, 
but we can be there, all the three of us in a sense. It was 
nice, actually. It was fun. – Non-Attributed 
Compared  to  using  more  standard  video  conferencing  to 
remotely  attend  an  event,  participants  generally  felt  that 
their  experience  with 
telepresence  robots  was  more 
immersive.  Some  also  felt  they  were  advantaged  because 
they could more easily fit the conference into their normal 
activities, such as multi-tasking work. 
This is much better than video conferencing. I can tell when 
people are directing questions to me. There's certainly the 
ability to move around and direct my conversations toward 
people  in  a  crowd,  and  the  fact  that  I  can  go  to  different 
places.  I  do  feel  more  immersed...I  was  able  to  guilt-free 
multitasking at a conference. If I go through the trouble of 
attending  a  conference  I  don't  feel  good  skipping  out  on 
sessions doing other work, but I didn't feel bad about it.- P3 
Local  participants  reported  overall  positive  experiences 
with 
survey 
respondents  recommended  doing  telepresence  again  at 
future  Ubicomp/ISWC  conferences.  Many  local  attendees 
commented in the survey with similar reactions about how 
the  robot  telepresence  was  providing  important  ways  for 
some people to attend remotely.  
It was great. It was a key talking point of the conference, it 
allowed people with disabilities or family or visa issues to 
attend, and even for a remote presenter to take questions – 
S93 
In  addition  to  these  generally  positive  experiences,  we 
found  a  series  of  social  and  technical  challenges  emerge. 
Throughout the remaining results, we describe each of these 
in  detail  along  with  recommendations  for  conference 
organizers and telepresence designers.  We have explicitly 
separated  out  the  implications  for  each  stakeholder  as  the 
implications  are  often  different.    It  was  also  evident  from 
our study that conference organizers can have an impact on 
the  remote  attendees’  experience  beyond  the  intent  of  the 
designers  of  the  telepresence  robots.  Thus,  it  is  critical  to 
understand  the  implications  for  conference  organizers.  
Moreover,  we  think  that  many  of  our  results  are  valuable 
for  those  who  might  attend  a  conference  remotely  in  the 
future  for  they  shed  light  on  best  practices  for  attending 
remotely,  presenting  one’s 
interacting,  and 
recognizing potential privacy issues. 
IDENTITY AND THE PRESENTATION OF SELF 
We  found  several  challenges  related  to  identity  from  the 
perspectives  of  the  remote  attendees  and  also  those 
attending  Ubicomp/ISWC  in  person.  Here  we  explore 
aspects related to Goffman’s presentation of self [10]. First, 
remote attendees faced challenges in being able to present 
their identity remotely in their Beam robot. Unlike real life 
and  the  way  people  can  easily  customize  their  appearance 

identity, 

 

423

they 

liked 

looked 

[10], each robot was visually the same. Even though we had 
asked  if  people  wanted  to  personalize  their  robot  in  some 
way, as mentioned, only two did so. Remote attendees also 
found  that  they  had  no  way  of  seeing  themselves  to 
understand  how 
to  people  attending 
Ubicomp/ISWC  in  person  [32].  Unlike  situations  where  a 
person  might  look  in  a  mirror  to  see  herself,  the  remote 
attendees  did  not  easily  have  such  an  option  (and  none 
chose to drive into a washroom to use a mirror). Knowing 
how one looked to local attendees was important to them as 
it could influence their conversations or the reactions from 
others. 
I don’t have a real good sense of myself in the scene so I 
can't see the scarf at all. I've had to ask people how long 
the  base  is,  or  how  far  it  is  from  the  base  to  their  feet  in 
order to get a better sense to not hit people's toes. I didn't 
know for a while where I had a badge, or if. I had to ask 
people a lot of questions about what I looked like to even 
get a sense of that so I don't really feel like I'm wearing a 
scarf. – P1 
I wore power jewelry because I wanted to be certain that I 
didn't  appear  too  dominant.  The  first  day  I  wore  red 
jewelry.  There  are  ways  that  women  can  use  jewelry  and 
clothing  to  look  feminine  versus  incompetent.  I  wanted  to 
make  sure  that  I  looked  assertive  and  powerful  because  I 
feel I always have to counteract the stigmas associated with 
being  single  and  female.  Now  you  add  this  tele-robotic 
dimension and look confident. - P2 
Local  attendees  also 
the  Beam  robots 
personalized  in  some  way  (cf.  [35])  so  they  could  easily 
identify who was who, yet sometimes this was difficult to 
know because of the small size of the nametag or a lack of 
personalization of the Beams. 
I  loved  that  one  person  personalized  their  Beam  with  a 
scarf. It would have been nice if all of them had identifying 
traits like that - the name tags were hard to read from any 
distance. – S16 
It  was  also  difficult  to  identify  the  users  of  the  non-
augmented (i.e., bescarfed, name-tagged) Beams, especially 
from behind. – S138 
Remote attendees talked about other ways that they thought 
they  might  have  also  liked  to  present  their  identity 
remotely.  This  moved  beyond  what  one  might  commonly 
do when in person at a conference and included ideas such 
as  attaching  printouts  describing  one’s  research  and  RFID 
tags to identify passersby. 
In  addition  to  one's  visual  presentation  of  self,  how  one 
presented  herself  acoustically  was  also  important;  again, 
this is an important part of self-representation and identity 
[10]. Remote attendees found it was difficult to understand 
how  loud  they  were  when  talking  to  others  and  if  it  was 
socially appropriate given the context of the situation they 
were in, as also found by Paepcke et al. [23] and Lee and 

to  see 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Takayama [18]. The remote attendees wanted to engage in a 
socially appropriate manner, but it was not always easy to 
achieve. 
Like the visuals of their remote representation, they could 
not  hear  how  they  sounded  in  the  remote  environment. 
Local  attendees  sometimes  complained  that  the  remote 
attendees  were  talking  too  loudly  or  too  softly.  In  one 
instance, a remote attendee was talking to an individual in 
the  corner  of  a  presentation  room  between  sessions.  The 
remote attendee thought the conversation was private with 
the person, but in actual fact it could be heard throughout 
the entire presentation room by others mingling about. 
They  don't  adjust  the  volume  of  their  voice  according  to 
surroundings. In large group conversations, the volume of 
the Beam was higher than surrounding people, so it was as 
if a person was standing in the room and shouting. – S7 
In such circumstances, the remote attendees lost the ability 
to control aspects of their presentation of self [10]. 
Second, we learned that some people can develop a strong 
tie with their remote embodiment, almost as though it was 
their own 'body' that only they should be able to use.  
You might hurt my bot, knock my bot over. It is physically 
disconcerting at this point. [It's like you] become the Mars 
rover,  I  really  did  feel  like,  immersed  in  this  experience 
enough such that when somebody walks into the bot and it 
shakes, I feel my body tense. - P2 
In somewhat of a contrast, as organizers of the conference, 
we  felt  we  were  providing  a  series  of  robots  that  were 
somewhat interchangeable between attendees. In this sense, 
we  felt  that  if  one  stopped  working  for  whatever  reason, 
and  another  attendee  was  away  or  not  planning  to  be 
present for a portion of the day, we could use that person's 
robot  for  someone  else.  Thus,  as  organizers,  we  had  a 
relatively  loose  sense  of  tie  between  the  robots  and  a 
particular  person.  Most  remote  attendees  had  the  opposite 
reaction where they felt strong ownership over 'their' robot. 
Moving  between  robots,  or  realizing  they  had  been 
connected 
into  a  different  robot  because  of  system 
configurations on our end, was disconcerting to them. 
Similarly, it was very disconcerting when I woke up in the 
wrong body. I was really expecting to wake up in the middle 
of  the  room.  At  first  I  thought  you’d  taken  me  home.  I’m 
like, “Why did <tech support> take me home? He knew I 
was talking to an NPR reporter. - P2 
oh i didn't realize you guys name swapped too. oops. man it 
was weird being 'in the wrong body' and coming to life in 
the wrong place! is the town hall still happening? or did i 
miss it. - P2, Backchannel 
Recommendations 
We recommend that conference organizers and telepresence 
designers should explore ways to convey the identity of the 
remote  attendees  from  all  angles.  Conference  organizers 

 

424

sometimes  challenging 

should  encourage  remote  attendees  to  personalize  their 
representation in the conference space and remote attendees 
should  in  turn  think  of  ways  to  do  so.  Remote  attendees 
should be given a clear idea of how they appear to the on-
site  attendees,  whether  through  mirrors  or  infrastructure 
cameras  (although  Takayama  and  Harris  [32]  found  that 
these  interventions  may  have  negative  consequences).  We 
found  that  remote  participants  bonded  with  the  particular 
hardware  assigned  to  them;  conference  organizers  should 
endeavor to support that identification. 
Beams require the remote person to set the speaker volume, 
yet  do  not  provide  adequate  feedback  for  this  task.  Like 
Tsui  et  al.  [34],  we  recommend 
that  designers  of 
telepresence systems either give the missing feedback [16], 
empower local attendees to change the volume (though this 
may  be  socially  problematic  [18]),  automatically  set  the 
speaker volume based on the ambient noise level [7], or add 
sidetone  to  the  audio  channel  [23].  It’s  unclear  which 
solution (or combination) would address the problem. 
These ideas align with social theories of the presentation of 
self to convey how people desire to present themselves in a 
telepresence robot (as an ‘actor’) and what is valuable for 
others with whom they interact (their ‘audience’) [10]. 
NAVIGATION AND A LACK OF SPATIAL AWARENESS 
Navigation  was 
remote 
attendees.  This  was  especially  the  case  in  crowded  rooms 
and  hallways,  such  as  when  breaks  were  occurring. 
Unexpected  obstacles  such  as  power  cords  on  the  floors 
were  difficult  to  avoid.  Remote  attendees  talked  about 
lacking  spatial  awareness  of  the  larger  conference  setup. 
We had provided them with overview floor plan maps, but 
this did not necessarily help that much since it did not show 
what the space looked like in more of a first-person view. 
The cameras on the Beams tended to lack a peripheral view, 
which further made it difficult.  
Movement  between  presentation  rooms  was  generally  left 
to  the  breaks  because  remote  attendees  found  it  hard  to 
unobtrusively  move  between  talks  and  'session  hop'.  The 
Beams made a low noise as they moved and attracted visual 
attention. It was also even more difficult to avoid obstacles 
when  trying  to  be  discreet.  Thus,  going  between  rooms 
during  a  talk  was  easily  seen  as  a  distraction  and  highly 
noticeable. This was also partly because they had to park at 
the  front  of  the  room  to  get  a  good  view  of  the  presenter 
and slides. 
In  addition,  some  remote  attendees  felt  that  they  lacked  a 
larger sense of where the conference was being held. They 
were restricted to just two floors of the hotel (the meeting 
room space) and could not see or go out into the city more 
broadly. As a result, one remote attendee asked us for help 
to navigate to an open window where she would be able to 
see the city of Seattle to know what it looked like. 
Sometimes  navigation  issues  created  unique  opportunities 
for  social  engagement  and  interactions  with  others.  When 

for 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

remote  attendees 

the  venue  and  give 

Beams  got  stuck  on  power  cords,  for  example,  attendees 
may strike up a conversation together. Remote participants 
also needed to ask attendees for help with the elevators. 
Recommendations 
Conference  organizers  should  be  sure  that  their  event  will 
not  be  overcrowded  and  that  there  are  clear  navigation 
paths  for  the  remote  attendees.  They  should  provide 
overview  maps  of 
the  remote 
participants  adequate  time  to  explore  their  environment  in 
advance of the conference. 
Designers  of  telepresence  robots  should  explore  practical 
solutions  for  indicating  the  robot’s  current  position  on  the 
venue  map  (suggested  by  Tsui  et  al.  [34]),  and  perhaps 
include  the  locations  of  other  robots  at  the  event  on  it.  
Other  research  has  shown  the  value  of  wide  angle  and 
panoramic camera views [13]. 
ACCESSIBILITY AND AUTONOMY 
faced 
As  stated,  several  of  our 
accessibility  challenges  in  their  daily  lives  due  to  reduced 
mobility. The remote attendance allowed them to stay in a 
location such as their home or work office where mobility 
challenges  were  much  less  likely  to  surface.  They  could 
also  easily  disconnect  from  the  conference  if  they  needed 
additional 
rest.  Those  with  accessibility  challenges 
generally  felt  a  strong  sense  of  empowerment  and 
additional  feelings  of  autonomy  that  they  often  did  not 
normally  feel  when  attending  conferences.  Instead  of 
feeling  frustrated  and  challenged  with  moving  throughout 
the conference, which they sometimes felt in-person, their 
accessibility issues were somewhat removed and much less 
'present'. One remote attendee even described the feeling as 
one of having 'superpowers.' 
It feels magical, because it’s like your teleporting, right? I 
am in <city> but I’m still in Seattle, some part of me, right? 
- P4 
P4  was  accustomed  with  moving  around  in  a  wheelchair 
and she felt this helped her use the Beam.  
It’s  very  wonderful,  I  see  Beam  as  a  great  starting 
foundation  to  develop  further  robotic  technologies  in  the 
future. Even now, I feel that it’s still more like a wheelchair 
and it has Skype features, right? It has to have additional 
features,  like  maybe  an  arm  that  connects,  to  extend  to 
shake  somebody’s  hand,  more  interaction  instead  of  just 
this visual presence… - P4 
On  the  other  hand,  the  use  of  the  Beams  created  new 
accessibility  challenges  for  those  who  were  remotely 
attending.  The  most  prominent  example  of  this  issue 
resulted  from  the  elevators  that  were  necessary  for  the 
Beams to move between the conference venue's two floors. 
The  remote  attendees  could  not  activate  the  elevator  call 
buttons nor select their desired floor. As a result, they had 
to  ask  people  standing  near  the  elevators  for  help. 
Sometimes the local attendees did not know when or how to 

 

425

  For  example, 

help  the  remote  attendees  because  they  were  not  familiar 
with  the  situation.  Others  would  engage  with  the  remote 
attendees in somewhat awkward ways by pushing or pulling 
them in and out of elevators, even though they could do this 
movement on their own. 
Recommendations 
Any  measures  that  the  conference  organizers  can  take  to 
give  the  remote  participants  agency  and  autonomy  should 
be  strongly  considered. 
they  could 
communicate  to  on-site  attendees  about  the  challenges  of 
robot  mobility  and  instruct  them  that  helping  out  by 
keeping pathways clear and helping at doors and elevators 
is  appropriate  providing  that  autonomy  is  maintain  (e.g., 
avoid pushing a robot when helping). Alternately, designers 
of  telepresence  robots  should  consider  solutions  to  allow 
remote users to control doors and elevators. 
SOCIAL NORMS 
Throughout the conference there was an evolution of social 
norms  regarding  how  one  should  act  as  a  remote  attendee 
and  how  local  attendees  should  interact  with  the  remote 
attendees. This created several socially awkward situations, 
yet  it  also  reflected  the  fact  that  our  attempt  to  include 
Beams was a form of breaching experiment, with the likely 
effect of disturbing existing social norms [3,6,21]. 
First,  remote  and  local  attendees  faced  social  challenges 
around the positioning of the Beams within the presentation 
rooms. As mentioned, we had originally created an area in 
the  front  corner  of  each  presentation  room  where  we 
wanted Beams to 'park' during a talk (Figure 1, right). Yet 
this created issues because the remote attendees had a poor 
view  of  the  presenter  and  projected  slides  because  of  the 
angle.  Over  time,  the  remote  attendees  ended  up  moving 
around and trying different locations from which they could 
watch  the  presentations.  This  included  the  back  of  the 
room, which was too far from the screen to see them well. 
Eventually,  most  of  the  remote  attendees  found  the  best 
viewing location to be at the front of the aisle separating the 
rows of seats. This allowed them to be as close to the screen 
as  was  possible  while  still  aligning  one's  Beam  with  the 
front  row  of  the  seats  in  the  room.  They  also  found  they 
needed  to  use  their  camera's  zooming  features  to  help  see 
the slides, even when close to the front of the room. 
Well, at the beginning I thought that I had to park on the 
corner of the road on the place that they were, I think it was 
designated for robot. Then I had a very bad spot I couldn't 
see much of the slides. Then I moved to the middle and it 
was  still  difficult  to  read  the  slides,  but  I  found  that  if  I 
zoomed then I would see every word on the slide. I missed a 
lot of slides because I didn't know that I could zoom and see 
better. - P5 
When  parked  in  their  location  during  a  talk,  the  remote 
attendees  were  able  to  easily  ask  each  other  through  the 
backchannel  if  they  were  blocking  the  view  of  another 
remote  attendee  in  the  Beam.  However,  it  was  more 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

difficult for the remote attendees to ask the local attendees 
if they were blocking their view. They lacked the ability to 
easily turn around and whisper or ask them in a low voice. 
As a result, many local attendees complained about Beams 
blocking  their  view  of  the  presentations  when  the  remote 
attendees decided to park in the front row of the room. 
The  Beams  are  unable  to  sit,  so  during  talks  they  end  up 
holding  a  privileged  social  position  (effectively  doing  the 
equivalent of standing at the front of the room during a talk, 
since  they  weren't  able  to  position  themselves  elsewhere 
and be able to see the screen). If a person did that, it would 
be considered very rude. – S7 
Second, novelty was clearly a factor in terms of how local 
attendees  reacted  and  interacted  with  the  remote  attendees 
during the initial day of the conference. Beams were a focal 
point during the first day of presentations. Local attendees 
could  be  seen  talking  amongst  themselves  and  pointing  to 
the  Beams  that  were  'parked'  in  their  session.  During 
breaks,  a  common  activity  was  local  attendees  taking 
photos  ('selfies')  with  the  Beams.  Many  local  attendees 
would also surreptitiously capture pictures of the Beams for 
their own records or to post on social media.  
The  first  day  I  couldn’t  get  five  feet  without  a  selfie.  The 
first day, the first morning … - P2 
These behaviors diminished considerably after the first day 
of  the  conference  as  people  became  used  to  having  the 
Beams  around.  Until  that  point,  they  were,  however, 
somewhat  of  a  'celebrity'  but  also  a  distraction  for  those 
who were trying to focus on the conference talks. As with 
many breaching experiments, such social ‘disruptions’ may 
go away with time as social norms adjust [3,6]. 
A lot of the audience focused on what they were doing just 
because  it  was  novel  and  interesting  ...  might  have  taken 
attention away from some of the talks. – S21 
I  saw  some  people  taking  pictures  and  other  such  novelty 
interactions,  but  I  also  saw  them  working  into  regular 
group interactions during the breaks. – S187 
Recommendations 
Conference  organizers  should  consider  options  for  giving 
the remote attendees adequate audio and video of the talks. 
One option would be better positioning for the telepresence 
devices.  Another  would  be  to  stream  the  presenters  and 
slides  directly  through  dedicated  A/V  equipment  (or 
digitally share the slides in advance of the talk). 
Designers of telepresence hardware should provide human-
like  aural  and  visual  acuity.  Based  on  our  own  informal 
measures,  Beam  acuity  is  approximately  equivalent  to 
20/200 vision (i.e., the remote user can see something at 20 
feet  that  an  average  person  can  see  at  200  feet)  when 
zoomed out, and 20/100 when zoomed in fully. Given this, 
it  is  not  surprising  that  the  remote  attendees  took  up 
residence  at 
room.  Additionally, 
telepresence robots should be adjustable between a normal 

front  of 

the 

the 

human sitting height and a normal standing height, ideally 
under control of the remote user.   
Those who attend a conference via a telepresence robot in 
the  future  should  consider  the  social  norms  of  how  they 
move  and  park  their  robot  while  recognizing  their  likely 
impact on others. 
SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT & MINGLING 
The  remote  attendees  generally  felt  that  they  were  able  to 
engage  socially  with  other  conference  attendees  through 
acts  of  'mingling'  during  the  breaks  and  at  lunch  (at  least 
with  those  who  did  not  go  offsite  for  lunch).  Interactions 
with  others  are  integral  to  the  creation  of  one’s  self-
representation and identity [10]. 
It was a good interaction. It was someone who I had only 
previous been in email correspondence with, so it was nice 
to put a face to a name. The beams were very approachable 
(more so than people) which I really liked. – S75 
Despite the positives, remote and local attendees also faced 
challenges when interacting with others. 
First, it was difficult for both remote and local attendees to 
know  if  the  other  wanted  to  engage  in  conversation  when 
they would see each other or it would appear like one was 
approaching the other. The normal body language that one 
might use to discern interest was difficult to ascertain from 
the  remote  and 
local  attendees  alike.  For  example, 
continuous  eye  contact  over  several  seconds  while 
approaching  an  individual  might  indicate  the  desire  to 
converse.  Yet  such  eye  contact  was  hard  to  ascertain 
between  remote  and  local  attendees.  Similarly,  one's  body 
posture and direction when approaching another person can 
help  people  determine  if  one  is  moving  towards  them  to 
talk, or if they are simply navigating a crowded space. Such 
cues were hard to discern for local attendees because it was 
sometimes  difficult  to  drive  the  Beam  in  a  crowded  area. 
Remote  attendees  could  not  easily  see  body  language 
because the camera's quality was not high enough.  
It was hard to use them in the coffee breaks. When a beam 
approached me I couldn't tell if they person was interested 
in talking to me or if they were trying to get past me. (no 
visible  cues  to  make  up  for  the  lack  of  body  language).  – 
S204 
Along a similar line, it was sometimes difficult for remote 
and local attendees to know when a conversation between 
the two should end. In a typical face-to-face conversation, 
people  are  often  very  good  at  determining  this  based  on 
one's  body  language  and  gestures.  However,  these  cues 
were hard to understand when the Beam was being used. 
What I found that when I was facing someone and speaking 
it's difficult to end a conversation because you have to move 
really if you want to leave you have to move. If you don't 
say see you around, or if you are talking I felt that the other 
party  was  not,  really  wanted  to  continue  with,  it  was 
awkward to end a conversation. - P5 

 

426

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

time 

in  seeing  and 

Second,  remote  attendees  faced  a  difficult 
in 
identifying local attendees. Despite having a wide field-of-
view camera on the Beams, they still felt like they lacked 
peripheral awareness to see who was around. As mentioned, 
it  was  also  hard  to  recognize  people  at  a  distance,  which 
included  challenges 
reading  people's 
nametags.  
And I have no peripheral vision so it's hard to spot people. 
It's  also  hard  to  recognize  people,  and  I  don't  have  the 
liberty  of  looking  at  their  badge.  …  I  can't  read  badges 
even  when  I  zoom  in  which  most  of  time  I  don't  have  the 
opportunity to do before the conversations moved past that 
anyway. - P1 
Even though we know the people and some people, if you 
know their voice very well then you could immediately pick 
up  who  was  talking,  but  in  many  cases  it  really  took  a 
while. I sit also maybe turning left and right on this thing 
who  is  speaking.  By  the  time  you  figured  that  out,  maybe 
someone else was speaking, so that made it quite tiring. – 
P6 
As  a  result  of  the  challenges  in  identifying  others,  remote 
attendees who were more senior in the field generally felt it 
was  easier  to  network  and  meet  with  people  that  they 
already knew, or that knew them and would approach them. 
One senior remote attendee had even developed a strategy 
where  he  would  let  people  come  to  him,  rather  than 
approaching  others,  given  the  challenge  in  identifying 
people.  Remote  attendees  who  were  job  hunting  found  it 
difficult to do so because they would need to approach and 
talk with people that they may not have previously known. 
On  the  other  hand,  remote  attendees  who  were  relatively 
new to the field found it was beneficial to be using a Beam 
because  of  their  initial  'celebrity  status'  at  the  conference. 
This made them more 'well known' at the conference than 
they would have been if they had attended in person. 
Third,  we  learned  just  how  important  food  and  beverages 
are to a conference experience, especially when it comes to 
mingling  and  interacting  during  breaks  and  lunch.  For 
obvious  reasons,  remote  attendees  are  unable  to  eat  and 
drink at the conference. Yet this means there is no reason to 
stand in a food or drink line where one may easily begin to 
chat with the person next to her in line. It also means that 
when  'standing  around'  and  conversing,  there  is  not  the 
additional  act  of  eating  or  drinking  to  augment  the 
conversation  with  an  activity.  Instead,  the  conversation  is 
focused  on  just  the  conversation.  Food  and  drinks  also 
represent a common and socially acceptable way to leave a 
conversation.  For  example,  a  person  can  tell  another  that 
they need to go get another drink or more food. 
[I miss out during] the coffee breaks. (laughs)... The lunch 
and dinners… If there was some other activity planned for 
those who connect remotely, that would be nice. - P4 
One might imagine that a remote attendee could attempt to 
resolve this situation by trying to eat or drink a beverage at 

 

427

to  attend 

the same time as the local attendees. This might make them 
feel  like  they  'fit  in'  more  with  what  was  occurring  at  the 
conference  site.  Yet  often  this  type  of  approach  did  not 
work  well  because  there  was  a  time-zone  mismatch 
between the conference and attendee’s location.  
Remote  attendees  could  not  go  to  offsite  restaurants  for 
meals  with  attendees.  They  were  also  not  able  to  come  to 
the conference reception, which was held at a local offsite 
music  museum.  This  meant  their  socializing  time  was 
limited and, perhaps, somewhat overly focused at the more 
'academic' aspects of the conference: the presentations and 
the  short  breaks  between  them.  By  mistake,  one  remote 
attendee  happened 
the  conference’s  Demo 
Reception (at the hotel) because she did not realize she was 
supposed to park her Beam for the night at the end of the 
day’s  talks.  Instead,  she  drove  around  and  mingled  with 
other  attendees.  Overall,  she  described  this  as  one  of  her 
favorite times at the conference because she was normally 
not  able  to  attend  large  social  functions  like  it  due  to  her 
mobility issues.  Upon reflection, the Demo Reception was 
just  as  crowded  as  the  conference  breaks  and  so  it  would 
likely  have  turned  out  to  be  fine  having  the  Beams  in 
attendance at it. 
Recommendations 
We  recommend  that  conference  organizers  communicate 
with  on-site  attendees  in  advance  of  the  conference  to 
establish  expectations  and  social  norms.  The  remote 
experience could also be enriched by allowing the remotes 
to participate more fully in breaks and off-site activities. 
As  noted  above,  telepresence  hardware  developers  should 
consider  ways  of  improving  visual  acuity,  to  benefit 
mingling  activities.  At  the  same  time,  mingling  requires 
even greater field of view. It may be possible to address this 
tension  by  combining  peripheral  and  foveal  views  [35]. 
Mingling  also  benefits  from  the  telepresence  device’s 
display and camera being near standing human eye height, 
further motivating adjustable height. 
How to support beginning and ending conversations [33] in 
mingling  situations  that  include  telepresence  devices is  an 
open  research  question  and  is  ripe  for  future  work.  
Potential  solutions  may 
the  robot’s 
mobility  as  a  form  of  body  language  for  starting/stopping 
conversations (e.g., slight movements may indicate the end 
of a conversation). 
PRIVACY: THE MIXING OF TWO SOCIAL CONTEXTS 
Remote attendees found themselves in two social contexts 
at  one  time  during  the  conference  and  often  needed  to 
mitigate the challenges that this setup created. For example, 
P2 discussed the telepresence setup with her live-in partner 
prior to the conference starting. She explained how he could 
tell  if  her  microphone  was  on  and  what  areas  of  their 
apartment  were  captured  by  the  camera.  She  also  placed 
small pieces of paper over top of her camera when it was 
not in use. Thus, there was clear foresight and planning in 

include  utilizing 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

an effort to regulate how she and her partner participated in 
the space (or did not), thereby exercising autonomy [1]. 
[My partner] knows. I tried to tell him that if the headset is 
on the mic might be open. Don’t talk unless you know the 
mic  is  closed  …  We  sort  of  discussed  where  the  camera 
[was and what it captured]. - P2 
Along  a  similar  line,  P1  occasionally  connected  into  the 
conference  from  home  so  that  she  could  also  be  with  her 
children portions of the time or they could see her husband 
who was at the conference in person. At times she placed a 
tea  bag  label  over  her  camera  so  she  could  see  what  was 
happening  at  the  conference  and  watch  a  presentation, 
while  not  letting  local  attendees  see  into  the  more  private 
confines of her home. This act allowed her to have a private 
view  in  solitude  [1]  and  preserve  some  confidentiality  by 
not revealing more than she wanted to [1].  
I'm in my office. Most of my attendance have been from [my 
office], a little bit of it from home...Because I can close the 
door,  and  make  sure  that  I'm  not  disturbed….I  attended 
from home because the kids wanted to see my husband. - P1 
P2  and  P7  talked  about  how  they  purposely  dressed  in  a 
way  that  they  felt  was  acceptable  in  a  conference  setting, 
despite connecting in from home.  
I actually put on a regular girl's makeup. It looked terrible. 
Then  I  actually  sat  down  on  the  camera  and  redid  my 
makeup.  I  did  it  like  I  did  theater.  I  used  to  do  a  lot  of 
theater,  so  I  did  my  makeup  like  theater  makeup.  Then  I 
actually looked like a normal woman. - P2 
I was also kind of okay dressed. I don't think I would have 
done this in pjs or a t-shirt. I think I would have, I wouldn't 
say  dress  up,  but  I  would  have  tried  to  be  clothed 
appropriately. – P7 
On  the  other  hand,  some  participants  were  less  concerned 
about  being  captured  in  their  home.  For  example,  one 
participant  attended  the  entire  conference  from  her  home 
because  she  was  confined  to  laying  or  sitting  down  as  a 
result  of  mobility  challenges.  She  was  used  to  attending 
university classes like this using Skype and so it was not a 
problem for her if she was seen at home in this manner. 
Despite attempts to mitigate privacy challenges, sometimes 
issues  still  arose.  In  one  situation,  for  example,  a  remote 
attendee forgot her microphone was on while talking to her 
children.  This  was  heard  by  local  attendees  and  breeched 
the  confidentiality  [1]  of  the  remote  attendee  by  revealing 
more than she had intended to others at the conference. 
Well I accidentally left my microphone on when I had the 
kids there, and the talk had already started. I was trying to 
tell them to leave quietly thinking my mic was off. So I had 
a parenting-in-public, and disturbing-a-speaker moment all 
at once...Somebody came up and waved in the camera, and 
I turned it off as soon as I could. – P1 

 

428

Turning  to  survey  responses  from  the  local  attendees,  we 
did  not  see  any  concerns  about  seeing  into  the  remote 
attendees’  homes  or  otherwise  private  locations  (e.g.,  an 
office).  Similarly,  nobody  commented  on  concerns  over 
having  themselves  visible  by  other  people  at  the  remote 
attendees' locations (e.g., by work colleagues if at work, by 
family members if at home). This is likely because the local 
attendees were already comporting themselves in a manner 
that they felt was acceptable for public viewing. 
Recommendations 
Conference  organizers  should  work  with  remote  attendees 
to  instruct  them  of  the  potential  for  privacy  implications, 
and  suggest  ways  to  mitigate  them.  Organizers  should 
consider  ways  to  allow  remote  attendees  to:  regulate  their 
autonomy [1] by choosing when and how they participate in 
the  space,  easily  move  into  and  out  of  solitude  [1]  from 
local attendees, and sometimes mask camera views in order 
to  reveal  an  appropriate  amount  of  information  about 
oneself (regulate confidentiality [1]). 
Designers of telepresence devices should consider carefully 
whether an open-mic design is best, compared to push-to-
talk or other solutions. If open-mic is provided, the current 
state of the mute toggle must be very apparent.  Researchers 
should  also  explore  options  for  mitigating  privacy  issues 
with what is shown in the background of the camera frame 
in such mixed contexts [1,20]. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
We now summarize and reflect on our findings to suggest 
key  directions 
telepresence 
explorations and research.  While many of our findings may 
relate  to  office-based  settings,  our  focus  is  strictly  on 
conference  settings.  Thus,  we  are  not  attempting  to 
generalize  beyond  the  setting  we  explored  even  though 
some findings may be relevant to other situations.  Future 
studies  would  be  needed  in  office-settings  to  understand 
how our work generalizes to them (if at all). 
Successes and Challenges 
Overall, we found that the Beam telepresence robots were 
an  effective  solution  for  including  a  small  number  of 
remote  attendees  at  an  academic  conference  and  would 
certainly advocate for similar setups at future conferences. 
Those  with  accessibility  challenges  found  the  experience 
especially  valuable  as 
them  with  new 
opportunities  for  remote  attendance  to  overcome  mobility 
issues  and  fatigue.  Remote  attendees  who  were  unable  to 
travel due to family, visa, or time issues similarly thought 
the  experience  was  better  than  other  telepresence  options 
such as video conferencing for presentations because of the 
ability to navigate and socialize at the conference. 
Yet the experience was by no means perfect and we found 
lots of areas for improvement, as mentioned throughout the 
recommendations  in  our  results.  Compared  to  conference 
attendance  via  virtual  environments,  we  see  that  similar 
issues  emerged  when  using  telepresence  robots.  This 

it  provided 

conference 

for 

future 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

in  constructing  one’s 

included  challenges 
identity, 
recognizing the identity of others, and moving into and out 
of  conversations  [2,13].  These  all  relate  to  the  manner  in 
which one is able to understand his or her identity and self-
representation and customize it as desired to create an ideal 
self [10]. In our case, the remote attendees were limited in 
the  ways  they  could  do  this  customization.  This  suggests 
future work in ways to better manage and create one’s self-
representation.  
We also influenced self-representation through some of the 
decisions  we  made  as  conference  organizers 
(e.g., 
partitioning areas off for the Beams to park which affected 
their  interactions  with  others,  changing  their  robots  when 
technical issues arose). In future situations, such alterations 
should  be  minimized  or  discussed  with  remote  attendees 
ahead of time to give them the opportunity to exercise their 
autonomy as it relates to identity and self-presentation. 
Telepresence  robots  brought  with  them  the  additional 
complexity of a mixed context where remote attendees were 
both  present  at  home/work  along  with  being  at  the 
conference. This also meant that they ‘stood out’ as being 
different  from  other  attendees,  unlike  an  avatar-only 
conference.  These findings relate to privacy challenges in 
video-mediated  environments  where  one  must 
take 
additional  steps  to  exercise  autonomy,  confidentiality,  and 
solitude [1]. 
Design Suggestions and Training 
We  feel  that  many  of  the  problems  we  uncovered  for 
robotic  telepresence  at  conferences  can  be  overcome  with 
design  alterations  to  the  telepresence  robots,  additional 
training or education on how to best interact while using a 
telepresence robot, or training for local attendees on how to 
best  engage  with 
remote  attendees  along  with  an 
understanding of the limitations of the telepresence robots. 
However, 
and 
establishing social norms may represent especially difficult 
problems.  Lee  and  Takayama  [18]  studied  long-term 
deployments  of  telepresence  robots  in  workplace  settings 
and  found  that  social  norms  were  a  problem  even  in  that 
context.  Takayama  and  Go  [31]  attributed  the  problem  to 
one  of  mixed  metaphors.  They  recommend  resolving  the 
confusion by making the identity of the remote person even 
more readily apparent. It is not clear exactly how to put this 
into  practice  in  a  conference  setting,  or  if  it  would  be 
sufficient to establish social norms and mitigate the social 
breakdowns.  As said, our research was a form of breaching 
experiment [3,6,21] where the remote attendees ‘disrupted’ 
the normal flow of conference attendance.  Such disruptions 
are likely to ease over time, yet social norms will need to 
evolve to accommodate and adjust to robotic presence. 
Suggestions for Future Conference Telepresence  
Reflecting on Ubicomp/ISWC’s telepresence setup, we feel 
that  ripe  areas  for  exploration  may  include  expanding  out 
the number of remote attendees or considering the effects of 
time-sharing  telepresence  robots  for  a  particular  period  of 

awkwardness 

around 

issues 

social 

 

429

to  navigate. 

  Other  options  may 

time  (e.g.,  a  desired  presentation  session).  The  benefit  of 
having  one  robot  per  attendee  certainly  allows  people  to 
customize  their  robot  and  develop  their  desired  level  of 
attachment to or identification with it. However, this could 
be a costly endeavor if there are a large number of remote 
attendees.  It  would  also  increase  the  amount  of  technical 
support  that  would  be  needed  to  manage  and  oversee  the 
telepresence  setup.  Time-shared  telepresence  robots  could 
reduce  infrastructure  costs,  yet  may  detract  from  one’s 
construction  of  identity,  unless  the  robots  could  be  easily 
altered in appearances to match new attendees. It is also not 
clear what is the right balance of telepresence robots to in-
person attendees.  It is likely that this would largely depend 
on  the  amount  of  open  foyer  space  that  is  used  for 
conference breaks, as this was the toughest area for remote 
attendees 
include 
representing  remote  participants  in  a  streamed  lecture  [9], 
or the use of mobile or wearable telepresence devices [8].  
Lastly,  we  hope  that  other  conferences  will  replicate  and 
improve  this  approach,  but  even  more  we  hope  that 
researchers  attempt,  study,  and  report  other  approaches  to 
remote  attendance.  There  are  many  other  approaches  that 
could be attempted, either individually or in combination. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We  thank  the  Ubicomp/ISWC  conference  chairs,  A.J. 
Brush, Adrian Friday, and Lucy Dunne, for their help and 
support  throughout  the  planning  and  conducting  of  the 
conference 
telepresence,  and  John  Lateulere  for  his 
technical support throughout the conference.  We are very 
gracious  to  Suitable  Technologies  for  their  conference 
sponsorship  of  the  BeamPros.    Lastly,  we  thank  NSERC 
and the GRAND NCE for funding portions of this research. 
REFERENCES 
1.  Michael Boyle, Carman Neustaedter, and Saul 

Greenberg. 2009. Privacy Factors in Video-Based 
Media Spaces, Media Space 20+ Years of Mediated 
Life, Springer. 

2.  Juliet M. Corbin and Anselm Strauss, 2008. Basics of 
Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for 
Developing Grounded Theory, Sage Publications. 
3.  Andy Crabtree. 2004. Design in the absence of practice: 
breaching experiments. In Proceedings of the 5th 
conference on Designing interactive systems: processes, 
practices, methods, and techniques (DIS '04). ACM, 
New York, NY, USA, 59-68. 
DOI=10.1145/1013115.1013125  
space. In Proceedings of the 3rd European Conference 
on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work 
(ECSCW'93) (Milan, Italy). Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, Dordrecht, 125--138. 
5.  Thomas Erickson, N. Sadat Shami, Wendy A. Kellogg, 
and David W. Levine. 2011. Synchronous interaction 
among hundreds: an evaluation of a conference in an 

4.  Paul Dourish. 1993. Culture and control in a media 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

avatar-based virtual environment. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems(CHI '11). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 503-
512. DOI=10.1145/1978942.1979013  

6.  Harold Garfinkel, H. 1967. Studies of the routine 

grounds of everyday activities, Studies in 
Ethnomethodology, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: 
Prentice-Hall, 35-75 

7.  Akira Hayamizu, Michita Imai, Keisuke Nakamura, and 

Kazuhiro Nakadai. 2014. Volume adaptation and 
visualization by modeling the volume level in noisy 
environments for telepresence system. In Proceedings of 
the second international conference on Human-agent 
interaction (HAI '14). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 67-
74. DOI=10.1145/2658861.2658875  

8.  Kori Inkpen, Brett Taylor, Sasa Junuzovic, John Tang, 
and Gina Venolia. 2013. Experiences2Go: sharing kids' 
activities outside the home with remote family 
members. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on 
Computer supported cooperative work (CSCW '13). 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1329-1340. 
DOI=10.1145/2441776.2441926  

9.  Jia Chun, Popescu, V., Dark, M., York, C. 2008. Virtual 
Classroom Extension for Effective Distance Education, 
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, Volume 28 
(1), 64-74. 

10. Erving Goffman. 1959. The Presentation of Self in 
11. Serena Hillman, Azadeh Forghani, Carolyn Pang, 

Everyday Life, Doubleday. 
Carman Neustaedter, and Tejinder Judge. 
2014. Conducting Interviews with Remote Participants, 
In Tejinder K. Judge and Carman Neustaedter (Eds), 
Studying and Designing Technology for Domestic Life: 
Lessons from Home. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 
San Francisco, CA, USA. 

12. Scott E. Hudson and Ian Smith. 1996. Techniques for 
addressing fundamental privacy and disruption tradeoffs 
in awareness support systems. In Proceedings of the 
1996 ACM conference on Computer supported 
cooperative work (CSCW '96), Mark S. Ackerman 
(Ed.). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 248-257. 
DOI=10.1145/240080.240295 

13. Steven Johnson, Irene Rae, Bilge Mutlu, and Leila 

Takayama. 2015. Can You See Me Now?: How Field of 
View Affects Collaboration in Robotic Telepresence. 
In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '15). ACM, 
New York, NY, USA, 2397-2406. 
DOI=10.1145/2702123.2702526  

14. Michael L. W. Jones. 2000. Collaborative virtual 

conferences: using exemplars to shape future research 
questions. In Proceedings of the third international 
conference on Collaborative virtual environments (CVE 
'00), Elizabeth Churchill and Martin Reddy (Eds.). 

ACM, New York, NY, USA, 19-27. 
DOI=10.1145/351006.351009  

15. Norman P. Jouppi. 2002. First steps towards mutually-
immersive mobile telepresence. InProceedings of the 
2002 ACM conference on Computer supported 
cooperative work (CSCW '02). ACM, New York, NY, 
USA, 354-363. DOI=10.1145/587078.587128 
16. Atsunobu Kimura, Masayuki Ihara, Minoru Kobayashi, 
Yoshitsugu Manabe, and Kunihiro Chihara. 2007. 
Visual feedback: its effect on teleconferencing, Proc of 
the Conference on Human Computer Interaction, 
Springer-Verlag, LNCS 4553, 491-600. 

17. Annica Kristoffersson, Silvia Coradeschi, and Amy 
Loutfi. 2013. A review of mobile robotic telepresence. 
Adv. in Hum.-Comp. Int. 2013, Article 3 (January 
2013), 17 pages. DOI=10.1155/2013/902316  
18. Min Kyung Lee and Leila Takayama. 2011. "Now, i 
have a body": uses and social norms for mobile remote 
presence in the workplace. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI '11). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 33-42. 
DOI=10.1145/1978942.1978950  
19. Tristan Lewis, Jill Drury, and Brandon Beltz. 2014. 
Evaluating Mobile Remote Presence (MRP) Robots. 
In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on 
Supporting Group Work (GROUP '14). ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 302-305. 
DOI=10.1145/2660398.2663777  
20. Joseph F. McCarthy and danah m. boyd. 2005. Digital 
backchannels in shared physical spaces: experiences at 
an academic conference. In CHI '05 Extended Abstracts 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA '05). 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1641-1644. 
DOI=10.1145/1056808.1056986  
Joyce Wackenhut. 1986. Response to intrusion into 
waiting lines, Journal of Personality and Social 
Psycholoyg, Vol. 51(4), Oct 1986, 683-689. 
Design of a Context Aware Home Media Space, 
Proceedings of the International Cofnerence on 
Ubiquitous Computing, Springer, 297-314. 

21. Stanley Milgram, Hilary Liberty, Raymond Toledo, and 

22. Carman Neustaedter and Saul Greenberg. 2003. The 

23. Carman Neustaedter, Saul Greenberg, and Michael 

Boyle. 2006. Blur filtration fails to preserve privacy for 
home-based video conferencing. ACM Trans. Comput.-
Hum. Interact. 13, 1 (March 2006), 1-36. 
DOI=10.1145/1143518.1143519  

24. Andreas Paepcke, Bianca Soto, Leila Takayama, Frank 
Koenig, and Blaise Gassend. 2011. Yelling in the hall: 
using sidetone to address a problem with mobile remote 
presence systems. InProceedings of the 24th annual 
ACM symposium on User interface software and 
technology (UIST '11). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
107-116. DOI=10.1145/2047196.2047209  

 

430

35. Gina Venolia, John Tang, Ruy Cervantes, Sara Bly, 
George Robertson, Bongshin Lee, and Kori Inkpen. 
2010. Embodied social proxy: mediating interpersonal 
connection in hub-and-satellite teams. In Proceedings of 
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI '10). ACM, New York, NY, 
USA, 1049-1058. DOI=10.1145/1753326.1753482  

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

25. Eric Paulos and John Canny. 1998. PRoP: personal 

26. Irene Rae, Bilge Mutlu, and Leila Takayama. 2014. 

roving presence. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI '98), Clare-Marie Karat, Arnold Lund, 
Joëlle Coutaz, and John Karat (Eds.). ACM 
Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., New York, NY, 
USA, 296-303. DOI=10.1145/274644.274686  
Bodies in motion: mobility, presence, and task 
awareness in telepresence. In Proceedings of the 32nd 
annual ACM conference on Human factors in 
computing systems (CHI '14). ACM, New York, NY, 
USA, 2153-2162. DOI=10.1145/2556288.2557047 
27. Irene Rae, Leila Takayama, and Bilge Mutlu. 2012. One 
of the gang: supporting in-group behavior for embodied 
mediated communication. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI '12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3091-
3100. DOI=10.1145/2207676.2208723 
28. Irene Rae, Leila Takayama, and Bilge Mutlu. 2013. The 
influence of height in robot-mediated communication. 
In Proceedings of the 8th ACM/IEEE international 
conference on Human-robot interaction (HRI '13). 
IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 1-8. 
29. Shervin Shirmohammadi, Shun-Yu Hu, Wei Tsang Ooi, 
Gregor Schiele, and Arno Wacker. 2012. Mixing Virtual 
and Physical Participation: The Future of Conference 
Attendance? Proceedings of the Conference on 
Massively Multiplayer Virtual Environments. 
Telepresence Robot?, IEEE Spectrum, 
http://spectrum.ieee.org/automaton/robotics/industrial-
robots/attending-conference-via-telepresence-robot 

30. Strickland, E. Should I Attend a Conference Via a 

31. Leila Takayama and Janet Go. 2012. Mixing metaphors 
in mobile remote presence. In Proceedings of the ACM 
2012 conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work (CSCW '12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 495-
504. DOI=10.1145/2145204.2145281  

32. Leila Takayama and Helen Harris. 2013. Presentation of 

(telepresent) self: on the double-edged effects of 
mirrors. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM/IEEE 
international conference on Human-robot 
interaction (HRI '13). IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ, 
USA, 381-388. 

33. John C. Tang. 2007. Approaching and leave-taking: 

Negotiating contact in computer-mediated 
communication. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. 
Interact. 14, 1, Article 5 (May 2007). 
DOI=10.1145/1229855.1229860 

34. Katherine M. Tsui, Munjal Desai, Holly A. Yanco, and 
Chris Uhlik. 2011. Exploring use cases for telepresence 
robots. In Proceedings of the 6th international 
conference on Human-robot interaction (HRI '11). 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11-18. 
DOI=10.1145/1957656.1957664  

 

431

