CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Early Adopters of the Internet and Social Media in Cuba 
 

Michaelanne Dye, Annie Antón, Amy S. Bruckman 

 

School of Interactive Computing 
Georgia Institute of Technology 

 

85 5th St. NW, Atlanta, GA 30332 USA 

mdye@gatech.edu, aianton; asb @cc.gatech.edu 

are 

limitations,  Cubans 

ABSTRACT 
Although  the  Cuban  government  has  tightly  controlled 
information  access  for  more  than  half  a  century,  a  small 
number  of  Cubans  have  access  at  work.  In  this  paper,  we 
examine Internet and social media use by early adopters in 
Cuba in early 2015, as we enter a time of potential change. 
Specifically, we explore Cubans’ access limitations and the 
activities  they  do  online,  as  well  as  what  Internet  access 
means  to  them.  We  conducted  interviews  with  12  Cuban 
Internet  users  and  observed  their  social  media  use.  Our 
findings  suggest  that  access  limitations  and  slow  network 
speeds  greatly  restrict  Cubans’  Internet  use.  To  counter 
these 
collaborative,  often 
conducting  online  research  and  posting  photos  for  friends 
with less access. Based on these findings, we propose future 
work to help meet Cuban citizens’ information needs. 
Author Keywords 
Social media; social computing; Facebook; Latin America; 
Cuba; qualitative methods; interviews 
 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.3.  [Group  and  Organization  Interfaces]:  Collaborative 
Computing 
INTRODUCTION 
“Now I have contact with the rest of the world. I’ve stopped 
living in the bubble.”  
-- Cuban citizen with Internet access (P1) 
 
In  a  country  where  information  was  tightly  controlled  for 
more than 50 years, people are eager to access content long 
out of reach. In December 2014, the United States and Cuba 
announced  that  they  intend  to  normalize  relations  [5,44]. 
One potential consequence may be greatly increased access 
to the Internet for Cuban citizens. Our study began in fall 
2014,  shortly  before  this  announcement.  Considering  the 
potential for drastic change, as well as the unique space that 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  the  author(s)  must  be 
honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or 
republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific 
permissions 
from Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW  '16, February  27-March  02,  2016,  San  Francisco,  CA,  USA 
Copyright  is  held  by  the  owner/author(s).  Publication  rights  licensed  to 
ACM. 
ACM978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819947 
 

permission 

Request 

and/or 

a 

fee. 

1295

Cuba  represents,  this  research  attempts  to  capture  the 
situation  in  Cuba  at  this  moment  in  time.  Through 
interviews with 12 Cuban Internet users and observation of 
their  social  media  use,  we  explore  the  impact  of  Internet 
access  on  the  daily  life  and  worldview  of  Cuban  early 
adopters  of  Internet  technology.  We  seek  to  answer 
questions  such  as:  which  Cubans  currently  have  Internet 
access, how do they use it now, and how do they hope to 
use it in the future? What hopes do Cubans have for a more 
networked future?  
 
Understanding  the  situation  for  early  Internet  adopters  in 
Cuba is, first, of interest for researchers, corporations, and 
others  hoping  to  engage  more  directly  with  Cuba  in  the 
future. Second, insights developed from understanding this 
unusual situation may provide insights into the role of the 
Internet and social media in other countries. We draw from 
other  work  on  design  implications  for  the  urban  poor  in 
developing  countries 
that,  “calls  for  developing  ICT 
interventions  grounded  in  users’  existing  practices  rather 
than introducing new and unfamiliar ones” [54].  
 
Miller and Slater argue that there is significant intellectual 
value 
to 
understand  the  very  different  universes  of  social  and 
technical  possibility 
the 
Internet in, say, Trinidad versus Indonesia, or Britain versus 
India” [32]. Within those universes of social and technical 
possibility,  Cuba  is  unique  in  combining  extremely  low 
access to both Internet and telephone with a highly literate 
population  [9].  The  broader  social  context 
includes 
crumbling 
food  shortages 
[27,47].  Thus,  the  challenges  for  Cuban  Internet  users  are 
quite  different  from  those  of  Iraq  [29]  or  Mexico  [33] 
during wartime, rural India [1], Africa [2], native American 
reservations in the US [38], or other developing locations.   
 
Miller  and  Slater  continue  that,  “Each  of  these  places  is 
constantly  being  redefined  through  engagements  with 
forces such as the Internet” [32].  Is Cuba at this particular 
historical  moment 
in  any  meaningful  sense  “being 
redefined”  by  the  Internet?    We  begin  to  develop  insights 
into that question using qualitative research methods. More 
broadly, by examining this particular situation in the world 
of  social  and  technical  possibilities,  what  insights  can  we 
draw  for  the  use  of  information  and  communication 
technologies (ICTs) for low-access spaces in other parts of 

that  have  developed  around 

infrastructure  and  chronic 

in  “producing  material 

that  will  allow  us 

the world? This paper serves as an exploratory study of an 
understudied  space  while  also  laying  a  baseline  for  future 
work in this country. 
 
BACKGROUND  
Cuba  has  been  called  the  second  most  isolated  country  in 
the  world,  partially  due  to  its  tightly  controlled  Internet 
[49].  Reasons  for  this  Internet  stagnation  include  lack  of 
resources,  the  US  embargo  against  Cuba,  and  the  Cuban 
government’s  fear  of  implications  of  the  freedom  of 
information [17,35]. However, this was not always the case. 
Cuba  was  once  the  most  connected  country  in  the 
Caribbean,  accounting  for  nearly  32%  of  all  email  traffic 
and international news [35]. In the early 90s, Cuba seemed 
positioned  to  grow  in  the  computing  sector  with  some 
predicting faster change in Cuba than in the former Soviet 
Union because of the small population and the potential for 
aid  from  the  large  expatriate  community  located  nearby 
[31].  In  1996,  with  assistance  from  the  NSF,  Cuba 
connected to the Internet and government officials seemed 
positive about its potential use in Cuba [35]. However, five 
years later, Cuba was at the lowest point in six dimensions 
of Internet access [52]. Cuba’s Internet has stagnated with 
little improvement since the late 90s [35].  
 
Changes during the last five years place Cuba in the midst 
of  a  technological  upheaval,  pitting  government  control 
against the desire for economic success [16]. In 2013, Cuba 
connected  a  high  speed  ALBA-1  fiber  optic  cable  to 
Venezuela, enabling increased data transmission speeds [7]. 
Cuba was removed from the US state sponsors of terror list 
in May 2015, and formal diplomatic relations between the 
US and Cuba were established in July 2015 [10]. This will 
presumably  yield  significant  growth  in  Internet  access  for 
Cuban  citizens  [5].  However,  consistent  blocks  exist  to 
Internet  access,  including  policy  restrictions,  surveillance, 
and lack of resources. Even with more Internet penetration 
across  the  island,  little  has  changed  for  most  Cubans 
seeking information beyond state-controlled sources [7,35].  
 
The Cuban government continues to repress individuals and 
groups  who  criticize  the  government  or  call  for  basic 
human  rights  [17].  The  government  has  been  known  to 
persecute  dissident  bloggers. For  example,  blogger  Yoani 
Sanchez,  whose  posts  frequently  speak  out  against  the 
government, has been imprisoned on several occasions [7]. 
Despite  impediments  to  open  communication  online,  our 
findings show that many Cubans are eager to communicate 
with one another, as well as the rest of the world.  
 
Researchers 
communication 
technologies  for  development  (ICT4D)  have  shown  that 
literacy  poses  a  central  challenge.  Systems  designed  for 
rural India or Africa often leverage audio [1], audio and still 
pictures  [30],  video  [41],  or  even  bar  codes  [34]  to  ease 
technology  use  by  low-literate  individuals.  In  Cuba,  the 
situation  is  quite  different—the  literacy  rate  is  reported  to 

information 

and 

on 

1296

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

be 99.8% [9]. We have been unable to confirm that statistic 
from  multiple  sources;  however,  regardless  of  the  exact 
figure,  it  appears  the  literacy  rate  in  Cuba  is  high.  This 
suggests that the situation in Cuba may have commonalities 
with its Caribbean neighbor Trinidad, which also has a high 
basic  literacy  rate  [32].  This  raises  the  intriguing  question 
of whether Cuba will follow Trinidad’s pattern of extremely 
rapid  adoption  of  the  Internet  going  forwards,  if  access 
restrictions are lifted. 
 
RELATED WORK 
Research on the Internet in Cuba 
How many Cubans currently have Internet access, how do 
they  use  it  now,  and  how  do  they  hope  to  use  it  in  the 
future?  Little  empirical  research  has  been  published 
recently  regarding  Internet  use  in  Cuba,  and,  to  our 
knowledge, this work has been conducted in fields outside 
of CSCW. Pérez found that of 25 Cuban professionals, all 
reported  minimal  access  to  Information  Technology  (IT) 
yet  expressed  increased  access  as  critical  for  development 
[18].  More  recent  work  examines  the  Cuban  blogosphere. 
To date, little research examines social network sites (SNS), 
such as Facebook and Twitter. Hoffman [25] argues that the 
need  for  public  debate  in  Cuba  is  not  mediated  by  the 
government,  and  the  current  blogger  community  in  Cuba 
arose  as  a  result  of  that  need.  According  to  Hoffman, 
through the blogosphere and e-mail, a virtual public sphere 
has  formed;  however,  this  has  not  deeply  penetrated  the 
physical  world  in  Cuba.  Other  researchers  suggest  that 
online  communication  technologies  have  allowed  for  a 
more  pluralized  public  space,  bringing  together  microsites 
that were once segmented and isolated [19]. However, these 
online spaces are still limited to a select few, namely young 
intellectuals  who  are  able  to  gain  Internet  access.  Others 
have  examined  the  blogosphere  as  an  emergent  public 
sphere  in  Cuba  in  which  bloggers  have  forced  their  way 
into  the  public  arena,  challenging  the  ingrained  narratives 
perpetuated  by  the  Cuban  regime.  Therefore,  the  current 
blogosphere may present a model for democratic sociability 
in Cuba [13]. 
 
However,  regardless  of  the  popular  discourse  surrounding 
the  ‘liberating’  nature  of  social  media,  the  idea  of  the 
Internet  potentially  provoking  a  ‘Cuban  Spring’  may  be 
flawed  due  to  the  uniqueness  of  the  Cuban  situation  [56]. 
When examining the Internet and state control in China and 
Cuba, authors contradict the notion that the Internet poses a 
threat  to  all  authoritarian  rule  by  demonstrating  how  both 
the  Cuban  and  Chinese  governments  have  been  able  to 
control  and  profit  from  the  Internet  [25,26].  Others 
advocate  for  further  research  in  this  area  because  of  the 
complicated  history  of  outside  development  actors 
attempting to use IT to promote democracy [15]. However, 
some  argue 
international 
community will be key in advancing the state of technology 
in  Cuba 
important 
contribution  for  examining  social  media  use  by  Cuban 

[18].  These  papers  provide  an 

that  assistance 

from 

the 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

the  government  may  result 

activists,  the  state  of  the  Internet  in  Cuba,  and  the 
importance  of  IT  development  on  the  island.  We  aim  to 
extend  prior  work  by  incorporating  the  voice  of  Cubans 
who do not identify as activists into the narrative of Internet 
use in Cuba. By analogy, if we were to study just political 
discourse on the Internet in the United States, we would be 
looking at only a tiny fraction of online activity—much of 
the picture would be missing. Our work examines everyday 
Internet and social media use by early adopters in Cuba. 
 
Repressive Regimes and Conditions of Political Unrest 
Researchers  have  examined  social  media  use  in  countries 
with  repressive  regimes  as  well  as  places  with  extreme 
political  unrest  [4,33,40,53].  Similar  to  recent  work  on 
Cuba, these studies primarily focus on political protest and 
activism. This work provides insights for work in countries 
with tightly controlled Internet access and where speaking 
out  against 
in  negative 
consequences. When examining the interplay between SNS 
and  political  change 
identified 
Facebook  as  an  ideal  tool  for  Egyptians  to  communicate 
and 
serving  as  a 
mechanism  to  circumvent  the  inherent  lack  of  freedom  of 
speech  or  the  inability  to  gather  in  groups  in  the  offline 
world  [4].  Similarly,  research  on  social  media  use  in  the 
Mexican  Drug  War  notes  the  role  of  SNS  for  information 
curation among volatile populations [33]. Another study on 
online  contribution  practices  in  an  undisclosed  country 
identified strategies used by individuals to navigate Internet 
blocking such as self-censorship and reliance on social ties 
to relay blocked content [40].  
 
Mark et al. [29] studied the use of social media by ordinary 
citizens  during  war  time  in  Iraq.  They  document  ways  in 
which  citizens  use  social  media  creatively  to  foster 
resilience in time of crisis, particularly: 
 

support  mobilization,  ultimately 

in  Egypt,  one  study 

•  reconfiguring  social  networks  (meeting  new  people 
online,  because  existing  modes  of  socializing  are 
not possible if travel is dangerous) 

•  self-organization  (organizing  shared  resources,  and 
collaboratively planning travel in dangerous areas) 
•  redundancy  (sharing  electrical  power  and  Internet 

access) 

•  proactive  practices  (making  educational  materials 
available  online  to  make  sure  they  are  accessible 
regardless of travel conditions) 

•  repairing  trust  in  information  (sharing  information 
that  has  been  verified  and  cross-checked  by 
trustworthy people) 

 
The  needs  of  Cuban  citizens  are  obviously  quite  different 
from  the  citizens  struggling  during  wartime  studied  by 
Mark.  However,  a  crumbling  infrastructure  and  chronic 
shortages  of  food  put  significant  stress  on  Cuban  citizens 
[27,47].  Similar  to  Mark’s  subjects,  our  participants  are 
struggling  to  adapt  to  disruption  that  has  persisted  over 

time. As we will see, Internet access for Cubans is currently 
so limited that many of the practices documented by Mark 
et al. are not yet apparent and arguably not yet possible. 
 
Low-Access Spaces 
Work in regions around the world show how persistent and 
creative individuals can be in obtaining Internet access. A 
study on political activists in a Palestinian village observed 
that, although the village lacked Internet access, individuals 
used Internet connections at workplaces and a 3G network 
through an Israeli mobile phone provider to bypass access 
issues  [53].  Villagers  were  thereby  able  to  take  part  in 
political activism via social media. In our study, workplaces 
are central to the state of the Internet in Cuba. 
 
Once people obtain Internet access for the first time, what 
do  they  use  it  for?  Early  Internet  use  in  US  Native 
American reservations was funded for work and education; 
however,  individuals  were  primarily  using  the  Internet  for 
entertainment  purposes,  similar  to  how  typical  individuals 
around  the  world  use  it  [38].  Other  studies  observe  that 
within  one  month  of  acquiring  Internet  access  on  mobile 
phones, Indian youth in slum communities access SNS such 
as  Facebook  [36,37].  A  similar  study  in  Kenya  reveals 
growing  online  participation,  primarily  on  Facebook,  is 
limited  by  high  costs,  technology  access,  and  unreliable 
electricity  [55].  Our  findings  resonate  with  these  studies 
regarding the central role of entertainment and socializing, 
and the importance of Facebook in particular. 
 
Wyche et al. stress the importance of research to add value 
to participants’ lives, a guiding principle that also motivates 
our work [55]. These studies help to frame our work within 
the larger context of Internet use in low-access spaces.  
 
METHODS 
Drawing methods from other similar studies [11,23,42], we 
performed  12  semi-structured  interviews  with  citizens 
living  in  Cuba  who  do  not  identify  as  dissident  bloggers. 
This was important because we sought to learn more about 
the  average  Cuban  citizen’s  Internet  use.  We  interviewed 
four  females  and  eight  males,  ranging  in  age  from  22-60 
(see  Table  1).  Our  participants  by  some  measure  may  be 
considered elite; however, they live under similar economic 
conditions  to  those  who  do  not  have  Internet  access.  We 
recruited  participants  until  we  felt  that  our  data  was 
saturated  [22].  We  used  purposeful,  snowball  sampling  to 
recruit  initial  participants  through  personal  contacts.  We 
then asked these contacts to refer us to additional contacts. 
The first author visited Cuba in March 2014, and was able 
to build a set of initial contacts who agreed to assist us in 
recruiting  more  individuals  for  this  study.  Our  snowball 
sample  began  from  multiple  independent  seeds.  This 
method  of  sampling  was  the  only  one  at  our  disposal—
making  contact  with  participants  was  challenging.  It  is 
important to note that our sample is not representative (see 
section  Limitations).  Due  to  legal  restrictions,  we  did  not 

1297

Interviews  were 

monetarily  compensate  participants. 
conducted in 2015 from January 15th through April 7th. 
The new policy agreement between the US and Cuba calls 
for  new  efforts  to  increase  Cubans’  access  to  Internet 
services, as well as releasing several Cuban dissidents from 
Cuba’s jails [44]. The policy change may make it less risky 
for  Cubans  to  discuss  sensitive  topics  more  freely.  All  of 
our  participants  use  email  and  SNS  to  communicate  with 
individuals  outside  of  Cuba  on  a  regular  basis. Each 
participant  was  aware  that  their  online  activity  was  (most 
likely)  being  monitored  by  the  government  and  their 
employer. Our consent form cautioned participants to avoid 
topics  they  deemed  controversial.  Our  protocol  specifies 
that  if  a  subject  broached  a  topic  that  may  be  deemed 
controversial, we would interrupt them and remind them to 
be  careful.  However,  this  never  happened  during  our 
interviews.  We  have  anonymized  all  data  that  appears  in 
this paper to further protect participants’ privacy.  
 
Interviews  lasted  between  30-90  minutes.  Due  to  the 
difficulties  surrounding  access  to  communications,  we 
allowed  each  participant  to  choose  the  interview  method 
(Skype,  phone,  Facebook  chat,  or  email)  most  convenient 
for  them.  Seven  interviews  were  conducted  via  Facebook 
chat,  three  via  email,  one  via  Skype,  and  one  via  phone. 
Three  interviews  were  conducted  with  participants  who 
were  traveling  outside  of  Cuba  for  work  purposes.  Most 
Cubans  have  limited  access  to  Internet  and  international 
phone calls to and from Cuba are expensive. Participating 
in  interviews  was  much  less  burdensome  for  Cubans 
visiting other countries. 
 
During  the  interviews,  participants  were  asked  questions 
about: Internet access, Internet use, social media sites, self-
censorship,  Internet  impact  on  their  lives  and  culture, 
differences  between  Internet  users  and  non-users,  and  the 
normalization  of  relations  between  Cuba  and  the  United 
States.  These  interviews  were  semi-structured  so  that  the 
interviewees  were  able 
the 
to  guide 
conversation [23]. In email interviews, follow-up questions 
were tailored to the initial responses.  
 
With  participants’  consent,  we  also  examined 
their 
Facebook activity to determine their frequency of use, the 
type of information they post, and the types of interactions 
they have. Similar to prior work [14], we used participant-
observation  to  interact  with  individuals  on  Facebook  to 
illuminate  the  details  in  their  social  media  use  and  enrich 
our data set. In our preliminary research, we found that the 
majority  of  Cubans  who  interact  on  social  media  do  so 
through  Facebook; 
therefore,  we  focused  our  online 
participant-observation  on  that  site.  In  the  consent  form, 
participants  were  notified  about  this  method  and  each 
interviewee  agreed  to  become  Facebook  friends  with  the 
first  author  to  facilitate  our  research.  The  first  author 
created  a  private  Facebook  list  that  included  participants 

the 

flow  of 

1298

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

fluent 

and was only visible to her. This feed was monitored daily. 
The  authors  noted  the  frequency  and  types  of  posts  by 
participants  and  tailored  our  questions  based  on  these 
observations.  This  also  allowed  us  to  view  demographic 
data via participants’ profiles. We  conducted brief follow-
up interviews with participants via Facebook chat, enabling 
us  to  interact  with  them  more  frequently  and  ask  them 
specific  questions  about  their  Facebook  activity.  The  first 
author’s  Facebook  friend  list  is  private  to  protect  our 
subjects’ privacy. 
 
Interviews  were  conducted  in  Spanish,  English,  and  a 
mixture  of  both  depending  on  the  participant's  preference. 
Interviews were transcribed and translated into English by 
the  first  author,  who  is  fluent  in  Spanish.  One  researcher 
conducted  thematic  analysis  [8]  and  performed  qualitative 
coding.  All  authors  discussed  the  codes  and  emerging 
themes throughout the coding process.  
 
The  United  States  and  Cuba  have  a  complicated  history, 
and it is important that we reflect on our own relationship to 
this  international  situation.  We  draw  from  feminist  social 
science  research  regarding  researcher  self-disclosure  and 
reflexivity in an effort to be transparent [23]. Two authors 
are  bilingual  Cuban  Americans,  both 
in  
Spanish.  The  first  author  comes  from  Cuban  descent  but 
was born and raised in the United States. She has traveled 
to Cuba twice and is familiar with the culture and customs 
through lived experience and regular contact with friends in 
the  country.  Access  to  participants  was  facilitated  by  the 
language skills, cultural knowledge, and social network of 
the  first  author.  The  second  author’s  brother  and  parents 
were born in Cuba, whereas she was born in the US  She 
has traveled to Cuba once on an academic trip in which she 
briefly  studied  the  medical  and  educational  systems  in 
Cuba,  and  is  acculturated  to  Cuban  culture  and  customs.  
For  both  the  first  and  second  author,  this  Cuban  heritage 
brings  with  it  a  passionate  sympathy  for  the  plight  of  the 
Cuban  people,  which  shapes  all  our  work  related  to  this 
topic. The third author is not of Cuban descent and speaks 
no Spanish, and has been able to balance discussions with 
an  outsider’s  perspective.  Our  research  meetings  are 
conducted in a mix of Spanish and English when the third 
author is not present, and in English when the third author 
is participating. 
 
Because  all  authors  were  born  and  raised  in  the  US,  our 
research  approach  naturally  stems  from  our  background 
living in a country that highly values democratic principles 
and  freedom  of  speech.  All  three  authors  share  the 
conviction that Cuba should adopt a greater openness to the 
rest of the world.  Interestingly, we often disagree on how 
best to achieve that openness, since we come from opposite 
ends  of  the  US  political  spectrum.  The  political  diversity 
within  our  team  is  a  source  of  intellectual  depth  as  we 
continually  challenge  one  another’s  assumptions.    These 
values  and  commitments  shape  the  questions  we  ask  and 

 
 

Age 

Sex  Occupation 

P1 

24 

F 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

answers we hear. However, this research is not intended to 
take  a  political  stance  or  advocate  for  a  specific  cause. 
Rather,  we  hope  this  research  helps  to  communicate  the 
lived experiences and desires of our participants, rather than 
we as researchers speaking for them.  
 
FINDINGS 
To  explore  the  impact  of  Internet  access  on  the  daily  life 
and worldview of early IT adopters in Cuba, we detail how 
Cubans access the Internet and how this shapes their usage. 
Additionally,  we  identify  the  most  important  aspects  of 
Internet  use  for  Cubans  as  reported  by  participants: 
connecting  with  friends  and  access  to  information.  We 
describe  how  Cubans  use  the  most  popular  site  in  Cuba, 
Facebook, and what they post online. Finally, because this 
study  serves  as  a  baseline  for  an  ongoing  study  of  how 
increased 
Internet  access  affects  Cuba,  we  discuss 
participants’ feelings regarding the future of the Internet in 
Cuba.  
 
The State of the Internet in Cuba 
Current Internet penetration in Cuba is estimated between 5 
to 25%, with only 5% of the population having full access 
to  the  Internet.  The  rest  only  have  limited  Internet  access 
that  includes  a  national  e-mail  system,  pro-government 
websites,  and  some  other  services  [39].  Therefore,  if  one 
has email access, whether by smartphone or computer, this 
does  not  mean  that  they  have  Internet  access.  Participants 
reiterated this, saying that the majority of their friends and 
acquaintances  do  not  have  Internet  access  and  they 
considered themselves among the minority.  
 
None  of  the  participants  regularly  accessed  the  Internet  in 
cyber  cafes  due  to  slow  bandwidth  and  high  cost.  Access 
costs about US $4.50 an hour and the average Cuban earns 
the equivalent of US $20 per month [43]. Few people have 
Internet access at home and none have access on their cell 
phones. Though, as of spring 2014, a few have access to an 
email  service  on  phones  called  Nauta,  costing  ~$1.20  per 
megabyte  [43].  Three  of  our  twelve  participants  (P1,  P9, 
and  P11)  have  access  to  email  on  their  phones.  However, 
the service is slow and unreliable. 
 
Since  the  normalization  of  relations  with  the  US  was 
announced, changes in Internet access have been minimal. 
In February 2015, Cuban officials announced a promotion 
for  state-run  cyber  cafes  allowing  users  to  access  the 
Internet for two hours and 16 minutes for $5 (instead of the 
normal  $4.50/hour)  [3].  However,  the  promotion  ran  until 
April  10,  2015,  and  was  still  prohibitive,  considering  the 
average monthly salary in Cuba. 
 
Internet continues to be expensive. [This new price] is half 
of  the  first  monthly  salary  that  I  had  when  I  started 
working. - P1 
 
 

P2 

P3 

P4 

P5 

P6 

P7 
P8 

P9 

23 

48 

30 

26 

31 

31 
26 

24 

P10  22 
P11  26 

P12  60 

F 

M 

M 

M 

M 
M 

F 

F 
M 

M 

Inter-
view 
Medium 

Facebook 
Chat 

Facebook 
Chat 

Facebook 
Chat 

Facebook 
Chat 

Skype 

Facebook 
Chat 

Radio 
Broadcaster 
and English 
Interpreter  

Computer 
Engineer  

Electrical 
Engineer 

Graduate 
Student 
Professor 

M  Metrologist 

Phone 

Economist 
Programmer  Facebook 

Chat 
Email 

English and 
French 
Interpreter 
Student 
Programmer  Facebook 

Email 

Chat 
Email  

Radio 
Station 
Program 
Director 

Interview 
Lang. 

Spanish 
and 
English 
 
Spanish 

English 

Spanish 
and 
English 
Spanish 

Spanish 
and 
English 
Spanish 
Spanish 

Spanish 

English 
Spanish 

Spanish 

Table 1 - Description of Participants 

 
In  March  2015,  Cuba  allowed  the  launch  of  the  first  free, 
public Wi-Fi service in the country. This service is run by a 
prominent artist, Kcho, which costs the artist approximately 
$900 per month [45]. With many Cubans attempting to use 
the service, the speed is prohibitively slow, seeming more 
like  a  symbolic  change  rather  than  a  practical  one.  Each 
participant  we  spoke  to  had  Internet  access  at  work  or  at 
school. Of those with access at school, it was limited to a 

1299

couple  of  hours  per  week.  P5  accessed  the  Internet 
occasionally from the home of a friend who is a foreigner 
and has been granted a license to have Internet in his home. 
Three of our participants, P6, P10 and P12, also had limited 
access to the Internet at home. 
 
I  use  the  institutional  account  of  a  family  member  who 
works in the cultural sector and it's mainly used for email 
service,  but  it  additionally  allows  access  to  selected  sites 
(usually .cu sites, Wikipedia, some foreign press). I have my 
own  account  through  the  University,  which  also  provides 
email service, but its additional access is more limited (only 
sites directly related to the University). - P6 
 
The  Internet  access  that  I  have  is  extremely  limited.  We 
have it in school, but it’s a limited quota that doesn’t work 
for everything. Additionally, certain sites like Facebook are 
only accessible at certain hours a day. Apart from that, the 
Internet  that  I  have  [at  home]  is  one  that  I  buy  for  a  few 
hours per week, depending on what they allow me. - P10 
 
Because hardly any Cubans have Internet access at home, it 
is not surprising our participants reported mainly using the 
Internet for work or school, which affected the framing of 
our  conversations  with  them.  The  three  participants  who 
had limited access at home still stated that they mainly use 
it  either  for  school  or  work.  In  the  initial  stages  of  our 
interviews,  interviewees  discussed  their  Internet  use  in 
terms  of  how  it  has  affected  their  jobs  or  studies.  Internet 
speeds at workplaces and universities are often faster than 
those in individuals’ homes, but they are still restrictive.   
 
Computer  hardware  at  home  was  purchased  either  during 
international  travel  or  on  the  black  market.  Some  home 
hardware was surprisingly up-to-date, while other hardware 
was  cobbled  together  from  quite  old  components.  We  do 
not  have  data  on  the  age  of  computers  used  at  work  or 
school or how they were obtained. 
 
Although  pornography  is  often  credited  as  a  driver  of 
demand  for  Internet  access  [32],  our  participants  pointed 
out that they were unable to access pornography in Cuba or 
shop  online.  Other  news  articles  have  confirmed  the 
inability  to  access  pornography  in  Cuba,  pointing  out  that 
even  trying  to  access  a  pornographic  site  can  lead  to  the 
cancellation of web services [51]. It has also been reported 
that  Internet  users  must  sign  a  contract  that  they  will  not 
look for pornographic content [24] and there can be harsh 
consequences for being caught with pornography. 
 
Interviewer: When did you first get an email address? 
P4: In the university… after that they cut off the Internet for 
students 
Interviewer: Do you know why they cut it off? 
P4:  Because 
that  one  student  had 
pornography and used the connection to upload photos and 
took advantage and they took away the Internet for the first 

they  discovered 

1300

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

three  years  for  all  the  majors.  The  last  two  years  we  had 
Internet two times per week for only 10 minutes. 
 

Unlike other studies regarding the introduction of the 
Internet to communities [38], we find that because this type 
of content is blocked or inaccessible in Cuba, participants 
reappropriate the Internet in different ways. However, 
participants still use the Internet for entertainment purposes, 
which is consistent with other findings on early Internet 
access in communities [38]. Participants admitted to 
accessing Facebook or Google for personal reasons when 
possible. 

information 

[Facebook] is blocked for the majority of my coworkers but 
now they let me have it so that I can contact counterparts 
and so that I can use it for work… the majority of the time I 
use it for my own personal things. - P4 
 
Regulations and Restrictions 
Until  now  the  government  has  not  been  interested  in  the 
community  having  access  to  the  Internet.  They  use  the 
justification that it’s expensive, that there’s not bandwidth, 
that people are not ready for that, it’s as if the people were 
stupid. - P3 
 
As  opposed  to  relying  heavily  on  content  censorship  like 
other countries with tightly controlled Internet access, such 
as  China  or  Iran,  the  Cuban  government  also  controls  the 
spread  of 
through  high  cost  and  slow 
bandwidth  [6].  Participants  felt  their  Internet  use  was 
restrictive  due  to  slow  access,  high  costs,  and  blocked 
content.  This  trend  continued  throughout  our  interviews, 
serving as the main challenge to recruiting participants. All 
participants reported that there are things they would like to 
do on the Internet but are unable to, due to slow connection 
speeds and high costs.  
 
I always try to access Facebook to have contact with some 
person. But it’s very complicated because the connection is 
extremely  slow.  So,  a  lot  of  times,  I  can  be  talking  with 
someone  and,  boom,  the  connection  drops.  And  I  have  to 
wait to connect again…everything is a hassle. – P5 
 
I  have  access  in  my  workplace,  but  it  is  a  very  slow 
Internet, where you can’t watch videos and sometimes not 
upload photos. - P1 
 
In addition to cost and speed, content blocking was also a 
factor that limited access for participants. Some participants 
stated  that  sites  were  blocked  because  of  other  companies 
or countries limiting access to Cuba.  
 
There are many sites where there is technical information 
and  articles  online  that  we  are  forbidden  from  accessing 
because we live in Cuba. – P3 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

to 

tools)  has 

restrictions, 

the  Cuban 

technological 

 
There are lots of things that I want to do on the Internet but 
can’t.  Up  until  recently,  there  were  many  services  in 
Google  that  weren’t  available  in  Cuba.  For  example, 
Google analytics. Similarly, Skype doesn’t work in Cuba. I 
would like to be able to use it to talk to many people but I 
can’t. I would like to be able to edit my Facebook profile 
more than once per week or be able to use Netflix to watch 
the series that I like but I can’t do that, either. - P10 
 
Regardless  of 
technological 
community  (which  we  define  as  individuals  who  have 
access 
found  creative 
workarounds to government blockades [7,35]. For example, 
two  participants  mentioned 
revolico.com,  a  virtual 
marketplace where individuals sell goods and services from 
computer  repair  to  USBs.  It  should  be  noted  that  the 
exchange  of  money  and  goods,  however,  takes  place  in-
person  and  no  money 
is  exchanged  online.  Rather, 
revolico.com  acts  more  like  a  forum  or  message  board. 
Additionally,  an  “offline”  Internet  has  formed  in  Cuba  in 
which  citizens  distribute  media  through  USBs  called 
“packages”  [7].  During  the  first  author’s  travels  in  Cuba, 
she  encountered  this  practice  among  every  young  person 
with whom she spoke. Most neighborhoods have a person 
who  sells  various  packages  that  contain  content  like 
YouTube videos, mp3s, movies and news.  
 
People here share information by way of hard drives...It’s 
what  people  call  the  “Weekly  Packet”  that’s  around  1 
terabyte.  They  sell  it  very  cheap.  They  sell  a  copy  of  the 
series, movies, etc. - P3 
 
In  addition  to  selling  Internet  content  via  hard  drives  and 
USBs,  some  individuals  access  content  and  technological 
tools through other non-traditional means: 
 
In Cuba they exploit more technology that what most would 
imagine. All software that is used is pirated and we all have 
access to them without fear of penalty or problems with the 
law. Although there isn’t Internet, the average PC user [in 
Cuba]  does  much  more  than  the  regular  user  out  in  the 
world.  Format  memories,  reinstall  operating  systems,  use 
professional programs like Adobe Suite or others that are 
really  expensive  are  easily  accessible  in  Cuba.  This  is  a 
great paradox for these times. - P4 
 
Sometimes you have to find ways around stuff. A trick I use 
for example: At home I can do the basic search of Google, 
but  not  follow  links,  so  sometimes  I  feed  the  search 
something  I'm  looking  for  just  to  see  where  it  might  be 
available and then go somewhere else to get it. People can 
sometimes answer messages on Facebook by replying to the 
email notification…You gotta be crafty sometimes..  - P6 
 
Some people sneak around hotels to get Wi-Fi access using 
password  breaking...People  share  information  in  this  city 

the  Internet 

the  Internet  differently.  For  us, 

through an “intranet” made between people with incentive, 
off the record, and who have bought their own equipment, 
routers, etc., that they interconnect, over more than 30 km 
in the city. Sometimes groups of young people put a router 
in a building and connect the others with cables or wireless 
connection  and  they  share  the  connection  to  exchange 
movies,  documentaries,  and  even  play.  But  everything 
occurs inside the bubble. - P3 
 
Such resourcefulness is common practice in countries with 
Internet  blocking  and  access  limitations  [40].  Although 
workarounds are possible in Cuba, the activity occurs, as P3 
put it, “inside the bubble,” meaning that few people are able 
to  access  the  Internet  to  connect  with  individuals  or 
information outside of Cuba.  
 
Internet Use 
“Things don’t happen like you think they happen. For the 
average Cuban, the Internet is Facebook. Perhaps you all 
see 
is 
Facebook, Facebook, Facebook.” - P7 
 
Regardless  of  the  high  barriers  to  access,  participants  still 
managed  to  get  online,  mainly  through  workplaces.  In 
addition  to  sites  that  participants  had  to  access  for  work 
purposes, all participants reported that Google or Facebook 
were  among  their  favorite  sites,  with  Facebook  being 
reported as the most used site. Our findings are consistent 
with  a  recent  survey  conducted  in  Cuba  that  reports  that 
91%  of  Cubans  with  Internet  access  use  Facebook  [59]. 
When asked what they use the Internet for, each participant 
said to connect with friends and access information, both of 
which will be explored further in the following sections.  
 
Connecting with friends 
Being able to connect with friends offers a large impact on 
Cubans with Internet access. While this may seem obvious 
(doesn’t everyone use the Internet for this?), for Cubans it 
is of particular importance. Nearly every Cuban has family 
members  outside  of  Cuba  and  many  have  not  been  in 
contact with them for years. As P3 told us, “sometimes they 
don’t  even  allow  you  to  use  regular  mail  to  write  to  your 
closest relatives living abroad.” In addition, phone calls to 
people  outside  of  Cuba  are  expensive.  Therefore,  the 
particularly  Facebook, 
Internet, 
new 
communication modes for Cubans.  
 
In my university there were people from different provinces 
and once we graduated Facebook became like our place for 
reunions. A lot don’t have telephones and we’re able to stay 
up to date through this medium. – P2 
 
With  the  Internet,  I  finally  have  contact  with  my  cousins 
and my family in Florida. - P5 
 
Our  participants  typically  use  the  Internet  to  connect  with 
people  they  already  know.  However,  as  stated  earlier, 

opening 

is 

1301

low 

several participants said that the majority of their friends do 
not have Internet access, limiting the number of people in 
one’s online social network who are also co-located.  
 
Information access and collaboration 
While connecting with friends is important to Cubans, the 
ability  to  access  information  online  is  perhaps  even  more 
crucial.  Similar  to  other  studies  on  Facebook  use  in  low-
access  regions  [55],  all  participants  spoke  with  optimism 
and  a  somewhat  utopian  outlook  about  using  the  Internet 
and SNS for information access.   
 
[The Internet] has affected me positively, because I’m kept 
updated  on  the  global  agenda,  things  that  many  times  the 
press or news here doesn’t inform us. – P2 
 
In  reality,  the  access  to  so  much  information,  has  been 
good...I’ve resolved complicated technical problems thanks 
to the information and help forums. - P3 
 
Because  Internet  penetration  remains 
in  Cuba, 
communities use collaborative efforts to retrieve and share 
information. As P5 explained, “A lot of the news that you 
find on the Internet you can hear from a friend who heard 
from  a  friend  who  heard  from  another  friend.”  In  Cuba, 
news  primarily  continues  to  travel  through  face-to-face 
social networks. People with Internet access often retrieve 
content for others and disseminate information to their local 
communities. Participants described the ways in which they 
use the Internet to collaboratively retrieve information and 
how  they  ask  for  information  retrieval  from  others  when 
their access is limited. 
 
Mostly [I share] news on current events or entertainment. 
Occasionally academic knowledge, too. Like having the odd 
neighbor's  child  needing  some  information  for  homework. 
Among friends, it's a regular thing. - P6 
 
Since the revolution, the Cuban media has been controlled 
by the government, limiting the amount of information that 
Cubans receive about the outside world as well as their own 
community  [7,35].  As  a  result  of  increased  access  to 
information  via  the  Internet,  participants  discussed  the 
Internet  and  social  media  in  terms  of  it  affecting  their 
perspectives and perceptions of reality. 
 
 [The]  Internet  always  allows  me  to  see  that  there  is  so 
much I don’t know, so much that I am not aware of. - P10 
 
The  most  important  thing  [about  the  Internet]  is  to  have 
other sources of information from other points of view and 
perspectives different from those of our country, which has 
a complacent and biased press. - P3 
 
Participants spoke about their lack of information access as 
something  that  hampers  Cuba’s  development,  amplifying 
their sense that they are isolated from the rest of the world. 

1302

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Individuals are eager to redefine what it means to be Cuban 
and to go beyond the traditional revolutionary identity that 
the state has perpetuated during the past half-century [48]. 
Participants  reported  feeling  as  though  information  had 
been  hidden  from  them  and  that  there  were  gaps  in  their 
knowledge  about  the  state  of  their  world.  Therefore, 
individuals  are  eager  to  have  access  to  more  diverse 
information and opinions.  
 
Normally,  what  we  consume  is  what  they  distribute  in 
Cuba,  the  information  they  give  us.  And  we  need  another 
version of reality to be able to confront what we ourselves 
think.... - P7 
 
My vision has changed, because now I'm not so vulnerable 
to what they want to me believe; I know with my own eyes 
what is reality. – P1 
 
Although participants spoke about the importance of having 
information  access  via  the  Internet,  some  individuals 
described a concern that Cubans may misuse it. 
 
Many  that  have  access  don’t  use  it  for  purposes  that  it 
really  should  be  used  for  and  use  it  more  for  either 
recreational purposes and other things...The Internet is for 
work, to increase knowledge, to communicate which is also 
very important, but not for playing. - P12 
 
The Internet is necessary but dangerous. Necessary because 
Cubans need to feel like a part of the world and enjoy all of 
the facilities offered by the Internet…. Dangerous because 
Cubans  have  never  had  the  power  of  the  Internet  in  their 
hands (to call it that) and can get carried away by all of the 
falsehoods that are published there. - P2 
 
Among our participants, only P2 and P12 hinted at concerns 
about possible negative implications of Internet technology. 
For participants coming from a world where information is 
typically officially vetted, access to unfiltered information 
is a paradigm shift. 
 
What do Cubans Post Online? 
With  their  consent,  we  also  observed  each  participant’s 
Facebook activity during the month of April 2015. Similar 
to  research  in  other  countries  [55],  participants’  Facebook 
use is clearly mediated by access limitations. All Facebook 
activity by participants occurred on a weekday between the 
hours of 6 a.m.-5 p.m. while at their jobs. Only P6 posted 
outside of this timeframe because he had increased access 
during his international travels. Unsurprisingly, participants 
with  faster  Internet  connections  and  regular  access  posted 
more often on Facebook than those without access.  
 
Selfies  and  pictures  of  friends  and  family  are  popular 
content  for  Facebook  posts.  However,  due  to  access 
barriers,  uploading  pictures  does  not  occur  as  often  as  it 
might if connection speeds were faster. Instead, participants 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

often  rely  on  sharing  content  from  Facebook  pages  of 
friends  who  are  able  to  upload  images.  Only  three 
participants (P1, P6 and P9) posted photos during the month 
of April. P6 uploaded these photos while outside of Cuba, 
and both P1 and P9 said that they have good access at work 
and were able to upload photos. P1’s posts were all pictures 
of herself and friends, which she tagged so that the pictures 
would appear on their profiles. Nine participants had photos 
of  themselves  added  to  Facebook  by  others.  P1  explained 
that  users  in  Cuba  rely  on  those  with  faster  and  more 
frequent  Internet  access  to  help  maintain  their  Facebook 
presence.  Similar  to  the  collaborative  efforts  used  to 
retrieve  information,  some  individuals  rely  on  friends 
outside  of  Cuba  to  help  them  maintain  their  social  media 
presence. As opposed to the average Internet user in the US, 
in  Cuba  connections  to  others  and  collaboration  are  vital 
parts of maintaining an individual online presence. P10 is a 
photography  student  and  maintains  a  Facebook  page  with 
images of Cuba as part of her academic studies. However, 
she must rely on her boyfriend who lives outside of Cuba to 
upload  the  photos  by  logging  into  her  account  on  her 
behalf. 
 
I know how to use [Facebook] for things that I need, like 
the page for my photographs, but I’ve had to resort to other 
forms that my photos arrive on the page, I can’t be the one 
who  uploads  them,  who  responds  to  the  comments,  the 
messages that people leave, etc. and that, honestly, leaves a 
bad taste in my mouth, like there is a piece of the process 
that I am not seeing. - P10 
 
The authors also made note of the content on participants’ 
Facebook walls to determine what content originated from 
Cuba versus other countries. Table 2 includes the number of 
links posted on Participants’ walls by themselves and others 
during  the  month  of  April  2015  (this  does  not  include 
pictures uploaded by participants or their friends). People in 
any country have different SNS usage patterns, and Cuba is 
no  exception.  As  evident  from  Table  2,  participants 
exhibited different behavior patterns in their Facebook use. 
Although  all  participants  spoke  about  the  importance  of 
access 
information  originating  outside  of  Cuba 
(particularly  in  terms  of  educational  or  informational 
material),  all  of  the  content  originating  from  outside  of 
Cuba was for entertainment purposes.  
 
Research  shows  that  some  Cubans  use  the  blogosphere  as 
an  alternative  public  sphere  [13,19,25];  however,  our 
participants do not seem to use Facebook to mobilize, speak 
their opinions, or ask questions or favors of their audience. 
Because  most  of  our  participants’  friends  and  family  in 
Cuba  are  not  on  Facebook,  the  majority  of  their  social 
capital  is  based  on  in-person  connections,  which  may 
explain  why  participants  do  not  use  Facebook  to  gather 
support from their community in terms of seeking favors or 
making requests. Additionally, the only political discourse 

to 

1303

the 

results 

interview,  P12  discussed  negative 

on Facebook that we observed dealt with the normalization 
of relations between Cuba and the United States, and each 
one of these posts were made by other Facebook users who 
tagged  some  of  our  participants  (and  therefore  the  post 
appeared  on  their  walls).  The  majority  of  our  interviews 
confirmed our observations.  
 
Opinions  may  be  expressed,  but  people  rarely  use  social 
networks  as  platforms…I  don’t  know  if  they’re  guarded. 
Maybe.  But  it’s  mostly  a  matter  of  what  is  simply  cool  or 
not  cool  to  post  in  your  circle.  I  don’t  think  it’s  a  Big 
Brother thing. – P6 
 
Although P6 attributes the type of content posted to social 
norms  of  one’s  network,  there  may  be  other  factors 
influencing  participants’  use.  When  considering  Cuba’s 
history  in  the  past  50  years  and  the  fact  that  political 
dissidents  have  been  imprisoned  for  openly  defying  the 
government, it is not surprising that participants do not use 
Facebook to share opinions on controversial topics. During 
our 
from 
something that he posted on Facebook. 
   
On  one  occasion,  I  fell  into  the  trap  of  saying  something 
that my bosses didn’t like and I almost lost my access. Since 
that day, I’ve tried to dedicate myself to only what concerns 
me and the path I walk on. - P12 
 
When  talking  about  the  type  of  material  she  posts  on 
Facebook, P1 said, “We could talk about politics, but I hate 
politics  so  we  never  talk  about  anything  like  that.”  This 
statement is indicative of an observed mutually reinforcing 
trend. Since it’s a sensitive topic, participants may say that 
they  do  not  post  about  politics  (or  other  controversial 
topics) as a way to protect themselves. As a result, others in 
their community refrain from posting similar content in an 
effort  to  maintain  social  norms.  However,  there  are 
indications  that  there  may  be  shifts  underway  in  Cubans’ 
use of Facebook, notably through the artist community. P10 
is  studying  photography  for  her  undergraduate  degree  and 
has  created  a  Facebook  page  to  share  her  photos.  In  this 
way, she feels as though she is showing the outside world 
what Cuba is like. However, she has to go to great lengths 
to  actually  post 
images,  which,  as  mentioned 
previously, may be one of the reasons more people do not 
post images. Through the creation of a Facebook page for 
her photos, her use of Facebook has become more varied: 
 
I joined Facebook in the first year of my job...it appeared to 
me like a good way to maintain contact with a lot of people 
that were no longer in Cuba. It’s for that reason that I use 
Facebook. Although, ultimately, since I created a page for 
my photos, I now also use it to show my work, to publicize it 
and share it with more people, so it’s allowed me to get to 
know many opinions about it and learn some things, too. - 
P10 
 

 
 
Participant 

Links 
from 
Cuba 

Description 
2 links to advertisements posted by 
Cuban Facebook pages. 1 link to Cuban 
newspaper article about cultural event 
in Cuba. 

 

1 link to GoFundMe page. 
1 link to Cuban newspaper article about 
cultural event in Cuba. 

 

 

 

 

5 links to news articles about Cuba 
from Cuban newspapers. 
1 advertisement posted by Cuban 
Facebook page. 1 shared photo from her 
company’s Facebook page.  

 

3 

0 
1 

1 

0 

0 
0 
0 

5 

1 
0 

P1 

P2 
P3 

P4 

P5 

P6 
P7 
P8 

P9 

P10 
P11 

P12 
 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Links from 
other 
countries 

Description 

1 blog post from outside of Cuba about 
cultural event in Cuba. 1 link to YouTube 
music video. 
18 links to humorous/uplifting memes from 
other Facebook pages. 

 

1 blog post from outside of Cuba about 
cultural event in Cuba. 
1 link to blog post from the US about Cuba. 
1 link to humorous YouTube video. 1 link to 
inspirational quote. 1 link to sports article. 
2 links to memes. 1 link to European soccer 
article.  

 

 

23 links to humorous/uplifting memes. 2 
animal videos from other Facebook pages. 

1 link to meme. 1 link to YouTube music 
video. 

 

 

2 

63 
0 

1 

4 

3 
0 
0 

25 

2 
0 

0 

a  lot  of  new  and  good  things  will  arise  because  a  lot  of 
artists,  painters,  musicians,  designers,  etc.  that  would  be 
able  to  share  their  work  and  people  would  get  to  know 
[them] through this route. - P11 
 
Future of Cuba’s Internet 
We  spoke  with  participants  about  the  future  of  Cuba’s 
Internet.  More  generally,  participants  spoke  about  their 
frustrations  with  feeling  that  their  country  is  behind 
economically, and they hope that change is coming to their 
country. They see the Internet as a potential catalyst for that 
change.  Participants  explained  that  the  Internet  is  needed 
for  education  and  information  access  in  order  to  improve 
economic  development  and  continue  to  educate  their 
population. 
 
In academia [the Internet] is an absolute must, and much is 
lost  or  not  developed  by  not  having  better  access  to 
information,  tools  and  skills.  As  a  teacher  I  notice  that 
every day. The same applies to almost every level of society. 

Table 2 - Origins of Links on Participants’ Facebook Walls during April 2015 

18 

18 links to local Cuban sports news 
related to his job as sports journalist. 

 
Unlike  studies  regarding  Facebook  use  in  the  US  [28], 
participants generally do not use Facebook for mobilization 
requests. However, there was one exception. On April 13, 
2015, P3 shared a public post promoting a GoFundMe page 
for  his  son’s  local  band.  This  is  unlike  any  other  post 
observed  during  this  research  and  the  first  post  by  a 
participant  who  was  making  a  request  of  the  Facebook 
community. P3 said that a friend in the US helped to create 
the page and is accepting funds and equipment donations on 
behalf  of  the  band.  This  one  incident  is  not  significant  in 
itself;  however,  it  will  be  interesting  going  forwards  to 
observe whether Cubans’ use of Facebook begins to evolve. 
 
In  addition  to  the  examples  from  P10  and  P3,  other 
participants mentioned that, with increased Internet access, 
they think their Internet use will change: 
 
[In the future] I think that people will go about adopting the 
Internet in their daily jobs just like has already happened in 
all the other countries in the world and that in this moment 

1304

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

the  cities,  and 

the  reconstruction  of 

Any profession can benefit from the Internet. The worldview 
would change drastically too. For the better, I think. - P6 
 
I  think  the  changes  we  need  the  most  are  Internet  for 
everyone, 
the 
establishment of some food companies. - P1 
 
DISCUSSION 
Mark et al. [29] found that Iraqi citizens during war time 
used  social  media  to  help  them  be  more  resilient  in  a 
number  of  ways:  reconfiguring  social  networks,  self 
organization, redundancy, proactive practices, and repairing 
trust  in  information.    We  observed  only  one  of  these 
practices among our participants in Cuba: repairing trust in 
information.  Our  participants  all  reported  using  social 
media  to  obtain  information  that  would  not  otherwise  be 
accessible  to  them.  It  is  common  practice  to  share 
information with others who do not have access. Through 
this mechanism, information access for a small minority has 
a broader impact. 
 
We did not see social media used in any of the other ways 
researchers observed in Iraq. For example, so few people 
have access in Cuba that people typically don’t meet new 
people  over  social  media.    Our  participants  used  social 
media to connect with family and existing friends.  Many of 
the creative ways that Iraqis [29], Mexicans [33], and others 
use social media for resilience depend on widespread access 
to cell phones and the Internet. The lack of these factors in 
Cuba hampers the ways in which Cubans appropriate ICTs.  
 
Our  participants  mainly  used  the  Internet  for  relationship 
maintenance and for entertainment.  This is similar to what 
Sandvig et al. [38] observed when Internet access was first 
introduced to a Native American reservation in the US. In 
his  “cute  cat  theory  of  the  Internet,”  Ethan  Zuckerman 
argues that entertainment applications of IT are often a first 
step towards more serious uses. Further, under conditions of 
censorship,  large  volumes  of  entertainment  use  can  help 
camouflage  more  controversial  uses  [58].  In  fact,  we  can 
characterize  the  current  state  of  the  Internet  in  Cuba  as 
“pre-cat,” because bandwidth limitations mean that Cubans 
generally cannot yet engage in many of the entertainment 
applications observed by Sandvig and Zuckerman. Further, 
Zuckerman  posits  that  it’s  more  difficult  for  countries  to 
block  large  sites,  like  Facebook,  that  are  used  both  for 
controversial conversations and for sharing cute pictures of 
cats. As we have shown, Cubans who have Internet access 
gravitate towards Facebook and report that the majority of 
their  Internet  activity  occurs  there.  If  access  for  Cubans 
increases, if it follows patterns elsewhere, this suggests that 
there  will  be  increased  use  for  entertainment  and  social 
purposes  using  richer  media,  followed  by  more  “serious” 
uses longer term.  Further, it also suggests that if we wish to 
reach  out  to  help  Cubans  with  their  information  needs,  it 
might  be  advantageous  to  leverage  Facebook,  since  our 

users  are  already  using  that  platform,  and  it  may  be  less 
likely to be censored. 
 
Our  participants  have  rather  utopian  hopes  for 
the 
  We 
introduction  of  Internet  technology  into  Cuba. 
observed  only  glimpses  of  skepticism—for  example, 
concerns that people will find information online that isn’t 
true.  None of our participants expressed any concern that 
Internet access might change the pace of life in Cuba.  P1 
visited the US, and found the pace of life unpleasant: 
 
Before [I visited] I thought the US was a paradise, the best 
in the world!!! And it’s true that at the beginning you are in 
awe of the amount of development and cleanliness, but that 
life [in the US] is so hurried/rushed and with so little time, 
that I can’t say that I like it completely. – P1 
 
Researchers  in  the  developed  world  suggest  that  our 
connectedness may be a key cause for the increased pace of 
life  [46,50].  Going  forward,  it  will  be  interesting  to  see 
whether  the  pace  of  life  in  Cuba  increases,  and  how  our 
participants feel about those changes. We plan to follow up 
with our participants regularly over the next few years, and 
will track the ways in which their beliefs and habits change.  
It  is  possible  that  dramatic  changes  will  take  place  over  a 
relatively short period of time. If so, we are hopeful that our 
participants will be in a unique position to reflect on those 
changes. 
 
LIMITATIONS 
Conducting  research  on  Internet  use  in  Cuba  is  made 
complicated by limitations on that use—we are exploring a 
limited  medium  by  means  of  that  same  limited  medium.  
We began with initial contacts established during a visit to 
Cuba,  and  used  snowball  sampling  to  make  contact  with 
additional participants. Consequently, our sample of Cuban 
Internet users is not representative.  Additionally, we must 
note a self-selection bias—we spoke with Cubans who were 
willing to speak with us.  It is possible that Cubans who are 
willing  to  be  interviewed  by  an  American  may  have 
systematic differences in values from those who are not.  
 
More  broadly,  the  group  of  Cubans  who  have  Internet 
access is not representative of the Cuban population.  As we 
have noted, they are an elite sub-group.  It is possible that 
as  more  typical  groups  of  Cubans  gain  access,  their  use 
patterns  and  the  values  they  put  on  that  use  may  be 
different. 
 
Another limitation is the interview medium itself. Given the 
difficulties  of  obtaining  Internet  or  phone  access,  we 
allowed  our  participants  to  select  the  way  they  would 
participate  in  the  interview.  As  we  note  in  Table  1,  two 
interviews were conducted by voice communication, seven 
by online chat, and three by email. Research on interview 
technique  suggests  that  higher  bandwidth  channels  of 
communication  provide  richer  information,  and  email 

1305

interviews  by  having 

interviews  are  impoverished  compared  even  to  those 
conducted  via  text  chat  [12].  We  mitigated  some  of  the 
limitations  of  email 
iterative 
conversations over time with those participants. 
 
It  is  both  a  limitation  and  a  feature  of  this  work  that  our 
data was conducted at one particular moment in time—the 
moment  when  potential  dramatic  changes  had  been 
announced but no actual changes seemed yet evident. The 
situation is dynamic.  In future work, we would like to track 
how the situation changes over time. We would also like to 
travel to Cuba to conduct additional interviews in person. 
 
CONCLUSION 
Use of social media by early adopters in Cuba defies simple 
categorization.  In  many  ways  it  seems  like  an  example  of 
ICT  in  the  developing  world—except  with  an  extremely 
high  literacy  rate.  It  seems  a  bit  like  ICT  under  state 
censorship  in  China—except  the  censorship  in  Cuba  is 
largely  accomplished  through  low  bandwidth  and  access 
restrictions  rather  than  blocking  software.  It  serves  as  an 
intriguing  contrast  for  researchers  studying  Internet  use  in 
other parts of the world. 
 
A  growing  number  of 
international  businesses  are 
beginning  to  operate  in  Cuba.  For  example,  Netflix 
announced  its  entry  to  Cuba  in  February  2015  [20],  and 
AirBnB  started  offering  lodgings  in  Cuba  in  April  2015 
[57].  For  members  of  the  CSCW  community  directly 
involved  with  Cuba,  this  research  should  be  of  practical 
use.  
 
The dominance of Facebook over all other social networks 
and websites in Cuba surprised us. As P7 comments, “For 
the average Cuban, the Internet is Facebook.” In a context 
in which most people do not have consistent access to any 
kind  of  communications  technology  including  telephone, 
intermittent  access 
for  basic 
communication for both work and socializing. It is used as 
a central communications channel both with others in Cuba 
and to reach people abroad. Participants with lower access 
reported  that  they  rely  on  others  to  help  maintain  their 
Facebook  presence,  further  highlighting  the  importance  of 
collaborative  efforts  to  use  Internet  tools.  The  majority  of 
Facebook  posts  by  participants  dealt  with  entertainment 
content or personal pictures. The dominance of Facebook in 
current  Internet  use  in  Cuba  sets  an  intriguing  context  for 
Facebook as a company and for other companies beginning 
to move into this space. 
 
Few places remain in the world where Internet access is as 
limited as it is in Cuba currently. If Internet technology is 
introduced  into  Cuba  rapidly,  what  happens  next  will 
constitute  a  kind  of  natural  experiment.  These  findings 
serve as a baseline for future work. 
  
 

to  Facebook 

is  used 

1306

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

FUTURE WORK 
The goal of this work was, first, to understand the current 
situation  in  Cuba  to  establish  a  baseline  of  Internet  use 
there.  We  plan  to  follow  up  with  our  participants  at 
intervals over the next few years. 
 
Our  second  goal  was  to  conduct  user-centered  design  of 
possible  CSCW  interventions  to  help  the  people  of  Cuba. 
Based on our findings, in future work, we are exploring the 
potential  for  creating  a  crowd-sourced  information  system 
for Cubans. Our research has shown that Cubans are eager 
to  access  information  from  outside  their  country  but  are 
limited  by  restrictions  such  as  content  blocks,  high  access 
costs,  and  time  limitations.  Access  to  email  is  more 
widespread  than  access  to  the  Internet  more  generally.  As 
we  have  shown,  Cubans  are  already  using  collaborative 
methods to access and share information.  
 
Drawing from these findings, we plan to develop an online 
group that encourages exchanges between individuals living 
in  Cuba  and  the  rest  of  the  world.  This  group  will  allow 
individuals  in  Cuba  to  send  information  requests  to 
volunteers  living  outside  of  Cuba  who  have  access  to  a 
wider  variety  of  information  at  much  lower  costs.  We 
envision  a  combination  of  crowd-sourced  information 
retrieval and cultural exchange. 
 
We found that Cubans are eager to show outsiders what life 
is like in Cuba.  Consequently, the information service will 
be two-way, allowing people outside Cuba to ask questions 
of  Cuban  citizens.    Making  the  system  two-way  will  also 
help  keep  implicit  power  relationships  more  nearly  equal, 
fostering a spirit of mutual respect and desire for increased 
understanding. 
 
To build an initial version, we will prototype with existing 
technologies [21] using a combination of Facebook groups 
and email.  Accessibility is a key goal. We aim is to make 
the system workable with the Internet access Cubans have 
now,  and  scale  gracefully  to  remain  useful  if/when  their 
access increases. Even if we encourage use of the group just 
for non-controversial topics, increased exposure to the rest 
of the world has the potential to be transformative. We plan 
to begin field-testing a low-fidelity prototype later this year.  
 
We expect the information retrieval aspect of our group to 
be useful for only a short period of time, after which more 
Cubans will have direct Internet access. Through this work, 
we hope to help our Cuban participants during this time of 
transition.  In  addition  to  providing  our  participants  with 
information,  we  also  aim  to  build  relationships  between 
Cubans  and  participants  outside  Cuba.  By  observing  the 
activity in the group, we will gain insights into the ways in 
which  information  access  via  the  Internet  can  affect  the 
culture and beliefs of a literate but isolated population. 
 
 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Thank  you  to  our  participants  for  being  involved  in  this 
research.  We  also  thank  the  reviewers  for  their  valuable 
feedback. This work is supported by NSF II-1552364.  
 
REFERENCES 
1.  Sheetal K Agarwal, Arun Kumar, Amit Anil Nanavati, 

and Nitendra Rajput. 2009. Content creation and 
dissemination by-and-for users in rural areas. 
Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Information and Communication Technologies and 
Development (ICTD ’09), IEEE, 56–65. 
http://http//ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/icp.jsp?arnumber=5
426702 
Jenny C. Aker and Isaac M. Mbiti. 2010. Mobile 
Phones and Economic Development in Africa. SSRN 
Electronic Journal. 
http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=1693963 

2. 

3.  Associated Press. 2015. Cuba Cuts the Price of Internet 
Access. NBC News. Retrieved May 12, 2015 from 
http://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/cuba-cuts-price-
internet-access-n308591 

4.  Ashraf M. Attia, Negris Aziz, Barry Friedman, and 

Mahdy F. Elhusseiny. 2011. Commentary: The impact 
of social networking tools on political change in 
Egypt’s “Revolution 2.0.” Electronic Commerce 
Research and Applications 10, 4, 369–374. 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1567
42231100024X 

5.  Peter Baker. 2014. U.S. to Restore Full Relations With 
Cuba, Erasing a Last Trace of Cold War Hostility. New 
York Times. Retrieved April 29, 2015 from 
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/18/world/americas/u
s-cuba-relations.html?_r=0 

6.  Guy Baron and Gareth Hall. 2014. Access Online  : 
Internet Governance and Image in Cuba. Bulletin of 
Latin American Research, 1–16. 
http://doi.org/10.1111/blar.12263 

7.  Ellery Roberts Biddle. 2013. Rationing the Digital: The 

Politics and Policy of Internet Use in Cuba Today. 
Internet Monitor Special Report Series 1. 
http://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2291721 

8.  Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using 

Thematic Analysis in Psychology. Qualitative 
Research in Psychology. 
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1191/14780887
06qp063oa 

9.  CIA. 2015. CIA World Fact Book: Country 

Comparisons: Literacy. Retrieved July 24, 2015 from 
https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-
factbook/fields/print_2103.html 

10.  Karen DeYoung. 2015. U.S. and Cuba set to formally 
reestablish diplomatic relations - The Washington Post. 
Washington Post. Retrieved July 24, 2015 from 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-
security/us-cuba-prepare-to-re-establish-diplomatic-
relations/2015/07/17/5304d4f6-2cc4-11e5-bd33-
395c05608059_story.html 

11.  Jill P Dimond, Michaelanne Dye, Daphne Larose, and 
Amy S Bruckman. 2013. Hollaback!: The Role of 
Collective Storytelling Online in a Social Movement 
Organization. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference 
on Computer Supported Collaborative Work and 
Social Computing (CSCW ’13), 477–490. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2441776.2441831 

12.  Jill P. Dimond, Casey Fiesler, Betsy DiSalvo, Jon Pelc, 
and Amy S. Bruckman. 2012. Qualitative data 
collection technologies. GROUP '12, ACM Press, 277. 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2389176.2389218 
13.  Paloma Duong. 2013. Bloggers Unplugged: Amateur 
Citizens, Cultural Discourse, and Public Sphere in 
Cuba. Journal of Latin American Cultural Studies 22, 
4, 375–397. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/13569325.2013.840277 

14.  Michaelanne Dye. 2011. La Vida Online: The Parallel 
Public Sphere of Facebook as Used by Colombian 
Immigrant Women in Atlanta. Master's Thesis. Georgia 
State University, Atlanta, GA. 
http://scholarworks.gsu.edu/anthro_theses/52/ 

15.  Pamina Firchow. 2013. A Cuban Spring? The Use of 
the Internet as a Tool of Democracy Promotion by 
United States Agency International Development in 
Cuba. Information Technology for Development. 
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/02681102
.2013.793119 

16.  Lorenzo Francheschi-Bicchierai. 2014. The Internet in 

Cuba: 5 Things You Need to Know. Mashable. 
Retrieved May 12, 2015 from 
http://mashable.com/2014/04/03/internet-freedom-
cuba/ 

17.  Freedom House. 2014. Freedom on the Net: Cuba. 

Retrieved April 29, 2015 from 
https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-net/2014/cuba 

18.  Alexeis García Pérez. 2011. Knowledge behind 

barriers: IT access as an enabler of Cuban 
development. Information Technology for Development 
17, 1, 81–88. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/02681102.2010.509713 

19.  Marie Laure Geoffray. 2013. Internet, Public Space 
and Contention in Cuba: Bridging Asymmetries of 
Access to Public Space through Transnational 
Dynamics of Contention. Berlin. 
http://www.desigualdades.net/Resources/Working_Pap
er/42_WP_Geoffray_Online.pdf 

20.  Jessica Glenza. 2015. Netflix launches $7.99 service 
for Cuba despite average wage of $17 a month. The 
Guardian. Retrieved July 24, 2015 from 

1307

http://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/09/netflix
-launches-streaming-service-cuba 

21.  Catherine Grevet and Eric Gilbert. 2015. Piggyback 

Prototyping  : Using Existing, Large-Scale Social 
Computing Systems To Prototype New Ones. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’15), 4047–4056. 
22.  Greg Guest, Arwen Bunce, and Laura Johnson. 2006. 
How many interviews are enough? An experiment with 
data saturation and variability. Field Methods 18, 1, 
59–82. http://fmx.sagepub.com/content/18/1/59.short 
23.  Kathryn Herr and Gary L. Anderson. 2005. The action 
research dissertation: A guide for students and faculty. 
Sage. 

24.  Bert Hoffmann. 2003. El Desarrollo Cubano Ante el 

Reto de las Nueva Technologías de Información y 
Comunicación. In Cuba: reestructuración económica y 
globalización, Mauricio de Miranda Parrondo (ed.). 
Centro Editorial Javeriano, Bogotá, 295–328. 

25.  Bert Hoffmann. 2011. Civil Society 2.0?: How the 
Internet Changes State-Society Relations in 
Authoritarian Regimes: The Case of Cuba. German 
Institute of Global and Area Studies. 
http://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1763846 

26.  Shanthi Kalathil and Taylor C. Boas. 2001. China, 

Cuba, and the counterrevolution. First Monday. 
http://www.firstmonday.dk/ojs/index.php/fm/article/vie
w/876/785 

27.  Joe Lamar. 2015. For Cubans, the struggle to 
supplement meagre rations is a consuming obsession. 
The Guardian. Retrieved July 26, 2015 from 
http://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/24/cubans
-food-struggle-rations-consuming-obsession 

28.  Cliff Lampe, Rebecca Gray, Andrew T Fiore, and 

Nicole Ellison. 2014. Help is on the way: Patterns of 
responses to resource requests on Facebook. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Computer 
Supported Collaborative Work and Social Computing 
(CSCW ’14). 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2531720 

29.  Gloria J. Mark, Ban Al-Ani, and Bryan Semaan. 2009. 
Resilience through technology adoption. Proceedings 
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI ’09), ACM Press, 689. 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1518701.1518808 
30.  Indrani Medhi-Thies, Pedro Ferreira, Nakull Gupta, 
Jacki O’Neill, and Edward Cutrell. 2015. KrishiPustak. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Computer 
Supported Collaborative Work and Social Computing 
(CSCW ’14), ACM Press, 1670–1681. 
http://dl.acm.org.prx.library.gatech.edu/citation.cfm?id
=2675133.2675224 

1308

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

31.  G. M. Mesher, R. O. Briggs, S. E. Goodman, J. M. 

Snyder, and L. I. Press. 1992. Cuba, communism, and 
computing. Communications of the ACM 35, 11, 27–ff. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/138844.138856 

32.  Daniel Miller and Don Slater. 2001. The Internet: An 

Ethnographic Approach. Berg Publishers. 

33.  Andrés Monroy-Hernández, Danah Boyd, Emre 

Kiciman, Munmun De Choudhury, and Scott Counts. 
2013. The new war correspondents: The rise of civic 
media curation in urban warfare. Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Computer Supported 
Collaborative Work and Social Computing (CSCW 
’13). http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2441938 
34.  Tapan S. Parikh and Edward D. Lazowska. 2006. 
Designing an architecture for delivering mobile 
information services to the rural developing world. 
Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on 
World Wide Web (WWW ’06), ACM Press, 791–800. 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1135777.1135897 
35.  Larry Press. 2011. Past, Present, and Future of the 
Internet in Cuba. Association for the Study of the 
Cuban Economy 21. http://www.ascecuba.org/c/wp-
content/uploads/2014/09/v21-press.pdf 

36.  N Rangaswamy and E Cutrell. 2012. Anthropology, 
development and ICTs: slums, youth and the mobile 
internet in urban India. Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Information and 
Communication Technologies and Development (ICTD 
’12) 9, 2, 51–63. from 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2160685 

37.  Nimmi Rangaswamy, G. Challugulla, M. Young, and 
E. Cutrell. 2013. Local Pocket Internet and Global 
Social Media. Bridging the Digital Gap: Facebook and 
Youth Sub-Stratum in Urban India. International 
Conference on Social Implications of Computers in 
Developing Countries. 
http://research.microsoft.com/apps/pubs/default.aspx?i
d=193542 

38.  Christian Sandvig. 2012. Connection at Ewiiaapaayp 
Mountain. In Race After the Internet, L Nakamura and 
P Chow-White (eds.). Routledge, New York, NY, 168–
200. 

39.  Nancy Scola. 2014. Only 5 percent of Cubans can get 
on the same Internet Americans do. That could soon 
change. Washington Post. Retrieved April 20, 2015 
from http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/the-
switch/wp/2014/12/17/cubans-might-soon-actually-be-
able-to-get-on-the-real-internet/ 

40.  Irina Shklovski and Nalini Kotamraju. 2011. Online 
contribution practices in countries that engage in 
internet blocking and censorship. Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 

http://aisel.aisnet.org/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1181
&context=jais 

53.  Volker Wulf, Konstantin Aal, Ibrahim Abu Kteish, et 
al. 2013. Fighting Against the Wall: Social Media use 
by Political Activists in a Palestinian Village. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’13), ACM Press, 
1979–1988. http://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2466262 

54.  Susan P Wyche, Andrea Forte, and Sarita Yardi 

Schoenebeck. 2013. Hustling online: understanding 
consolidated facebook use in an informal settlement in 
Nairobi. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’13). 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2481391 

55.  Susan P Wyche, Sarita Yardi Schoenebeck, and Andrea 

Forte. 2013. Facebook is a luxury: An exploratory 
study of social media use in rural kenya. Proceedings 
of the SIGCHI Conference on Computer Supported 
Collaborative Work and Social Computing (CSCW 
’13). http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2441783 
56.  Lana Wylie and Lisa Glidden. 2013. The’Cuban 

Spring' Fallacy: The Current Incarnation of a Persistent 
Narrative. International Journal of Cuban Studies. 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.13169/intejcubastud.5.2.
0140 

57.  Alan Yuhas. 2015. Airbnb and Cuba: a match made in 

capitalist heaven. The Guardian. Retrieved July 25, 
2015 from 
http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/02/ai
rbnb-cuba-apartments-houses-american-tourists 

58.  Ethan Zuckerman. 2007. The connection between cute 
cats and web censorship. Retrieved July 24, 2015 from 
http://www.ethanzuckerman.com/blog/2007/07/16/the-
connection-between-cute-cats-and-web-censorship/ 

59.  2015. Historic Poll: Top 25 findings from major Cuba 

survey. Fusion. Retrieved May 1, 2015 from 
http://fusion.net/story/116226/historic-poll-top-25-
findings-from-major-cuba-survey/  

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Systems (CHI ’11), ACM Press, 1109–1118. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979108 

41.  Thomas N. Smyth, John Etherton, and Michael L. Best. 
2010. MOSES. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’10), 
ACM Press, 1059. 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1753326.1753484 
42.  Anselm Strauss and Juliet Corbin. 1998. Basics of 
qualitative research: Procedures and techniques for 
developing grounded theory. Sage, Thousand Oaks, 
CA. 

43.  Juan O. Tamayo. 2014. Cuba allows phone access to 
some email. Miami Herald. Retrieved May 12, 2015 
from http://www.miamiherald.com/news/local/in-
depth/article1961145.html 

44.  The White House. 2014. FACT SHEET: Charting a 
New Course on Cuba. Retrieved May 12, 2015 from 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-
office/2014/12/17/fact-sheet-charting-new-course-cuba 
45.  Sabrina Toppa. 2015. Cuba Gets First Free Public Wi-
Fi Spot. Time. Retrieved May 14, 2015 from 
http://time.com/3747118/cuba-first-free-public-wifi-
spot/ 

46.  Sherry Turkle. 2012. Alone Together: Why We Expect 

More from Technology and Less from Each Other. 
Basic Books. 

47.  Rosa Tania Valdes. 2014. Raul Castro’s reforms fail to 
end Cuba's chronic shortages. Reuters. Retrieved July 
26, 2015 from 
http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/05/09/us-cuba-
shortages-idUSBREA480DC20140509 

48.  Cristina Venegas. 2010. Digital Dilemmas: The State, 

the Individual, and Digital Media in Cuba. Rutgers 
University Press, Piscataway, NJ.  

49.  Claire Voeux and Julien Pain. 2006. Going Online in 
Cuba: Internet Under Surveillance. Reporters Without 
Borders. Retrieved May 6, 2015 from 
http://www.rsf.org/IMG/pdf/rapport_gb_md_1.pdf 

50.  Judy Wajcman. 2008. Life in the fast lane? Towards a 
sociology of technology and time. The British Journal 
of Sociology 59, 1, 59–77. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18321331 

51.  Santiago Wills. 2013. The Internet in Cuba: Facts and 
Myths About Web Access. ABC News. Retrieved April 
30, 2015 from 
http://abcnews.go.com/ABC_Univision/internet-cuba-
facts-myths-web-access/story?id=19895951 

52.  Peter Wolcott, Larry Press, William McHenry, 

Seymour Goodman, and William Foster. 2001. A 
Framework for Assessing the Global Diffusion of the 
Internet. Journal of the Association for Information 
Systems 2, 6, 1–50. 

 

1309

