CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

 Beyond Talking Heads: Multimedia Artifact Creation, Use, 

and Sharing in Distributed Meetings 

Jennifer Marlow, Scott Carter 
FX Palo Alto Laboratory, Inc. 
{marlow, carter}@fxpal.com 

Nathan Good 
Good Research 

nathan@goodresearch.com 

Jung-Wei Chen 

UC Berkeley & Good Research 
 jennifer@goodresearch.com 

 

rationales  used 

 
ABSTRACT 
Distributed meetings can be messy, particularly when the 
task  requires  collaboration  around  multimedia  artifacts. 
Teams must not only share a variety of materials related 
to  the  work  in  real  time,  but  also  need  to  refer  back  to 
information after a meeting ends. While video tools make 
it relatively easy to have conversations at a distance, they 
are  less  adept  at  sharing  and  archiving  multimedia 
content.   We conducted a survey of and interviews  with 
members  of  distributed  teams  to  investigate  how  they 
create, use, and share multimedia content before, during, 
and after distributed meetings. Our findings shed light on 
decisions  made  and 
in  selecting 
technologies  to  prepare  for,  conduct,  and  archive  the 
results  of  a  video-mediated  distributed  meeting.    The 
results  suggest  a  need  for  flexible 
interfaces  for 
information  sharing  in  multiple  meeting  contexts  so 
content can be both easily referred to in the moment and 
also found again later. 
Author Keywords 
Remote collaboration; Communication tools; Video 
conferencing; Survey; Interview 
ACM Classification Keywords  
H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: User 
Interfaces - Interaction styles.  
General Terms  
Human Factors; Design; Measurement.  
INTRODUCTION 
Collaboration technologies such as video conferencing are 
increasingly  essential  tools  for  modern  remote  workers. 
As  new  communication  tools  have  been  increasingly 
adopted  in  the  workplace,  fewer  completely  face-to-face 
teams exist in modern organizations [8]. A 2014 survey of 
large companies  found that over  half (54%) of  meetings 
included  remote  participants  attending  via  audio,  video 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not 
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear 
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of 
this  work  owned  by  others  than  the  author(s)  must be  honored.  Abstracting 
with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or 
to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request 
permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819958 

1703

heads” 

or 

on 

“talking 

and/or  web  conferencing  [24].  As  workforces  evolve, 
video  streaming  and  communication  tools  are  struggling 
to  meet  the  increasing  demands  of  modern  distributed 
teams.    It  is  thus  important  to  understand  how  this  rich 
and evolving medium can be better harnessed to support 
creation and collaboration from afar.  
Current studies of video collaboration and usage primarily 
focus 
person-to-person 
communication  (e.g.,  [4]).  However,  much  remote 
collaboration also involves people generating and sharing 
digital  content  such  as  documents  and  other  types  of 
media  files  [14].    Sharing  content  with  both  local  and 
remote  participants  was  a  prevalent  behavior  mentioned 
by  60%  of  respondents  to  a  recent  survey  about  team 
meetings [24].  
While video conferencing tools that support conversations 
between  people  are  becoming  well  established,  there  is 
limited  support  for  integrating  information  and  media 
sharing within these tools [6]. As a result, sharing content 
during  video-mediated  distributed  meetings  remains 
difficult [18]. People have a variety of tools from which 
to  choose,  but  technical  and  social  challenges  with 
sharing information often dictate which one(s) they must 
use to achieve their goals.  
Our  goal  in  this  work  is  to  understand  why  this  is  so. 
Specifically, we focus on the following questions: 
How,  when,  and  why  do  distributed  teams  integrate 
content sharing into video-mediated meetings?  
What challenges exist in sharing meeting content across 
locations?  
To  answer  these  questions,  we  studied  a  diverse  set  of 
remote  collaborations  of  varying  sizes  and  in  different 
industries,  focusing  on  those  which  involved  creating 
some  sort  of  digital  or  physical  artifact  together.  We 
conducted  a  multi-method  study  around  the  process  of 
sharing content in various types of distributed meetings in 
small to medium sized companies. 
Our work expands upon prior studies of distributed team 
communication  by  considering  multimedia  flow  over 
multiple  stages  of  distributed  meetings  among  teams 
involved  in  creating  a  digital  or  physical  artifact.  In 
contrast  to  prior  CSCW  research  on  use  of  one  type  of 
communication  system  in  a  single  organization,  we 

examine  small  companies  that  assemblage  a  variety  of 
tools  and  applications  to  serve  their  information  sharing 
needs  on  an  ad-hoc  basis.  We  focus  particularly  on  the 
factors that influence tool choice for sharing  multimedia 
content  in  a  synchronous  distributed  meeting,  the  work-
arounds that are established to circumvent the limitations 
of  these  tools,  and  the  implications  for  re-finding  this 
information afterwards.  Additionally, this paper identifies 
a set of challenges that arise when sharing and accessing 
multimedia content across different meeting types. 
Our findings suggest that current tools and approaches are 
inadequate for meeting scenarios that require participants 
to  not  only  converse  but  also  to  share  and  co-reference 
different  types  of  multimedia  content  across  distance. 
Participants use a mixed set of tools to support different 
needs  within  different  types  of  meetings,  as  no  single 
video  conferencing  tool  includes  sufficient  functionality 
to  address  all  their  demands.  While  this  approach  may 
currently work “well enough” for many teams, comments 
made by study participants suggest there are still gaps in 
effective  support  for  real-time  media  sharing,  archiving 
and  access.  We  suggest  opportunities  for  the  design  of 
video  conferencing  tools  that  better  integrate  real-time 
communication with presentation materials from a variety 
of  sources,  that  can  be  reconfigured  based  on  meeting 
purposes and goals, and that allow individuals or groups 
to easily access and return to content after a synchronous 
conversation has ended.   
RELATED WORK  
Current state of remote collaboration 
Collaboration  technologies  have  been  around  for  many 
years  and  are  in  widespread  use  [1].  A  large  body  of 
related  literature  has  studied  how  distributed  teams  use 
such  tools  to  communicate,  build  trust,  and  so  on.  
However,  little  work  has  focused  particularly  on  the 
details  of  teams’  needs  for  and  practices  of  artifact 
creation  using  these  tools,  including  the  sharing  of 
multimedia material in real time using synchronous tools 
such as video conferencing. 
Recent  surveys  of  business  professionals 
large 
corporations have provided some overall insight into the 
prevalence  of  collaboration  tools  [e.g.,  19].  However, 
there is still a lack of detailed information about how and 
why people use tools across a variety of professions, work 
contexts, and tasks.    
Related  work  examining  the  role  of  video  conferencing 
tools at a large tech company looked at the role that video 
technology  such  as  “always-on”  portals  and  dedicated 
conference 
distance 
collaboration.  This work suggests that large corporations 
with  the  resources  to  support  real-time  communication 
can reduce the behavioral costs of communication and for 
the  first  time  allow  tightly  coupled  remote  work  to 
succeed  [12].  However,  it  did  not  analyze  meeting-

enabling 

played 

rooms 

in 

in 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

specific practices and behaviors and the tools required to 
assist  and  support  creation  in  those  contexts;  rather,  the 
study focused on high-level sharing and awareness needs. 
As  a  result,  little  is  known  about  how  teams  in  smaller 
organizations can use video and other tools to assist them 
in creation and to facilitate communication and sharing of 
multimedia information.  Similarly, little is known about 
how  video  does  or  does  not  help  distributed  teams  who 
are  involved  in  creating  digital  or  physical  artifacts 
perform  different  types  of  tasks.    We  were  interested  in 
exploring the choices people in less resource-rich settings 
make  in  terms  of  selecting  technology  for  remote 
collaboration both to communicate and share content, and 
in examining factors influencing these choices. 
Sharing media in remote collaboration 
Synchronous sharing 
Prior work has looked at how people share content in the 
context of synchronous communications in both personal 
and  professionally-oriented  contexts.    On  the  personal 
side,  work  by  Forghani  et  al.  [6]  investigated  how  and 
why people currently share media such as pictures or web 
pages in a call among friends/family, and developed a tool 
to  enable  co-referencing  of  common  artifacts  of  interest 
such as personal photos or Facebook posts.   
In  the  professional  arena,  distributed  design  teams  have 
provided fertile ground for study of how people share and 
create  design  artifacts  across  distance.    Prior  work  has 
also focused on creating specialized technological setups 
to  support  this  process  for  collocated  groups,  such  as 
whiteboards  and  shared  display  spaces  [7,  11,  16].  
However,  design  teams  present  just  one  context  for 
collaboration, which may not generalize to other areas. 
Asynchronous sharing 
Other  efforts  have  addressed  the  potential  need  to 
collaborate asynchronously by allowing people to review 
the results of past conversations.  Prior work has looked at 
the  methods  by  which 
to 
communicate  and  highlight  the  importance  of  tools  that 
provide affordances such as persistence and reviewability 
[20].    For  example,  chat  records  such  as  those  found  in 
Skype groups may be more lightweight than email when 
it  comes 
relevant  past 
in  a  way,  as  “hallway 
information  —  serving, 
conversations with a history” [9] that can be useful both 
during a meeting and for later reference. 
Again  in  the  design  context,  the  TeleBoard  system  was 
developed  to  record  and  store  the  results  of  design 
discussions  (and  artifacts)  for  later  perusal  [7].    The 
Procid  tool  was  developed  to  help  summarize  design 
discussions  and  help  distributed  groups  reach  consensus 
by visualizing information quickly and easily [27]. 
Additionally,  new  integrated  communication  tools  like 
Slack  and  Basecamp  provide  teams  with  an  activity 

traversing  and  finding 

teams  choose 

remote 

to 

1704

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

resources  may  be 

stream  and  historical  record  of  both 
interpersonal 
communications and file changes/sharing.  However, it is 
unclear  to  what  extent  these  are  currently  utilized  in 
remote teams. 
Continuing challenges for remote collaboration  
Although  the  progress  of  video  conferencing  tools  has 
made  distributed,  real-time  communication  easier,  both 
technical  and  social  barriers  to  sharing  information 
remain.    Some  of  these  were  highlighted  in  work  from 
over a decade ago [26] but persist today, including audio 
problems (poor audio quality, people not being heard, too 
much extraneous noise), behavior problems (speakers not 
checking  each  other  for  understanding, 
inadequate 
advance  planning),  and  technical  problems  (difficult  to 
identify  who  was  speaking,  not  everyone  could  view 
visual  materials,  necessary  documents  not  available 
during meeting). 
Apart  from  these  issues,  video  conferencing  seems  to 
work best for one single conversation among a group of 
people.    Supporting  more  complex  interactions  like 
sketching  remains  difficult  [12],  and  communication  in 
videoconference  meetings  between  distributed  actors  is 
curbed  by  the  lack  of  technology  support  for  the  sort  of 
sidebar conversations that are often useful [5].    
Finally, 
smaller 
in 
organizations, meaning that teams could be more likely to 
use  free  or  cheap  technological  solutions  rather  than  the 
most  advanced  state-of-the-art  tools.  Since  working 
across  sites  often  presents  compatibility  challenges  [17], 
tool choices have implications for how easily sharing can 
take  place.    The  overhead  incurred  by  sharing  different 
types  of  information  also  varies  with  the  work  at  hand, 
location of participants, and other factors. 
METHOD  
To  obtain  a  more  complete  picture  of  media  usage  in 
meetings, it is critical to understand characteristics of the 
meetings themselves, in particular the type and purpose of 
the meeting as well as the distribution of participants. It is 
equally important to understand any institutional or other 
factors  that  influence  participants’  tool  choices.  We 
focused on small to medium sized companies and startups 
because  workers  in  these  settings  are  less  likely  to  have 
access to heavyweight video conferencing technology.   
To assess the context in which users choose to share and 
use media, we utilized a multi-method approach including 
surveys, interviews, and observations. 
Survey 
We  disseminated  a  survey  to  individuals  working  for 
startups  and  small  to  medium  sized  companies  to  get  a 
broad  sample  of  remote  collaboration  experiences.    We 
began with known contacts and used snowball sampling, 
enlisting  our  contacts  to  both  refer  others  and  post  the 
survey  to  external  mailing  lists  to  expand  our  reach  and 

limited 

if 

range.  We recruited people across a variety of industries 
and job roles.  
The  survey  was  designed 
to  obtain  background 
information  about  the  types,  structure,  and  general 
purpose  of  respondents’  distributed  meetings. 
  To 
understand  the  most  common  configurations  of  meeting 
participants,  we  asked  questions  about  what  types  of 
meetings respondents had with remote others, how often 
these occurred, and where participants were located.  We 
also asked about the frequency and prevalence of sharing 
different  types  of  information  and  files,  and  how  the 
information was shared (using what types of technology).  
Finally,  we  asked  participants  to  describe  aspects  they 
liked and disliked about the tools they used. 
Interviews 
We  also  asked  survey  respondents 
they  would 
participate  in  a  follow-up  interview.    Of  those  who 
responded  affirmatively,  we  contacted  and  followed  up 
with  15  participants.    The  interview  sample  reflected 
some  of  the  diversity  present  in  our  survey  sample: 
Participants  worked  in  software  development  (n=5),  UX 
design and research (n=5), and film/entertainment related 
jobs (n=5). 
Interviews lasted between 45 minutes and one hour.  The 
majority  of  them  (13  out  of  15)  were  carried  out  over 
video  conferencing  tools  such  as  Skype  or  Google 
Hangouts,  and  the  other  two  were  conducted  in  person.  
Participants  received  a  $25  gift  card  as  compensation.  
The  interviews  followed  a  semi-structured  format  in 
which we followed up in more detail about responses they 
gave  to  our  survey.    We  explored  issues  pertaining  to 
meeting  structure,  layout,  etc.  by  asking  interviewees  to 
relate  examples  from  their  most  recent  meetings  with 
remote  team  members.    Two  members  of  the  research 
team  were  involved  in  each  interview,  with  one  leading 
the interview and another taking notes. 
All  interviews  were  transcribed  and  then  coded  by  two 
members  of  the  research  team.    We  followed  an  open 
coding  scheme,  using  qualitative  data  analysis  software 
(Atlas.ti) to first cluster comments related to tool use and 
sharing  information  around  broad  themes,  and  then 
iterated  around  these  themes  to  develop  a  set  of  sub-
themes and cross-cutting trends. 
Meeting observations  
Finally,  we  recruited  three  teams  who  agreed  to  let  us 
observe a remote meeting in action.  These meetings each 
lasted  around  one  hour.    In  one  case,  we  observed  from 
the same room as one of the meeting members, and in two 
others  where  this  was  not  possible,  we  joined  in  the 
videoconference from a separate location.  Two observers 
watched the work occurring and took detailed notes about 
who  participated,  what  was  shared  and  how,  and  any 
difficulties encountered in this process.   

1705

included 

finance 

represented 

SURVEY RESULTS 
Who  is  participating:  Location  and  configuration  of 
meetings 
We  received  53  responses  to  the  survey.    Respondents 
were  primarily  distributed  throughout  the  United  States 
(90%)  and  Europe  (10%).    93%  of  respondents  reported 
working with at least one distributed team in the context 
of their jobs.  Most of these teams were small to medium 
sized, made up of less than 15 people [3].  Around 46% of 
respondents  were  in  different  technical  fields;  other 
industries 
(16%), 
manufacturing  (11%),  as  well  as  healthcare,  scientific 
research, and entertainment. 
For  each  remote  group  they  worked  with,  participants 
provided the locations of group members and the number 
of people in each location, providing both the distribution 
and the configuration of groups.  There were a total of 91 
team  meetings  provided 
that  most  survey 
respondents  worked  on  multiple  remote  teams).    We 
coded  the  group  makeups  using  the  configurations 
mentioned by [13]: Hub and spoke (e.g., 3:1), Hub to hub 
(e.g., 2:2) and Fully distributed (e.g., 1:1:1:1).   
Somewhat  surprisingly,  a 
fourth  configuration  not 
included  in  this  typology  emerged  as  the  most  frequent 
configuration.    In  this  arrangement,  there  are  three  or 
more  locations,  with  unequal  numbers  of  participants  in 
each  location  (for  example,  3:2:1).    We  refer  to  this 
configuration here as a “mixed” setup.   
Overall, as seen in Table 1, the prevalence of the different 
kinds of team member distributions were: 
Mixed  
(3+ locations, unequal numbers of participants in each 
location) 
Hub to hub (2 locations, roughly equal numbers in each)  29% 
23% 
Hub and spoke (1 location with a group, 1 location with 
a single individual) 
Fully distributed (single individuals in each location) 

(given 

41% 

7% 

Table 1.  Distributions of meeting participant locations 

Interestingly,  few  of  the  meetings  described  were  “fully 
distributed”.  This meant that in the majority of the cases, 
at least one of the locations  had  multiple team  members 
interacting  with  others 
(also  either  collocated  or 
distributed).    The  emergence  of  the  “mixed”  category 
highlights the fact that a large number of  meetings  were 
distributed  across  more  than  two  locations  (in  fact,  the 
mean number of locations per meeting among all survey 
responses was 2.62).   
A  majority  (74%)  of  respondents  were  involved  with 
multiple distributed teams (53% worked on three or more 
distributed projects). This predominance of multiple team 
membership  corresponds  with  other  recent  findings  that 

1706

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

65-90% of knowledge workers are concurrently on more 
than one work team [23]. 
What is the purpose of remote meetings? 
The  survey  asked  participants  an  open-ended  question 
about the purpose(s) of their remote meetings.  We coded 
responses based on the typology and descriptions used in 
[2]:  Conversation (short, ad-hoc and informal interaction 
that happens multiple times a day between two people or 
among  a  small  group);  Status  update;  Presentations;  and 
Training.  Based on the free responses provided, we also 
added another category of “Information sharing” which is 
similar  to  ‘conversation’  but  might  be  more  formal  and 
scheduled than a conversation.  The breakdown of types 
of communications (in Table 2) was: 
Status update 
Information sharing 
Brainstorming 
Conversation 
Presentations 
Other (social, demo, planning, training) 

33% 
18% 
13% 
12% 
  9% 
14% 

Table 2.  Meeting purposes from survey respondents 

The  purpose  of  a  meeting  influences  the  type  of 
information  shared  and  the  importance  of  saving  or 
referring to it later.  The meeting types listed above differ 
in  terms  of  the  degree  to  which  they  involve  one  or 
multiple  people  sharing  artifacts  during  a  meeting,  and 
their need to access information again later.  For example, 
the goal of a brainstorming meeting or conversation may 
be to reach a decision (that does not need to be saved or 
recorded).    A  status  update  or  information  sharing 
meeting  may 
involve  multiple  people  exchanging 
information  or  files  that  some  individuals  need  to  keep 
and  refer  back  to  later,  and  a  presentation  meeting  may 
center on one person sharing information that others may 
wish to revisit afterwards. In turn, users select tools best 
suited to these needs. 
Tools used to enable remote communication 
To  assess  current  practices,  we  asked  participants  to  list 
the tools they use to communicate remotely.   Responses 
included  multiple  tools  and  programs  (mean  number  of 
tools  =  3.26). 
  We  grouped  responses  into  broad 
categories based on the type of tool being used (Table 3).  
While free video conferencing tools predominated, these 
were  also  either  supplemented  with  or  replaced  by  paid 
videoconferencing  tools,  as  well  as  less  rich  modalities 
such  as  IM  or  phone  calls.    Some  participants  reported 
using multiple free and paid video conferencing tools. 
 
 
 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Free/consumer video conferencing  
(Skype, Google Hangouts, etc.) 
Paid/professional video conferencing  
(GoToMeeting, WebEx, etc.) 
Instant messaging 
Phone 

64% 

34% 

25% 
23% 

Table 3.  Tools used to communicate remotely 

What is being shared?  Frequency and type of media 
sharing 
Finally, we asked participants to rank the frequency with 
which  they  shared  various  types  of  information  in 
different  formats  with  remote  team  members.    Answers 
were on a 7-point Likert scale ranging from 1=never and 
7=every day.   
The median ratings of media types being shared appear in 
Table  4,  in  order  from  most  frequently  shared  to  least 
frequently  shared.  These  responses  suggest  that  as  the 
complexity, needed interactivity/explanation or “richness” 
of  the  media  increases,  the  frequency  with  which  it  is 
shared decreases.  Videos, which can be time consuming 
to view or transfer due to their relatively large file sizes, 
were shared least frequently, while links to webpages and 
text (e.g., documents), which are lightweight to share and 
view, were shared more often.   

Websites (URLs) 
Text 
Images 
Spreadsheets 
Slides 
Videos 

6 
4 
4 
4 
2 
1.5 

Table 4.  Median reported frequency of sharing media types 
One format that many synchronous meeting tools support 
is  the  ability  to  screen  share.  Screen  sharing  was  a 
frequently mentioned means of using video to discuss and 
create  artifacts  in  a  variety  of  ways,  and  was  something 
that  80%  of  respondents  did  at  least  occasionally.  The 
main  uses  of  screen  sharing  were  to  explain  something, 
co-reference  something,  give  a  demo,  and  interact  with 
material like a prototype.  
Summary of survey findings 
From  the  survey,  we  gained  an  overall  sense  of  the 
breadth  and  diversity  of  distributed  meetings  occurring 
within  our  sample  of  professionals  in  small  to  medium 
sized teams.  It is clear that a variety of factors, including 
the nature of work, distribution of participants, and types 
of meetings all impact what information is shared, when, 
and  how.  The  goal  of  our  follow-up  interviews  was  to 
examine  more closely the  needs for and challenges  with 
sharing multimedia across a variety of meeting scenarios.  
These examples provided insight into a set of challenges 

1707

the 

in  sharing 

and  recommendations  for  supporting  the  sharing  of 
artifacts across a range of contexts.   
INTERVIEW AND OBSERVATION RESULTS 
Analysis 
While  the  survey  data  provided  insight  about  meeting 
types and goals, the interviews and observations allowed 
us  to  investigate  more  specifically  how  participants 
managed different types of media before, during, and after 
a meeting.  
To examine  multimedia sharing,  we coded the interview 
transcripts  and  observation  notes  for  examples  given  of 
instances in which content (primarily documents or other 
types of media) was sent or shared with others.  We sub-
coded  these  examples  around  what  was  shared,  how  it 
was  shared,  and  comments  made  about  the  relative 
success  or  challenges 
information.  
Examples  from  interviewees  are  referred  to  as  P1-P15, 
and examples from observations are labeled Obs1-Obs3. 
After  an  initial  round  of  open  coding,  we  used  affinity 
diagramming  to  cluster  the  examples  around  common 
themes  pertaining  to  different  aspects  of  the  remote 
sharing process. These themes  guided our understanding 
of  the  issues  that  influenced  participants’  tool  choices 
and,  more  importantly,  how  participants  used  media  in 
meetings.  These involved the nature of the meeting, what 
was being shared, and the rationales for why it was shared 
in that way. 
In  particular,  we  found  that  the  process  of  sharing 
information and media in a remote meeting often required 
individuals  or  groups  to  make  various  decisions.    First, 
they had to decide what tool or medium to use to share the 
content.    Second,  they  had  to  decide  when  to  share  this 
content  (before,  during,  or  after  the  meeting).    These 
choices  then  had  implications  for  the  persistence  and 
retrievability of the content after the meeting.   
Tool selection:  Factors influencing program and tool 
choice for remote collaboration 
The specific features and capabilities of the tools used for 
remote  collaboration  have  the  potential  to  shape  and 
direct both the collaboration as well as how shared media 
is  prepared  and  disseminated.  Interviewees  often  used  a 
combination of free video conferencing tools, paid video 
conferencing  tools,  email,  chat,  and  phone  calls  for 
various work scenarios and tasks.  This is consistent with 
Gonzales  et  al.’s  [10]  assertion  that  it  is  increasingly 
anachronistic to think of user needs as being supported by 
a  single  tool.  As  a  result,  groups  often  cobble  together 
multiple tools and create “media toolboxes” or ecologies 
to serve their collaboration needs [15, 21, 25].  
At  the  very  least,  many  tools  such  as  Skype,  Google 
Hangouts,  Join.me,  WebEx,  and  others  offer  standard 
features  such  as  the  ability  to  screen  share,  send  files 
(photos,  videos)  and  chat  in  real  time.    So  what  caused 
people  to  gravitate  to  one  over  another?    We  coded  the 

interviews  around  all  examples  of  synchronous  meeting 
communication technologies used and rationales for using 
these specific tools.   
Four interviewees mentioned that they chose the meeting 
tool  (Google  Hangouts)  because  it  was  “convenient”  — 
namely,  because  they  were  already  using  the  suite  of   
collaborative  applications  such  as  email,  documents, 
calendar, etc. associated with Google Hangouts and so it 
was integrated with their workflow and infrastructure.   
Five interviewees mentioned having no choice in terms of 
the specific program or tool they used to meet with others.  
This  took  two  forms:    One  form  was  when  the  parent 
company  dictated  what  programs  or  tools  its  employees 
should  use.  Another  form  was  when  security  concerns 
prevented  employees  from  using  open  cloud-based  tools 
or  even  webcams  on  their  computers,  so  as  a  result  all 
communication  had  to  be  audio-only  and  conducted 
through an internal version of Microsoft Lync.   
A second form of “non-choice” occurred for participants 
who  worked  with  a  variety  of  external  clients.    In  this 
case,  they  were  often  beholden  to  the  tools  their  clients 
used and preferred, even when this was not optimal.   
In the third category, seven participants had a choice over 
the tool they used and mentioned trying out various video 
conferencing tools over time.  In this case, when they had 
a  choice  between  programs,  features  that  were  most 
important  were  cost  (e.g.,  number  of  free  functionalities 
such  as  allowing  multiple  parties  to  share  their  screen) 
and overall reliability of the connection.   
Thus, teams and groups may be required to use a tool that 
is  non-optimal  for  their  needs  due  to  external  or 
convenience reasons.  Since not all tools share the same 
features,  sharing  and  archiving  behaviors  are  often 
influenced by the particulars of the tool a team chooses to 
(or has to) use.  
Incorporating media into meetings  
Media always plays some role in a remote meeting — at 
the  very 
to 
communicate  among  the  participants  during  the  meeting 
itself.  But  there  are  often  many  other  types  of  media  at 
play  during  a  meeting,  from  the  preparation  of  a  slide, 
video,  or  demo  beforehand;  photos,  files,  or  screenshots 
(or even a secondary synchronous medium) shared during 
the  meeting  itself;  and  meeting  notes,  videos,  or  other 
artifacts shared after the meeting.   
The  meetings  described  by  our  participants  occurred 
throughout the process of building or designing an artifact 
such  as  software,  hardware,  graphic  design,  video,  or 
music. 
the  examples  given  by 
participants  and  our  observations  based  on  the  type  of 
meeting  they  were  holding.    Overall,  there  were  13 
information  sharing  meetings,  6  status  update  meetings, 
and 6 presentation meetings.  Here we analyze the actions 

least  a  synchronous  medium 

  We  categorized 

is  used 

1708

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

instances 

obstacles 

to 

sharing 

in  which 
the 

taken, decisions made, and implications of these actions at 
the  three  stages  of  a  meeting.    We  focus  on  both 
commonalities and variations across all examples. 
During:  Media interactions during a meeting 
As  indicated  by  the  survey,  sharing  and  discussing 
multimedia  material  during  a  synchronous  meeting  is  a 
common  activity.    Screen  sharing  is  one  of  the  most 
common  and  potentially  widely  used  features  of  most 
video conferencing tools, and a primary means by which 
video is used to communicate information about artifacts.  
It is useful to promote awareness of shared referents, and 
make  sure  everyone  is  on  the  same  page.    Twelve 
interviewees  described  cases  in  which  someone  in  their 
meeting used screen sharing to deliver slide presentations, 
give demos, and share images. All three of the meetings 
we observed also included screen sharing.  This was often 
seen  as  more  useful  than  file  sharing  because  it  enabled 
dynamic co-referencing of parts of an image or web page: 
“I  figure  the  screen  sharing  has  the  advantage of  being 
able  to  actually  interact  with  the  image  that  you’re 
sharing,  like  I  can  see  his  mouse  when  there  is  screen 
sharing.” (P3) 
There  were,  however,  many 
information 
presented 
collaboration.   
Sharing  challenge  1:  Items  could  not  be  screen  shared 
with remote participants  
One of the most difficult issues in any remote meeting is 
making  sure  all  participants  are  aware  and  involved  in 
what is happening. Auxiliary media plays an outsized role 
in this, in some cases making remote participants feel less 
included  but  also  providing  opportunities  for 
local 
participants  to  help  re-establish  common  ground  with 
remote attendees. 
Sharing  physical 
remote 
participants  has  been  a  long-standing  problem  in  remote 
collaboration.  For small items, one solution  was simply 
to hold the object up to the webcam: e.g., comparing two 
different stylus models (P11, info-sharing) or showing the 
way an app looked on a mobile phone (P3, info-sharing): 
“I deploy the application on my phone. Then we use the 
videoconferencing so I can put the phone in front of my 
laptop camera so you can see what it looks like.” (P3) 
However,  sharing 
large  physical  objects  such  as 
information drawn on whiteboards (P1, P4) or placed on 
posters and signs (P4) was not feasible  with the camera. 
While some specialized whiteboard capture tools exist to 
address this problem (e.g., [7]), these were not utilized by 
any of the teams in our sample.  One solution could be to 
only  keep  and  share  information  in  a  digital  format; 
however, there was a tension between having information 
visible to the rest of the office and visible to the remote 
participants. 
  For  example,  posters  and  flip  charts 

(non-digital) 

items  with 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

displayed in the “hub” office could be visible to others in 
the organization outside the immediate work team. 
“So it works great for the dev team to be able to see this 
[list  of  tasks  online]  and  it's  good  to  communicate  with 
management, but the physical paper board for the Sprint 
team would be better for the office, because people could 
see it happening.” (P4, status update) 
In many cases, a local group switched their focus between 
different artifacts, many of which may not be available to 
the  remote  participants.  This  could  be  as  simple  as 
referring  to  an  object  in  the  local  group’s  meeting  room 
that was not within view of a remote participant’s camera. 
Similarly,  screen  sharing  meant  that  when  the  shared 
artifact  was  visible  on  the  screen,  it  replaced  the  video 
feed  of  other  meeting  participants’  faces.    This  then 
prevented  remote  participants  from  seeing  what  was 
happening  in  the  room,  such  as  discussions  or  social 
dynamics between participants (P4, P13) 
“Also,  I  suppose  it's  kind  of  annoying  that  [the  remote 
participant] can't easily both see a shared screen and the 
video camera to people in the room. So, I guess, normally 
he  gets  no  context  of  what's  actually  going  on  because 
usually we're sharing the screen.” (P4, presentation) 
“We  don't  have  the  actual  Google  Hangouts  stream  on 
the  television,  most  often  it's  the  Hackpad  that  stays  on 
the screen.” (P13, status update) 
Furthermore, the social dynamics of a large group setting 
often  make  it  difficult  for  local  participants  to  help  the 
remote  user  maintain  awareness,  even  when  they  are 
aware of the problem. 
“We're  all  talking  about  this  and  something  comes  up 
which would be useful to share with Ben that he can't see 
on the board. So if it was just the two of us, yeah, I would 
take the time to describe it or I'd take a picture and send 
it  and  say  hang  on  a  second  and  I'll  just  send  you  a 
picture.  It  never  feels  to  me  that  I  can  do  that  in  the 
meetings. Say, “hang on” everybody and send a picture 
to them….”  (P4, info-sharing) 
This same participant would sometimes use media capture 
and  sharing  in  a  backchannel  to  help  the  remote  user 
recover some common ground that would otherwise have 
been lost:  
 “…we  had  a  team  meeting  with  a  presentation  last 
Thursday,  of  which  I  called  Ben  on  my  phone.  And,  of 
course, the person who was giving the talk doesn't work 
with  remote  workers  and  forgot  that  we  do  have  remote 
workers and he could send down the file in advance, and I 
don't have enough battery on my phone to video it all to 
ever  see  it.  So,  I  had  to  actually  take  photos  of  this 
projected  output  during  the  meeting  and  [send  it  via] 
WhatsApp.” (P4, presentation) 

Sharing  challenge  2:  Video  files  could  not  be  screen 
shared well 
One of the most difficult types of media to share during 
meetings  was  video or other  dynamic  materials (such as 
demos).    This  was  an  issue  in  multiple  cases.    For 
example,  many  of  our  interviewees  across  different 
industries (P5, P7, P9, P10, P12, P14, P15) worked with 
videos  and  needed  to  co-reference  a  video  with  remote 
others  to  discuss  specific  points  within  the  video.  
However, viewing video via screen sharing was not ideal: 
“Videos don’t work very well. With the refresh rate, it just 
doesn’t translate. If we wanted to share a video, we just 
send out the link and then people would watch it.”  (P9, 
info-sharing) 
P12 was a user experience researcher who often wanted to 
show  videos  of  usability 
testing,  but  experienced 
difficulty doing that over web conferencing. 
“So how do you get whatever’s playing to be transmitted 
over in the web conferencing system in the fidelity you’re 
experiencing on?  
I think the difficulty can come because you’re then relying 
on the video to work across an audio to pickup and that 
just  never  seems  to  happen.  Typically,  that  will  be 
something that I’m unaware of. It’s kind of a flag, right? 
Do I need to show something? If I do, how am I going to 
set it up? And I don’t do it too frequently because of the 
challenge, especially with this.” (P12, presentation) 
In  many  cases,  participants  shared  video  with  others  via 
third-party  file  sharing  mechanisms,  but  this  approach 
was  still  considered  cumbersome  and  participants 
struggled to find alternatives. 
Sharing challenge 3:  Multiple people in a single location 
wishing to share screens  
Tools allow multiple people connecting to a meeting from 
different  locations  to  take  turns  sharing  their  screen  by 
allowing  them  to  “pass  the  ball”  or  “switch  presenter.”  
However,  this  assumes  that  all  participants  in  a  meeting 
are connected via their own laptops.  This was often not 
the  case.    Particularly  when  one  location  had  multiple 
people participating in the meeting (P3, P5, P9, P11, P12, 
P13), the video conferencing system  was hosted on only 
one  computer  and  the  content  could  only  be  shared 
through  that  computer.    It  was  difficult  for  other  people 
on  their  laptops  in  the  room  to  contribute  or  share 
information from their personal devices.   
“I  think  we  would  might  do  a  little  bit  more  screen 
sharing  if  it  was  simple,  like  Julie  wants  to  throw  her 
screen into the conversation… say we were in video and 
[she]  wanted  to  show  it  quickly,  it’s  probably  not  her 
computer that we’re actually connected to so and because 
it just wouldn’t be a quick simple thing to do, we probably 
wouldn’t do it.”  (P3, info-sharing)   

1709

Combining the problem of synchronously co-referencing 
videos with a desire to allow multiple people to contribute 
videos into a conversation, one participant expressed the 
desire  to  seamlessly  allow  people  to  share  videos  from 
their phones directly into the meeting. 
“If I could do that phone to phone, and be like, “Dude, 
watch this video,” and I could sling the phone and I could 
sling a video but they are actually watching it. They are 
not trying to look at a pixelated [video] via Skype. I think 
that would be a huge, huge thing. Because then you are 
talking about really being able to be like “Hey, can you 
watch this cut right now?” Because right now, things are 
slowed down with the fact that there is no instantaneous 
way to do video.” (P5, info-sharing) 
The  above  challenges  highlight  both  the  technical  and 
social factors that made sharing certain kinds of material 
difficult.    Because  the  tool  used  to  support  the  meeting 
did not easily address some of the above scenarios, people 
made decisions about how to integrate other content into 
the meeting and what adjunct tools to use to do this.   
File  transfer  was  one  way  of  dealing  with  Challenge  1 
(items  could  not  be  screen  shared)  and  Challenge  2 
(digital items could not be screen shared  well).  That is, 
people  would  send  a  hard  copy  of  the  artifact  to  be 
discussed  to  the  participants  either  through  email,  a  file 
sharing service like Dropbox, or hosting it on another web 
service like Vimeo (in the case of movies).   
However, 
required  
“all kinds of negotiation” to figure out how to access files, 
from uploading a file, to sharing its location, and figuring 
out  permissions  of  who  could  access 
if 
information  was  uploaded  ahead  of  time,  most  people 
didn't look at it prior to the meeting. 
For  Challenge  1  (items  could  not  be  screen  shared)  and 
Challenge  3  (multiple  people  in  same  room  could  not 
share  information  via  the  video  conferencing  system), 
another way of sharing information with others was to use 
an  alternate 
take 
photographs  of  physical  or  digital  information  and  send 
them  to  remote  participants.      Examples  of  photographs 
shared in real-time included notebook pages, a screen of 
statistics  in  the  office,  slides  being  presented,  mockups, 
and screen shots. 
As these examples indicate, it was common for people to 
take  an  extra  action  and  use  a  supplementary  tool  to 
effectively  share  multimedia  content  during  a  meeting.  
However,  this  meant  that  they  had  to  make  decisions 
about  what  tool  to  use  for  sharing.    These  tools  ranged 
from mobile chat applications (e.g., WhatsApp) to email 
to sending photos through the Skype chat window.   
One  factor  influencing  decisions  about  supplementary 
tool use was where the artifact would end up: 

tool  (often  a  mobile  phone) 

P14  mentioned 

to 

that 

this 

it.  Even 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

the 

“I think the only case where file sharing is OK is if you 
send  a  snapshot  that  is  easily  displayed  inside  the  tool. 
For  example,  you  send  a  file  on  Skype,  it  needs  to  be 
easily  visible.  If  you  send  a  photo,  that  works.  I’m  glad 
that it’s not cluttering my inbox. For a document it’s not 
adequate, especially if we have to look at it.”  (P3) 
Interviewees did not necessarily always use the same tool 
for  sharing  photographs.  Instead,  they  performed  an 
assessment  of  whether  they  would  need  to  access  that 
information  again  later.  The  tool  used  had  implications 
for  the  persistence  and  re-discoverability  of  the  material 
being shared. For example, P4 explained what influenced 
his decision to  send a photo via a  mobile SMS program 
(WhatsApp) or via email.  
“Maybe  there's  a  choice  between  things  I  e-mail  and  I 
[send via] WhatsApp. So [WhatsApp] is kind of a stream, 
right? It's not made terribly well. I can't search it…In the 
team  meeting  when  I  took  the  photos  of  the  projected 
slides and just WhatsApp that, perhaps it was also partly 
because I know we don't need a record of it…but…I might 
e-mail that because actually I'll go back to my computer 
and probably save that on the drive as well.” (P4) 
Finally, 
location  of  participants  also  made  a 
difference.    P4  noted  that  when  all  participants  were 
physically distributed, it was easy to know that everything 
had  to  be  saved  in  an  online,  easy-to-refer-to  format. 
However,  in  a  two-to-one  situation,  it  was  less  obvious 
what needed to be preserved and what didn’t: 
“It gets a bit scattered when there are two people in the 
office  doing  stuff  and  one  person  is  remote.  It's  almost 
worse than one or ten and one, because it's like where do 
you keep the shared to do list? Will you record from these 
meetings?  When  it  is  just  me  and  [remote  colleague],  I 
know we have to record stuff remotely because it's going 
to be seen so we'll make notes in the JIRA [issue tracking 
program]  tasks  and  manage  it  all  very  carefully  there. 
But,  when  it's  easier  for  me  to  just  talk  to  [collocated 
colleague]  in  the  office  and  say,  “how  are  you  getting 
along  with  that”,  then  we're  like  should  we  both  be 
writing it down in the tasks?” (P4, status update) 
After:    Archiving,  accessing,  and  distributing  media 
after a meeting 
The end of a meeting does not signal the end of meeting-
related  media  creation  and  sharing.    In  some  instances, 
teams had a structured way of archiving meeting minutes 
or to-dos in an easily accessible place via persistent web 
link, for example in Hackpad or Etherpad (Obs3, P4, P11, 
P13). However,  minutes  typically only  were recorded or 
updated  by  one  person  and  emailed  to  the  rest  of  the 
group.  Slides could be shared afterwards, and often were 
(Obs3), but the off-topic conversations that deviated from 
the  slide  content  were  lost.  Thus,  two  sets  of  challenges 
around archiving meeting content emerged.  

1710

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Archiving  challenge  1:    Recording  not  possible  or  not 
useful 
Recording  can  be  especially  useful  when  the  meeting 
itself  constitutes  useful  data.  For  example,  a  user 
experience  researcher  (P8)  recorded  remote  usability 
sessions conducted over video conferencing to refer back 
to  later.  For  this  reason,  using  a  more  advanced,  paid 
professional web conferencing tool that allowed recording 
was advantageous: 
“That’s  one  of  the  benefits  of  GoToMeeting.  It’s  really 
easy just to record a session.”  
However,  when  the  client  required  that  a  free  tool  be 
used, this functionality was lost, and required her to rely 
on handwritten notes as a reminder of what had happened: 
“I  wasn’t  able  to  record  because  it  was  on  Google 
Hangouts and I was like, “How do you record with this 
thing?”  But  I  wasn’t  allowed 
to  use  any  other 
[conferencing tool], because the client required that I use 
Google Hangouts… And then you just rush over and write 
everything down and whatnot.”  (P8) 
When  asked  about  how  information  from  meetings  was 
typically saved or preserved, a common response was that 
it  was  up  to  individuals  to  take  notes  about  what  was 
personally  important  to  them.  Sometimes  these  notes  or 
meetings  were  sent  around  (P5,  P6,  P9),  but  most  often 
individuals  just  kept  them  for  themselves  and  did  not 
share  them  with  others.  This  made  it  hard  for  team 
members 
remember  what  had  been 
discussed previously: 
Interviewer:  “Do  you  record  what  is  going  on  with  the 
screen sharing, to be able to refer to that later”? 
P9: 
useful to do that, but we don’t.” 
Interviewer:  “How  do  you  remember  the  information 
then?” 
P9:”I just remember it.  I don’t know”. 
However,  the  same  interviewee  later  acknowledged  the 
system of remembering information did not always work:   
“Right now, I have a bunch of emails that I go through 
and  write  them  down  and  try  to  remember  what  I  am 
supposed  to  do.    Then,  the  next  meeting,  I  say  I  forgot, 
and half the other people forgot, so it’s okay.” (P9, status 
update) 
However,  in  most  cases  meeting  summaries  or  to-dos 
were  generated  from  personal  notes  taken  during  a 
meeting.  In  many  cases  this  reflected  either  a  complete 
lack of recording functionality or a poor search interface 
for  recordings.  Therefore,  recording  meetings  was  either 
not possible with the tool, or not seen as useful to look at 
again  afterwards  (one  team  had  2  years’  worth  of 
recorded meetings that they did not refer to again).   

“We  don’t.    It probably  would  be  actually  very 

to  accurately 

 Archiving challenge 2:  Re-finding scattered information is 
difficult 
Apart from recording video conversations, some tools had 
the ability to record conversation  history, such as email, 
instant  messenger  chat  logs,  and  the  like.  This  did  not 
require  meeting  participants  to  do  anything  extra  to 
preserve  what  was  being  discussed.  The  problem, 
however, was re-finding a particular piece of information 
that  could  be  spread  across  a  variety  of  places.  For 
example, two participants (P3, P4) struggled to remember 
whether a photo had been shared in the Skype chat, email, 
or elsewhere. 
“When I go back to history to look for something, I know 
I stored some information but I don’t remember what it is, 
I know it’s by Skype so I can go in there and look for it. If 
I’m not sure it was on Skype, it would be one of the places 
I’d be looking into.” (P3, info-sharing) 
IMPLICATIONS FOR TOOL DESIGN 
As both our survey and interviews suggest, participants in 
remote  meetings  have 
to  balance  an  array  of 
considerations.  Their  institution  or  client  may  have 
specific requirements, they may have their own needs for 
different types of meetings, and they may have their own 
preferences  based  on  past  experiences.  These  issues, 
combined with the growing number of videoconferencing, 
file  sharing,  IM,  and  workflow  applications  being  used 
can  make  it  necessary  to  cobble  together  and  integrate 
information across a set of tools.  Table 4 summarizes the 
main  findings  and  challenges  found  in  our  work  across 
different types of meetings. 
Some challenges, such as organizational policy issues, are 
independent of tool functionality or usability.  However, 
the  capability  of  sharing  and  saving  information  that 
arises in the course of video calls is something that can be 
added 
tools.  Popular  video 
conferencing  tools  are  designed  to  support  synchronous 
conversations  between  people.  While  they  offer  some 
ability to screen share or send files in the moment, often 
times, once the call ends, this information is lost. Here we 
suggest  improvements  in  video-conferencing  tools  to 
support the issues of dispersed information and archiving. 
Aggregation of disparate information 
One common theme  noted across the different examples 
of meetings in our work is that participants had to make 
decisions  about  what  to  share  with  others  and  how,  and 
weigh  the  tradeoffs  between  the  options  they  had  for 
doing so. It is clear from our study that using a variety of 
tools and programs to share different kinds of information 
is  not  the  desired  approach  for  users,  but  as  described 
above,  a  result  of  attempting  to  navigate  the  myriad 
shortcomings  of  current  tools  in  the  course  of  getting 
work done.  While they were able to deal with managing 
this  multiplicity  of  tools,  it  often  led  to  increased 
cognitive load of deciding what to share and where to find 
it later.  This also implies  the need to anticipate upfront 

to  currently  existing 

1711

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Meeting type 

Status update 

Who shares and 
what do they share? 

Multiple people; 
Minimal multimedia 
sharing 

Information 
sharing 

Multiple people; 
Sharing of many 
different types of 
artifacts, both digital 
and/or physical 

Presentation 

One person typically 
screensharing digital 
artifact (presentation) 

Sharing and archiving needs and challenges 

Design implications 

Sharing: Mostly verbal reports; Demos of phone apps 
may not be easily screen-shared (Sharing Challenge 1:  
Not all items could be screen-shared) 
Archiving: Information such as to-dos kept in a shared 
file with a persistent online link to another application 
(e.g., notes in Smartsheet, Hackpad, etc.)   

Not all types of information can be shared well 
(Sharing Challenge 1:  Not all items could be screen-
shared; Sharing Challenge 2:  Video files could not be 
shared well) 
Multiple people may wish to show information over 
the video feed (Sharing Challenge 3:  Multiple people 
wishing to share information) 
Archiving: Screenshared information or backchannel is 
lost unless saved as a file elsewhere  
 (Archiving Challenge 1: Recording not possible or not 
useful) 
Non-screenshared information is scattered about and 
out of context (Archiving Challenge 2: Re-finding 
scattered information is difficult)   
Remote parties can’t see presentation if presenter 
neglects to share slides online.  Slideshows with 
embedded video face quality issues. 
Not all types of information can be shared well 
(Sharing Challenge 1: Not all items could be screen-
shared, Sharing Challenge 2: Video files could not be 
shared well) 
Accessing: Screenshared information or backchannel is 
lost unless saved as a file elsewhere  
(Archiving Challenge 1: Recording not possible or not 
useful) 

Tool should support members’ ability to 
synchronously contribute information 
from different, dispersed devices 

Tool should support members’ ability to 
synchronously contribute information 
from different, dispersed devices 
 
Tool should support persistent storage 
and access of shared information linked 
to the video conferencing tool 
Personalized archiving of information 

Tool should support members’ ability to 
synchronously contribute information 
from different, dispersed devices 
 
 
 
 
 
Personalized archiving of information 

 

Table 4.  Sharing and archiving needs and challenges across meeting types 

the extent to which meeting content will be referred to in 
the future. 
In  particular,  one  design  change  that  may  be  relevant 
given  the  discussion  of  the  users  in  our  study  is 
decoupling  video  sharing  practices  from  file  sharing 
practices,  which  users  find  confusing  and  burdensome. 
For  example,  most  popular  photo  sharing  applications 
today do not require users to move photos into a separate 
folder  for  sharing,  but  rather  allow  users  to  easily  and 
quickly  insert  photos  into  an  ongoing  narrative  or 
conversation,  of  which  the  other  user  can  instantly  view 
through  their  application.  Similarly  for  video,  designers 
may  want  to  look  into  tools  for  easily  selecting  and 
sharing  relevant  portions  of  video/screenshots  through 
synchronous communications. 
To support members’ ability to synchronously contribute 
information  from  different,  dispersed  devices  the  video 
conferencing  tool  could  provide  a  better  means  of 

1712

integrating relevant information within the tool itself. On 
the  sharing  side,  this  might  involve  improving  mobile 
phone apps so that they can connect directly to collocated 
meetings and allow seamless sending of information (e.g., 
pictures) from a participant’s mobile device directly into 
the  video  conference  tool  interface.  Such  integration  of 
additional  devices  would  address  Sharing  Challenge  3, 
where multiple meeting participants wished to contribute 
material (such as a photo from their mobile phone) or into 
the video conference without using a laptop. 
To  address  the  design  challenge  of  how  to  support 
persistent storage and access of shared information linked 
to  the  video  conferencing  tool,  conferencing  programs 
could  better  integrate  content  sharing  from  a  variety  of 
sources,  applications,  and  devices  alongside  the  video 
meeting.  This  could  help  reduce  users’  cognitive  burden 
and  need  to  decide  how  to  share  something  and  then 
remember  where  it  was  later.    Tools  like  Slack  offer 
automatic 
text-based 

archiving 

of 

and 

search 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

in 

involve  keeping  shared 

information/slides/presentations 

conversations, as well as the ability to share files such as 
images.    It  could  be  possible  to  share  all  information  in 
such  a  place  and  refer  to  it  while  on  a  video  call.  
However,  as  we  have  seen,  this  introduces  a  tradeoff 
between  focusing on the  meeting participants (observing 
faces,  social  dynamics,  etc.)  and  focusing  on  a  shared 
document.  
Persistent archived information tied to the video tool 
On  the  archiving  side,  better  information  integration 
would 
information  easily 
accessible and address Archiving Challenge 2 (Re-finding 
scattered information is difficult). For example, if a team 
had  a  recurring  video  conferencing  meeting,  the  tool 
could provide access to notes and snippets of previously 
shared 
the  same 
interface  used  to  hold  the  video  conferencing  meeting. 
This could help in situations where material was shared in 
various  formats,  inaccessible  to  remote  participants,  or 
when  multiple  people  wish  to  share  content  from  their 
own  devices.    It  could  also  assist  in  the  case  where 
individuals  have  several  recurring  meetings  and  want  to 
have  a  record  of  key  information  from  each.    One 
participant  described  the  potential  utility  of  having 
persistent, archived information: 
“One thing that would be nice to be able to keep up those 
minutes I write in hand, to actually embed them into the 
meeting, itself, so people can see what I am typing while 
they are watching, so maybe a split screen feature. Or, if 
we come back the next week, if I said I expect you to do 
this by next week, if it could just be there in the meeting, 
itself, that would nice.” (P9) 
Archiving and  saving information  was also a theme that 
came  up  often.  In  some  meetings,  information  being 
shared  was  transient  and  there  was  no  need  to  keep  a 
record  of  it  for  later.  In  fact,  individuals  sometimes 
appreciated 
that  a  photo  shared  over  chat  wasn’t 
“cluttering my inbox” (P3).  If old information needed to 
be accessed, it had to be made new again, for example by 
resending the old email to the group. However, different 
meeting  participants  might  have  different  attitudes 
towards the same information.  
We  saw  that  often  individuals  took  notes  to  record 
meeting  items  that  were  pertinent  to  them.  An  artifact 
such as information on a slide or a photo may be relevant 
and  archivable  to  one  person  but  not  to  another.  
Therefore, easily allowing meeting participants to have a 
“sandbox” where they can extract or refer to relevant bits 
of the meeting and its artifacts for either personal or group 
use  could  provide  useful  functionality.  This  would 
address Archiving Challenge 1, where recording an entire 
meeting was either not possible or not seen as useful (due 
to information overload).  It may be that only small bits of 
useful  information  need  to  be  extracted  and  preserved 
before the call ends and all data is lost, and these  needs 
may be different from individual to individual.    

1713

to  design  a  one-size-fits-all 

Modular  options  to  adapt  to  diverse  meeting  types 
and needs 
As  highlighted  in  Table  4,  we  also  discovered  diverse 
meeting types and needs.  A single team may, over time, 
participate  in  many  different  types  of  meetings,  as  our 
survey  and  interviews  suggest.  A  presentation  meeting 
may  not  require  much  information  sharing  beyond 
walking  through  a  slide  deck  together.  A  brainstorming 
session may not need to be archived; the end result of the 
discussion during the meeting is a decision that is reached 
and  the  process  to  get  there  is  irrelevant.  A  mixed-
configuration meeting has different social dynamics than 
a  hub-and-spoke  layout.    These  differences  make  it 
challenging 
tool,  and 
contribute  to  the  multiplicity  of  tools  being  used  in 
parallel.   
To  better  support  different  meeting  types,  it  could  be 
feasible to design a single video conferencing tool with a 
variety  of  modules  that  could  be  mixed  and  matched 
depending  on  the  meeting  type  and  attendees.  For 
example,  the  default  layout  for  a  status  update  meeting 
could include a large area for persistent note-taking, while 
the  default  (recommended)  layout  for  an  information 
sharing meeting could provide a space for external, non-
screen shared content to be sent from participants’ mobile 
devices and aggregated in one place. The tool could also 
allow individuals to choose themselves what parts of the 
meeting would be useful to them to record and keep later, 
perhaps  even  allowing 
important 
keyframes  or  screenshots  from  the  conversation  and 
shared references.   
As  described  above,  significant  friction  still  exists  in 
accessing  past  video,  and  in  using  archived  video 
information. Tools that would facilitate an easier, simpler 
way  of  accessing 
information  would  allow 
collaborators  to  spend  more  time  building  upon,  rather 
than merely recovering, work from previous meetings.  
The main focus of this paper is on factors and challenges 
that  influence  sharing  multimedia  material  during  and 
after  video  meetings  in  the  context  of  creating  artifacts. 
The 
to  office-based 
knowledge  workers  who  have  a  variety  of  choices  for 
their  communication  tools.  However,  our  work  also 
highlights other challenges, both technical and social, that 
arose  from  different  configurations  of  participants  and 
varied across different job roles. In future work, we will 
examine  more  of  these  factors  in  more  depth  through 
collecting additional examples from various industries. 
CONCLUSION 
Videoconferencing, 
and  workflow 
applications are flooding app stores. These tools are well 
suited  for  facilitating  conversations  between  “talking 
heads”, but struggle to facilitate richer collaboration and 
multimedia sharing. Our interviews and observations with 
members  of  distributed  teams  using  those  tools  reveal 

this  paper  apply 

sharing, 

them 

to  capture 

insights 

in 

this 

file 

them 

their  goals  and 

for  choosing  among 

some insights into this phenomenon: different users have 
peculiar  institutional,  social,  and  personal  needs,  and  no 
one tool readily satisfies all of these. Thus, users sample 
from  many  different  apps  to  cover  a  variety  of  different 
contextual issues, needs, and backup scenarios.  
This abundance of collaboration tools has in turn inspired 
a rise of other tools, such as Slack, Glip, and others, that 
have  as  their  main  selling  point  the  ability  to  integrate 
other tools together in a single interface. However, while 
those tools might make it easier to use a combination of 
collaboration apps, they do not provide users with enough 
guidance 
in  different 
circumstances, or for adapting the interface functionalities 
and  presentations  based  on 
tasks. 
Similarly,  they  do  not  close  the  gap  between  video 
content  and  what  is  preserved  from  other  asynchronous 
communication. 
Remote collaboration is prevalent for information workers 
in  companies,  and  small 
teams  of  workers  need 
technologies to help them converse and coordinate around 
shared  artifacts.    Finding  ways  to  bring  more  material 
from outside the meeting into the meeting, and to capture 
relevant  material  and  retain  access  to  it  for  future 
reference  has  the  potential  to  help  streamline  distance 
work for people in a variety of settings. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We  thank  our  interviewees  for  taking  the  time  to 
contribute  to  this  research.  We  also  thank  Matthew 
Cooper for his feedback and suggestions on the paper. 
REFERENCES  
1.  Pernille Bjørn, Morten Esbensen, Rasmus Eskild 
Jensen, and Stina Matthiesen. 2014. Does distance 
still matter? Revisiting the CSCW fundamentals on 
distributed collaboration. ACM Transactions on 
Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 21, 5, 27. 

2.  Matthias Böhmer, T. Scott Saponas, and Jaime 

Teevan. 2013. Smartphone use does not have to be 
rude: making phones a collaborative presence in 
meetings. Proc. MobileHCI, 342–351.  

3.  Erin Bradner, Gloria Mark, and Tammie D. Hertel. 
2005. Team size and technology fit: Participation, 
awareness, and rapport in distributed teams. IEEE 
Trans. On Professional Communication, 68–77. 

4.  Jed R. Brubaker, Gina Venolia, and John C. Tang. 

2012. Focusing on shared experiences: moving 
beyond the camera in video communication. Proc. 
DIS, 96–105.  

5.  Lars Rune Christensen, Rasmus Eskild Jensen, and 
Pernille Bjørn. 2014. Relation Work in Collocated 
and Distributed Collaboration. Proc. COOP, 87–101.  

6.  Azadeh Forghani, Gina Venolia, and Kori Inkpen. 
2014. Media2gether: Sharing Media during a Call. 
Proc. GROUP, 142-151.  

1714

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

7.  Lutz Gericke, Raja Gumienny, and Christoph Meinel. 

2012. Tele-board: Follow the traces of your design 
process history. In Design thinking research. 
Springer, 15–29.  

8.  Jennifer L. Gibbs, J. L., & Malgorzata Boyraz. 2015. 
International HRM’s role in managing global teams. 
In Collings, D. G., Wood, G., & Caligiuri, P. 
(Eds.), The Routledge companion to international 
human resource management, 532-551. 

9.  Jennifer L. Gibbs, Nik Ahmad Rozaidi, and Julia 

Eisenberg. 2013. Overcoming the “ideology of 
openness”: Probing the affordances of social media 
for organizational knowledge sharing. Journal of 
Computer-Mediated Communication 19, 1, 102–120. 

10.  Joseph A. Gonzales, Casey Fiesler, and Amy 

Bruckman. 2015. Towards an Appropriable CSCW 
Tool Ecology: Lessons from the Greatest 
International Scavenger Hunt the World Has Ever 
Seen. Proc. CSCW, 946–957.  

11.  Raja Gumienny, Lutz Gericke, Matthias Wenzel, and 

Christoph Meinel. 2013. Supporting creative 
collaboration in globally distributed companies. Proc. 
CSCW, 995–1007.  

12.  Demetrios Karis, Daniel Wildman, and Amir Mané. 
2014. Improving Remote Collaboration with Video 
Conferencing and Video Portals. Human–Computer 
Interaction, 1–98.  

13.  Benjamin Koehne, Patrick C. Shih, and Judith S. 

Olson. 2012. Remote and alone: coping with being 
the remote member on the team. Proc. CSCW, 1257–
1266.  

14.  Charlotte Massey, Thomas Lennig, and Steve 

Whittaker. 2014. Cloudy forecast: an exploration of 
the factors underlying shared repository use. Proc. 
CHI, 2461–2470.  

15.  Tara Matthews, Steve Whittaker, Thomas Moran, and 

Sandra Yuen. 2011. Collaboration personas: A new 
approach to designing workplace collaboration tools. 
Proc. CHI, 2247–2256.  

16.  Lora Oehlberg, Kyu Simm, Jasmine Jones, Alice 
Agogino, and Björn Hartmann. 2012. Showing is 
sharing: building shared understanding in human-
centered design teams with dazzle. Proc. DIS, 669–
678.  

17.  Judith S. Olson and Gary M. Olson. 2014. How to 

make distance work work. interactions 21, 2, 28–35. 

18.  Polycom. 2014. http://www.polycom.com/ 

content/dam/polycom/common/documents/guides/ 
polycom-guide-to-collaborating-across-borders-
enus.pdf   

19.  Polycom. http://www.polycom.com/defydistance/top-

10-challenges-with-remote-collaboration.html 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

20.  Jeffrey Treem and Paul Leonardi. 2012. Social media 

use in organizations: Exploring the affordances of 
visibility, editability, persistence, and association. 
Communication Yearbook 36, 143–189. 

21.  Thea Turner, Pernilla Qvarfordt, Jacob T. Biehl, 
Gene Golovchinsky, and Maribeth Back. 2010. 
Exploring the workplace communication ecology. 
Proc. CHI, 841–850.  

22.  Himanshu Verma, Flaviu Roman, Silvia Magrelli, 

Patrick Jermann, and Pierre Dillenbourg. 2013. 
Complementarity of input devices to achieve 
knowledge sharing in meetings. Proc. CSCW, 701–
714.  

23.  Ruth Wageman, Heidi Gardner, and Mark 

Mortensen. 2012. The changing ecology of teams: 
New directions for teams research. Journal of 
Organizational Behavior 33, 3, 301–315. 

24.  Wainhouse Research.  2015.  The collaborative 

enterprise:  How enterprises are adapting to support 

the modern meeting.  White paper. 
http://cp.wainhouse.com/content/the-collaborative-
enterprise-paper 

25.  Stephanie L. Woerner, Wanda J. Orlikowski, and J. 

Yates. 2004. The media toolbox: Combining media in 
organizational communication. Proc. Academy of 
Management, 1-36.  

26.  Nicole Yankelovich, William Walker, Patricia 

Roberts, Mike Wessler, Jonathan Kaplan, and Joe 
Provino. 2004. Meeting central: making distributed 
meetings more effective. Proc. CSCW, 419–428. 

27.  Roshanak Zilouchian Moghaddam, Zane Nicholson, 

and Brian P. Bailey. 2015. Procid: Bridging 
Consensus Building Theory with the Practice of 
Distributed Design Discussions. Proc. CSCW, 686–
699.  

 
 

 
 

1715

