CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

“Just Cast the Net, and Hopefully the Right Fish Swim into 

It”: Audience Management on Social Network Sites 

Eden Litt 

Northwestern University 

Evanston, USA 

eden.litt@u.northwestern.edu 

on 

users’ 

audience-reaching 

ABSTRACT 
When users post on social network sites, they can engage 
in  audience-reaching  strategies,  in  an  effort  to  reach 
desired  audience  members,  as  well  as  audience-limiting 
strategies,  in  an  effort  to  avoid  unwanted  audience 
members.  While  much  research  has  focused  on  users’ 
audience-limiting  strategies,  little  research  has  explicitly 
focused 
strategies. 
Additionally,  little  work  has  explored  either  strategy  at 
the  post  level.  Using  mixed  methods  involving  a  diary 
study  and  follow-up  interviews  focused  on  a  diverse 
group of users’ posts, this article reveals several audience-
reaching  strategies  users  engaged  from  altering  their 
content  to  tagging.  However,  users  in  this  study  rarely 
used  strategies 
to  exclude  people  proactively  and 
technologically  outside  of  their  targeted  audiences,  and 
instead broadcasted widely. Participants described several 
rationales for sharing broadly from skill-related issues to a 
reliance on the audience or site to filter the content. 
Author Keywords 
Audience;  privacy; 
audience 
management; audience-reaching strategies; social network 
sites.  
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m.  Information  interfaces  and  presentation  (e.g., 
HCI): Miscellaneous. 
INTRODUCTION 
Scholars  have  increasingly  studied  the  way  people 
manage 
their  audiences  on  social  network  sites. 
Researchers  have  explored  how  users  manage  their 
privacy,  what  audience  concerns  they  have,  whom  they 
think about as their audience, and what happens when the 
privacy  management  process  breaks  down  [e.g.,  15,  23-
25,  29,  33,  37,  39,  46].  However,  as  people’s  audience 
goals  and  strategies  continue  to  evolve  many  questions 

audience; 

imagined 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal  or  classroom  use  is  granted  without  fee  provided  that  copies  are  not 
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this 
notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this 
work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is 
permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute 
to  lists,  requires  prior  specific  permission  and/or  a  fee.  Request  permissions 
from Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA  
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02...$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819933 

1488

Eszter Hargittai 

Northwestern University 

Evanston, USA 
pubs@webuse.org 

they 

imagined  audience 

think  about  more 

regarding people’s audience management remain. Using a 
mixed  methods  study  focused  on  a  diverse  sample,  this 
paper  builds  on  prior  audience  management  research  by 
broadening the focus of audience management to include 
audience-reaching strategies and by highlighting people’s 
strategy use (or lack thereof) at the post level.  
BACKGROUND 
As  users  share  their  life  updates  to  large  and  diverse 
audiences on social network sites, research has started to 
focus on the way users imagine their audiences [3, 6, 25, 
is  a  “mental 
28,  31,  38].  An 
conceptualization  of  the  people  with  whom  we  are 
communicating”  [22].  So  whom  do  people  imagine  as 
they  post  on  social  network  sites?  Do  they  think  about 
their audiences abstractly focused on no one in particular? 
Alternatively,  do 
targeted 
audiences?  Research  about  the  imagined  audience  has 
suggested people think about their audiences in a variety 
of ways from very abstract and general conceptualizations 
(e.g.,  “everyone”  or  the  “public”)  to  more  specific  and 
targeted visualizations (e.g., “friends” or “coworkers”) [6, 
25,  31].  Some  research  has  also  found  that  people 
fluctuate  among  audience  conceptualizations  each  time 
they post, and while sometimes they think about general 
audiences,  other 
targeted 
audiences for their content made up of a section of their 
network such as “lovers of animals,” “Christian friends,” 
or  “relatives  in  Canada”  [21].  Framed  another  way, 
sometimes people have specific audience goals in mind. 
When  people  have  targeted  audiences  in  mind,  do  they 
engage in strategies to reach such targets? What strategies 
do they employ to maximize the chances that their targets 
see 
to 
proactively  exclude  people  outside  of  the  imagined 
audience,  who  may  also  technically  have  access  to  their 
posts?  The  following  section  explores  prior  audience 
management research.  
Audience Management: Reaching/Limiting Strategies 
As  research  highlights  [17,  38],  users  manage  many 
different  audience  boundaries  on  social  network  sites 
ranging  from  whom  they  allow  to  see  their  profiles  to 
whom  they  allow  to  see  and/or  interact  with  their 
individual posts. This paper focuses on how users manage 
their  audience  boundaries  for  their  posts.  Particularly, 
when users share posts and they have a target audience in 
mind, how do they manage their potential audience? 

their  posts?  Do 

in  strategies 

they  engage 

times, 

they 

think  about 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

tactics 

There  are  two  main  types  of  audience  management 
strategies  users  can  engage:  audience-reaching  and 
audience-limiting strategies. Audience-reaching strategies 
involve  attempts  to  include  the  target  audience.  In 
contrast,  audience-limiting  strategies  involve  attempts  to 
exclude  people  outside  of  the  target  audience.  That  is, 
users can engage tactics to reach target audience members 
as  well  as 
to  exclude  non-target  audience 
members.  For  example,  if  someone’s  imagined  audience 
consists of “family,” he or she can engage in strategies to 
reach  family  members  (e.g.,  tag  family  members  in  a 
post)  as  well  as  strategies  to  exclude  those  outside  of 
one’s  family  (e.g.,  use  of  a  list to  block  people  who  are 
not family members from seeing a post). 
Audience-Reaching Strategies 
While it has not been the focus of audience-management 
research  especially  when  it  comes  to  everyday  users, 
audience-researching  strategies  have  been  critical  to  the 
success  of  companies  and  professionals  in  the  media 
industry (e.g., writers, celebrities, brands, and advertisers) 
[1,  11,  42].  Such  professionals  have  long  used  tactics 
ranging  from  altering  content 
target 
audience’s  interests  to  using  promotional  spots  and 
advertising [43]. While everyday social network site users 
likely  have  different  incentives,  skills,  and  resources  [2, 
44], as everyday users broadcast their updates to diverse 
audiences,  they  may  also  use  strategies  to  reach  their 
audience goals.  
We see hints of these audience-reaching strategies in prior 
research. For instance, a study on the imagined audience 
on Twitter highlighted how one user engaged hashtags to 
attend  to  different  targeted  audiences  [25].  Similarly,  a 
study on international students found some used language 
as  an  “audience  filter”  when  posting  on  Facebook  [34]. 
Additionally, research focused on the imagined audience 
and  political  participation  found  evidence  that  social 
network site users edited their content in an effort to reach 
their  targeted  audiences;  one  participant  also  noted  he 
tagged  the  targeted  audience  [31].  While  these  studies 
suggest users engage in tactics, little research has focused 
on  these  strategies,  especially  at  the  post  level.  By 
connecting  research  on  social  network  site  users  with 
research on traditional professional broadcasters, the first 
research  question  explores  if  people  use  such  strategies, 
and if so, what such strategies look like: 

to  suit 

their 

RQ1: When users have a target audience in mind as 
they  share  a  post  on  a  social  network  site,  do  they 
engage in audience-reaching strategies to get through 
to the target audience? 
Audience-Limiting Strategies 
The  majority  of  audience  management  literature  has 
focused  on  people’s  audience-limiting  tactics  or  the 
“preventative”  [19], 
  “risk  management”  [39],  and 
“protective”  [45]  strategies  people  use  to  restrict  others 
from  seeing  or  understanding  their  information.  More 

1489

little 

explored 

research  has 

generally,  researchers  have 
identified  people  using 
multiple  profiles  [33,  38],  altering  their  privacy  settings 
[4, 6, 38, 46], creating lists and groups [8, 16, 18, 20, 37-
39, 41], blocking and  unfriending contacts [30, 39, 46], 
and using steganographic practices [26, 39]. For instance, 
Vitak  investigated  how  factors  like  audience  size  and 
diversity  relate  to  a  group  of  graduate  students’  use  of 
lists  [37].  Other  work  has  showcased  teenagers  utilizing 
steganographic  tactics  in  which  certain  audiences  like 
their  close  friends  can  understand  their  posts,  but  others 
like  their  parents  cannot  [26].  While  much  privacy 
research  has  focused  on  users’  general  or  hypothetical 
behaviors, 
audience 
management  at  the  post  level.  For  instance,  boyd  & 
Hargittai’s  research  highlighted  that  many  users  had 
altered  their  privacy  settings  on  Facebook  [4],  while 
Watson  and  colleagues  found  that  some  users  utilized 
circles  on  Google+  for  selective  sharing  [41].  These 
findings  indicate  that  people  have  used  these  various 
limiting tactics during their social network site tenure, but 
do they engage with them each time they post? If people 
have  a  target  audience  in  mind  when  posting,  do  they 
adjust  their  privacy  settings  or  use  a  list  to  proactively 
exclude people outside of the target audience? Or do they 
still  post  to  their  entire  network  and  beyond?  For 
example,  if  a  person  wants  to  reach  “friends  who  play 
basketball”  when  posting,  does  he  or  she  engage  in 
strategies  to  exclude  those  who  do  not  play  basketball 
from  seeing  the  post?  In  this  study,  we  explore  these 
audience-limiting  strategies  using  a  novel  method 
involving  a  diary  study  and  follow-up  interviews  on  a 
diverse  sample  to  allow  for  more  emphasis  on  audience 
management at the post level than has been done in prior 
work. Thus we explore the following question: 

RQ2: When users have a target audience in mind as 
they  share  a  post  on  a  social  network  site,  do  they 
engage  in  audience-limiting  strategies  to  exclude 
people outside of the target audience? 

While  studies  have  shown  that  some  users  engage  in 
audience-limiting  tactics,  there  is  also  evidence  that 
people  do  not  use  these  tactics  [32,  37,  41].  Related 
studies  often  give  recommendations  or 
test  design 
solutions  to  improve  audience-limiting  features  [18,  29, 
32,  39,  41].  Prior  research  has  alluded  to  several  factors 
that explain the lack of use of such features from skill or 
confidence  issues  to  the  amount  of  time  and  effort 
required  to  utilize  the  functionality  [17,  38,  39,  41]. 
Research  has  also  noted  that  some  people  do  not  use 
audience-limiting strategies at the post level, because they 
have  already  engaged  in  higher-level  privacy  strategies 
like self-censoring, and thus only share content they feel 
is  appropriate  for  anyone  who  can  access  their  content 
[15,  25,  32,  38].  However,  little  research  has  focused 
specifically  on  why  people  may  forgo  exclusionary 
strategies  and  knowingly  allow  people  beyond 
the 
imagined  audience  into  the  actual  audience.  This  study 

expands  prior  research  by  focusing  on  the  following 
question at the post level:  

RQ3: If users do not use audience-limiting strategies 
to  exclude  their  posts  from  those  beyond  the  target 
imagined audience, why not? Why do they share their 
posts to their entire networks and beyond even with a 
target audience in mind? 

METHODS 
Overview 
This  study’s  data  come  from  a  larger  project  that 
consisted  of  a  diary  study  (N=119)  and  follow-up 
interviews  (N=30).  The  data  analyzed  here  reflect  the 
people  who  participated  in  both  the  diary  study  and  the 
follow-up interviews (N=30). The data were collected in 
2014. We recruited through Craigslist, flyers, and word of 
mouth from across the United States. We used a screening 
survey  to  monitor  participant  eligibility  and  diversity. 
Participants had to be 18 years old or older, current users 
of Facebook, Twitter, and/or LinkedIn (with at least two 
years of experience on at least one of these), allow us to 
connect with them in one of these spaces, post primarily 
in English, live in the United States, and pass an attention-
verification-check  survey  item.  Additionally,  we  used 
Trost’s  statistically  nonrepresentative  stratified  sampling 
technique  [see  36  for  more]  focused  on  obtaining 
variations  within  age  and  gender,  as  many  privacy 
behaviors  are  related  to  these  factors  [4,  5,  35,  40].  If 
prospective  participants  were  eligible  and  aided  with 
diversity,  they  were  invited  to  participate.  Participants 
were not part of the authors’ direct social networks. 
Diary Study 
The  goal  of  the  diary  study  was  to  collect  participants’ 
social network site posts, and have participants reflect on 
these posts through surveys. 
We collected participants’ posts from Facebook, Twitter, 
and/or  LinkedIn  (depending  on  which  they  used).  We 
selected 
these  aforementioned  social  network  sites 
because they were the most popular services at the time of 
the study design [10], and thus would allow for a breadth 
of  users’ 
their  associated 
audience management strategies. We sent participants the 
diary surveys every other week via a link in an email. In 
total,  participants  received  four  diary  surveys  spread  out 
over two months. The study’s length of time allowed for 
the  collection  of  more  posts,  and  the  time  in  between 
surveys  helped  avoid  overburdening  participants  and 
helped  mitigate  potential  observer  effects.  We  tiered 
compensation,  and  participants  could  earn  up  to  $30  to 
Amazon,  and  the  opportunity  to  win  an  iPad  mini, 
depending on the number of surveys they filled out. We 
fielded the diary study March through May of 2014. 
The diary surveys contained questions about participants’ 
demographic  and  socioeconomic  background  as  well  as 
their  social  and  technological  skills  and  behaviors. 

imagined  audiences  and 

1490

SESSION: UNPACKING SOCIAL NETWORKS

to 

the  above  question, 

However,  one  of  the  diary  study’s  main  goals  was  to 
capture  people’s  imagined  audiences  in  association  with 
the posts they shared. In order to assess people’s imagined 
audiences,  we  stated,  “You  posted  the  following  on 
[Facebook,  Twitter,  or  LinkedIn]  last  week,”  with  a 
screenshot  of  their  post.  We  then  asked,  “As  you  were 
writing  this  post,  did  you  have  anyone  in  mind?  If  yes, 
who?”  There  was  then  space  for  participants  to  write  in 
for  whom  they  had  intended  the  post.  If  participants 
selected  “yes” 
they  were 
considered to have had a target imagined audience. In this 
piece, we focus on the items in which people had a target 
imagined  audience.  Participants  gave  their  imagined 
audiences for each post we collected (up to three posts per 
site  on  each  survey  depending  on  how  many  posts  each 
person  shared).  For  instance,  if  a  person  posted  three 
times on Facebook and twice on Twitter the week before, 
his or her diary survey asked the imagined audience(s) for 
the three Facebook posts and two Twitter posts. 
Follow-up Interviews 
The  goal  of  the  interviews  was  to  garner  more  in-depth 
insights  about  users’  imagined  audiences  and  their 
associated audience management strategies. We waited to 
ask  these  reflective  questions  until  after  the  diary  study 
completed  to  avoid  influencing  people’s  behaviors  or 
biasing the data in subsequent waves. 
We  invited  just  over  a  third  of  the  original  set  of 
participants  (N=47)  to  partake  in  the  interviews  in  order 
to be able to achieve data saturation [12] while accounting 
for  potential  nonresponses 
and  dropouts.  These 
prospective interviewees were also selected using Trost’s 
statistically 
sampling 
technique  [see  36  for  more]  to  aid  diversity  in  age  and 
gender.  We  also  had  self-reported  data  on  participants’ 
Internet  skills,  online  privacy  skills,  and  their  post 
frequency  from  the  diary  study;  we  considered  this 
information 
among 
interviewees.  Of  those  invited,  five  were  not  available, 
two  cancelled,  and  ten  did  not  respond  to  the  invitation 
resulting in 30 interviews.  
The follow-up interviews consisted of a voice call lasting 
approximately 50 minutes. We compensated participation 
in  the  follow-up  interviews  with  $20  to  Amazon.  We 
conducted  the  interviews  at  least  a  week  after  the  diary 
study ended during May and June of 2014.  
The 
regarding 
participants’ general social network site behaviors as well 
as their specific behaviors during the diary study. While 
there  was  a  general  template,  we  tailored  interviews  to 
participants’ diary study responses. We asked participants 
to reflect on their sharing process from thought or idea of 
a post all the way until the item was posted. Participants 
started off by describing a generic example of what their 
posting  process  typically  involves  on  the  site  they  use 
most  often.  Then  they  did  a  similar  exercise  with  the 

nonrepresentative 

interviews 

contained 

to 

ensure 

further 

diversity 

stratified 

questions 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

actual items captured during the diary study. For instance, 
if we had collected two Facebook posts and one Twitter 
post from a participant during the diary study, he or she 
elaborated  on  the  sharing  process  for  these  three  posts. 
The 
interviewer  (the  first  author)  asked  follow-up 
questions for more details, including if/when participants 
mentioned the use of an audience-reaching strategy and/or 
if/when  they  mentioned  the  use  of  an  audience-limiting 
strategy. If participants stated they had a target imagined 
audience in mind, and despite this shared their post with 
their entire network, they were asked to elaborate on why. 
Participant Background 
About  half  of  the  participants  were  female  (53.33%). 
They  ranged  in  age  from  20-75  (M=39.03,  SD=16.04). 
Just under a third had less than a college degree (30.00%), 
slightly  more  than  a  third  had  a  college  degree  only 
(36.67%), and a third had an advanced degree (33.33%). 
They ranged in Internet skills  from  1.50  to  5.00  on  a  5-
point  scale  [13]  (M=3.76,  SD=.90)  and  online  privacy 
skills from 1.75 to 5.00 on a 5-point scale [14] (M=3.75, 
SD=.92).  We  collected  between  2  and  24  of  their  posts 
(M=12.43,  SD=6.04)  during 
the  diary  study,  and 
participants  reflected  on  between  2  and  6  of  these  posts 
during the interviews. 
Methods of Analysis 
We  transcribed  the  audio  files  from  the  interviews.  We 
removed  and/or 
identifying 
information  to  protect  participants’  and  their  contacts’ 
privacy.  After  reading  through  all  transcripts  multiple 
times,  the  first  author  and  a  trained  research  assistant 
individually  coded  a  third  of  the  data  engaging  in 
grounded  theory  techniques  involving  open  coding  and 
memoing  [7].  They  met  several  times  to  discuss  their 
memos  and  issues,  and  made  modifications  to  the 
emerging  coding  scheme  as  necessary.  The 
two 
researchers  double-coded  a  third  of  the  interviews  with 
the  coding  scheme.  The  first  author  then  coded  and 
double-coded  the  final  two-thirds  of  interviews.  Coding 
took  place  in  the  analytical  software  Dedoose.  The  first 
author then pulled all excerpts and codes related to each 
research question into matrices for analysis [27]. 
Audience-Reaching Strategies 
RQ1 asked about the audience-reaching strategies people 
use when they have specific audiences in mind. Are users 
engaged  in  such  strategies?  If  so,  what  do  the  strategies 
look like? Participants highlighted a combination of social 
and technological strategies they employed to reach their 
target imagined audiences. In particular, users noted three 
main  strategies:  altering  the  script,  interacting  with  the 
imagined  audience,  and  taking  into  account  the  post 
timing. See Table 1 for an overview of the strategies. 
Alters Script for Target Imagined Audience  
Some  participants  noted  that  they  changed  the  way  they 
wrote a post to attract a target audience’s attention. This 
included  implicit  attempts  like  adding  a  message  to 

substituted  personally 

1491

provide  “context”  (P28)  when  posting  a  link  because 
people felt their imagined audiences were more likely to 
read  their  posts,  as  well  as  more  explicit  attempts  like 
altering  the  post  language  from  English  to  another 
language, or stating the audiences’ names in the post.  
Describing his “very intentional” post-sharing process, a 
25-year-old  college-educated  man  discussed  how  he 
“crafts” his post to reach his imagined audience: 
“And so I think through, okay which ones, like who is this 
[post] most applicable to . . . and then I think about, how 
do I—what kind of language do I have to use around this 
so that I can get like people to think about it in the most 
effective way.” (P9) 
Similarly a 31-year-old with a medical degree posted the 
same link on Facebook and LinkedIn, but he altered the 
message  and  used  “appropriate  wording  for  each  post” 
for his different imagined audiences for the two sites (P7). 
A  61-year-old  woman  with  a  master’s  degree  also 
changed  her  post  so  that  it  would  be  accessible  for  her 
target imagined audience: 
“I  actually  labeled  it  Throwback  Thursday  rather  than 
TBT and I did that intentionally because I wasn’t sure if it 
was an international thing or not, or I wasn’t sure if my 
international friends would know what TBT was or why I 
was doing that, so I did that intentionally.” (P19) 
A  couple  of  participants  discussed  how  they  signal  the 
target 
the  post 
language.  An  undergraduate  student  described  how  he 
used his posting language to notify which sub-audiences 
should pay attention, and which can tune out:  
“Like  yes  if  I  am  writing  this  in  Portuguese  that  means 
it’s aimed at people who speak Portuguese, and not like—
basically  I  mean  this  is  not  relevant  for  Americans  in 
many ways.” (P3) 
Others  discussed  explicitly  calling  out  the  imagined 
audience in their posts so the target audience would know 
to pay attention. For instance, a 75-year-old woman with 
an associate’s degree wrote a post to her classmates and 
started off the post with the high school name and “Class 
of  1957”  (P27).  Other  participants  used  steganography-
like references to catch their imagined audience’s eye like 
inside jokes, nicknames, and private information. 
Interacts with Target Imagined Audience  
Some participants also utilized the technology to reach the 
imagined  audience.  These  strategies  included  interacting 
with  the  target  imagined  audience  during  the  process, 
such  as  by  tagging  the  audience,  engaging  with  its 
content, or using relevant hashtags. 
The  majority  of  these  interactions  involved  tagging,  or 
technologically  linking,  the  target  audience  so  that  the 
post.
audience  would 

imagined  audience 

through  altering 

the 

be 

notified 

of 

SESSION: UNPACKING SOCIAL NETWORKS

Definition 

Strategy 
Alters script  Changes the 
content of the 
post. 

Interacts 
with 
imagined 
audience 

Takes into 
account 
performance 
timing 

Directly 
engages with 
the imagined 
audience 
during posting. 
Considers the 
time during 
posting. 

Examples 
- Specifies the imagined audience 
- Changes the post language 
- Uses steganography (e.g., inside 
jokes) 
- Includes text/image/audio 
- Tags the imagined audience 
- Uses a hashtag popular among 
the imagined audience 
- Engages with the imagined 
audience’s content 
- Posts at certain times because 
the imagined audience will be on 
-  Does  not  post  at  certain  times 
because  the  imagined  audience 
will not be on 

Quote 
“I  preface  the  thing  [the  post]  by  saying  who  it’s 
aimed at.” (P3, 21-year-old man in college) 

“I’ll do the tag if I want to make sure certain people 
see it, because I know that not everybody sees every 
Facebook  post.”  (P25,  38-year-old  man  with  a 
college education) 

“I  know  that  everybody  in  the  office  will  be  on 
Facebook that day looking at Facebook . . . I wouldn’t 
necessarily post work photos on a Sunday.” (P24, 37-
year-old woman with some college education)  

Table 1. Strategies for reaching the imagined audience. Categories are not mutually exclusive. 

As a 34-year-old man with a master’s education noted: 
“I’ve kind of noticed that I am tagging people more just 
because  I  realize  that  that  feature  is  beneficial  and  you 
can—instead of hoping that someone will see it, you can 
guarantee  that  they’ll  see  it,  so  that’s  the  reason  that  I 
will tag.” (P20) 
A  38-year-old  college  graduate  posted  a 
link  on 
Facebook,  and  his  specific  imagined  audience  consisted 
of a friend. When asked why he tagged his friend, he said:  
“I always will tag people if I think there are people who 
really need to see a post.”  (P25) 
On Twitter, the same participant noted different strategies 
he uses for audience targeting: 
“You do an at [@] whereas you do a plus at [+@] if you 
want it to be more public.” (P25)  
While  a  few  participants  tagged  in  hopes  of  broadening 
their audience, some did not take into account that tagging 
sometimes  impacted  the  potential  audience’s  reach.  For 
instance,  on  Facebook  tagging  can  also  expand  the 
potential  audience  to  the  tagged  individual’s  network. 
When  the  interviewer  asked  a  participant,  a  34-year-old 
with a master’s degree, if he knew whether tagging had an 
effect on who could see his Facebook post, he said: 
“I  don’t  know  for  sure,  that’s  something  I  probably 
should look into.” (P20)  
A  small  minority  of  participants  also  discussed  using 
tactics  like  engaging  with  a  target  imagined  audience’s 
content  so  that  audience  members  would  in  turn  look  at 
their  content.  A  few  also  discussed 
incorporating 
hashtags. The hope was that the target imagined audience 
would  search  for  that  particular  hashtag  and  reach  the 
content.  For  instance,  a  30-year-old  college-educated 

woman posted a link to a music video about body image 
on Twitter and her imagined audience consisted of fans of 
the  band  as  well  as  “plus-size  women.”  To  attract  her 
imagined  audience,  she  included  hashtags  in  her  tweet 
that referenced the band as well as “#plussize,” which she 
did  “so  that  they  were  included”  as  the  audience. 
Providing  more  context  for  the  strategy,  which  she  used 
several times during the study, she said:  
“I hashtag things . . . when I am trying to bring in mental 
health people. . . . So whenever something is about mental 
health, or that is one of the subjects, I just hashtag [using 
a mental health hashtag], and I hope to see more mental 
health followers.” (P2) 
Considers the Timing of the Performance 
Finally, a few participants talked about the role of timing 
when trying to reach a target audience. For instance, a 25-
year-old  college-educated  woman  described  her  target 
imagined audience as “Friends and family” as she posted 
a  new  profile  photo  and  noted  that  she  considers  the 
timing (“in the evening”) when sharing profile photos so 
that such a post “gets the most traction [laughs]” (P1).  
One 64-year-old woman with a master’s degree also noted 
that in an effort to reach a specific friend as the target, she 
liked to post “on the right day” (P18). 
Some participants noted that while they were not strategic 
about  timing,  they  sometimes  used  it  as  a  rationale  for 
why  they  did  not  hear  from  an  imagined  audience.  For 
instance  a  28-year-old  graduate  student  posted  about  a 
television  show  and  when  there  was  no  interaction  from 
her imagined audience, she said: 
“Ah, probably a lot of people haven’t watched it yet, so 
they might not like it yet.” (P16)  

1492

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Speaking more generally about timing, a 34-year-old man 
said: 
“Sometimes  if  I  post  something  and  I  don’t  see  a  big 
response,  I’m  like  oh  I  guess  I  posted  it  at,  you  know, 
middle  of  the  day,  where  everyone’s  working.  And 
certainly I’ve noticed that if you post maybe late, late at 
night  when  everyone  wakes  up  in  the  morning  and  they 
check  Facebook,  that  is,  you  do  typically  get  a  better 
response [laughs].” (P28) 
Audience-Limiting Strategies 
RQ2  inquired  about  the  strategies  people  use  to  exclude 
people outside of their target imagined audiences. While 
audience-reaching  strategies  included  both  social  and 
technological  tactics,  users  mainly  engaged  in  social 
audience-limiting  strategies.  The  most  common  limiting 
strategy discussed was the use of social steganography, in 
which the post was technologically accessible by anyone, 
but  socially  accessible  by  the  targeted  audience  only.  A 
34-year-old with a doctorate posted a quote on Facebook, 
and  while  his  imagined  audience  of  “close  friends,” 
understood the meaning behind the quote, he stated: 
 “No  one  else  would  really  infer  what  was  going  on.” 
(P28) 
People  used  such  steganographic  practices  as  both  an 
audience-reaching  and  audience-limiting  strategy.  A  51-
year-old  woman  used  a  nickname  in  a  post  to  attract  an 
imagined  audience’s  attention,  and  described 
the 
reaching/limiting strategy more generally like this: 
“At  times,  you  know,  if  it’s  like  a  private  joke  or 
something, or a reference to something that maybe we’ve 
talked about before, I will maybe post it in a different way 
or type it with quotation marks or spell it a different way 
so  that  it  will  be  in  reference  to  something  we  have 
discussed  before.  Kind  of  like,  hey,  here’s  a  little 
reminder  of  the  joke  we  got  about  blah,  blah,  blah,  you 
know.  So  not  everyone  will  get  it,  but  that  person  will 
understand what I mean.” (P6) 
Beyond sometimes engaging in steganographic practices, 
users  were  less  likely  to  report  using  technological 
strategies, like blocking, customizing privacy settings, or 
using  groups  and  lists  to  exclude  people  outside  of  the 
imagined  audience.  While  some  discussed  using  such 
practices more generally, the overwhelming majority did 
not  integrate  them  as  they  shared  the  posts  collected  in 
this study. Occasionally a few switched from “Friends” to 
“Public”  or  vice  versa  as  they  posted  on  Facebook,  but 
even  still,  most  participants  broadcasted  their  posts  to 
their  whole  networks  even  when  they  had  specific  sub-
audiences in mind. This was further confirmed by looking 
at  the  posts’  privacy  settings,  which  did  not  indicate 
 

 

1493

privacy setting customization. People seemed more likely 
to  engage  in  audience-reaching  strategies  to  reach  their 
imagined  audiences,  rather  than  strategies  to  limit  or 
exclude  people  in  the  potential  audience  who  were  not 
part  of  the  target  imagined  audience.  For  instance,  if  a 
person  posted  content  for  their  friends  and  family,  they 
may have engaged in strategies to reach their friends and 
family,  but  they  often  did  not  engage  in  strategies  to 
exclude  others,  like  their  professional  ties  or  communal 
ties, who also had access to such posts typically.   
Rationales for Sharing Beyond a Target Audience 
When  people  had  a  target  imagined  audience  in  mind, 
why did they not engage in more strategies to share only 
with  their  imagined  audience?  Why  did  they  knowingly 
share beyond their target audiences? How did they justify 
sharing  so  broadly?  In  response  to  RQ3,  participants 
provided  several  rationales  for  this  broad  sharing.  These 
rationales categorized into six major themes. For some it 
was  an  issue  of  skill,  for  others,  it  was  because  they 
wanted to reach an unknown secondary audience as well. 
Participants  sometimes  talked  about  more  than  one 
rationale, so the following are not mutually exclusive. For 
an overview of rationales, see Table 2. 
Reaching a Peripheral Audience 
The most commonly-emphasized rationale for why people 
shared  broadly  was  because  although  they  knew  their 
posts  were  mostly  relevant  to  a  sub-audience,  they  felt 
there  might  be  others  in  their  potential  audience  who 
would  also  find  the  post  relevant.  They  often  thought 
about  the  prototypical  people  or  groups  of  people  who 
would find the post relevant, but they thought there could 
be  others  who  would  also  be  interested.  However,  often 
they did not know nor care who exactly those others were. 
In  such  cases,  even  if  they  wanted  to  create  a  list  for  a 
target  imagined  audience,  they  might  not  know  whom 
specifically to include.  
For instance, a 31-year-old with a medical degree posted a 
link  on  Facebook  and  his  imagined  audience  was  a 
specific friend. He stated: 
“You  know  because  except  for  that  friend  I  didn’t  have 
anyone  specific  in  particular  in  mind  so  I  posted  it  on 
Facebook exactly so I could share it with a wider group 
of  people  because  I  was  sure  so  many  people  were 
looking for something like this.” (P7) 
Similarly a 50-year-old with a college education stated: 
“If I have in my mind that it’s a friends and family post, 
but choose to leave it public, it’s because it’s referring to 
something that I thought might be interesting to a larger 
group.” (P29)  

SESSION: UNPACKING SOCIAL NETWORKS

 

Rationale 
Reaching a peripheral 
audience 

Rated PG for all 
audience members 

Definition 
Shares broadly because there 
are others who should also be 
a part of the audience (but 
unaware of or do not care who 
those others may be). 
Shares broadly because 
content is appropriate for 
others, even if not relevant for 
everyone. 

Lacking the technical 
skills for a targeted 
performance 

Shares broadly because unsure 
of how to target a subset 
audience. 

Performance laziness 
and difficulty 

Relying on the 
audience or site for 
filtering 

Going where the 
audience is 

Shares broadly because it is 
easier than targeting the 
specific audience. 
Shares broadly because the 
audience will sort itself out or 
the site’s algorithm will target 
the right audience. 
Shares broadly because it is 
the only way to reach the 
imagined audience. 

Quote 
“I don’t think those things are only relevant to those people, I 
just think they’re specifically relevant to those people. So I’ll 
make sure that they see it, but I think, oh I enjoyed it, too, and 
other people might enjoy it, too, like in the case of that video.” 
(P25, 38-year-old man with a college education) 
“And anything that I post on Facebook, I’m okay with everyone 
seeing. I know there’s like filter options available where you can 
like put people into different groups and only have certain 
groups see stuff, but it’s not something that I ever saw was 
important for me to do privacy-wise.” (P4, 28-year-old man 
with a master’s degree) 
“I would have shared it with just family members if I knew how 
to do that completely. But I don’t mind it going to a broader 
audience.” (P27, 75-year-old woman with an associate’s 
degree) 
“And sometimes I just feel like if I create a list, it’s too much 
work.”(P21, 23-year-old woman with a college education) 

“I’ll just put it out there, and you know just cast the net, and 
hopefully the right fish swim into it.” (P28, 34-year-old man 
with a doctorate degree) 

“I didn’t really want to do it [tweet publicly to a politician], but 
I had to do it to get a hold of them because I couldn’t get a hold 
of them.” (P11, 55-year-old man with a high school education) 

Table 2. Rationales for sharing beyond the imagined audience. Categories are not mutually exclusive.

A  60-year-old  woman  with  some  college  education  also 
described why she shared a post for those who suffer from 
headaches to her whole network on Facebook: 
“I  don’t  have  a  problem  with  broadcasting  stuff  that  I 
think  will  be  helpful  to  people  .  .  .  I  knew  people 
personally,  but  then  I  know  there’s  a  lot  of  people  out 
there that do suffer like that.” (P13)  
A 34-year-old with an advanced degree posted a photo on 
Facebook  and  thought  of  his  brother-in-law  as  the 
imagined audience and tagged him. When asked to reflect 
on why he had shared it on Facebook if he was aiming it 
at his brother-in-law, he said:   
“I thought, yah it’s intended for this person specifically, 
but  I  think  that  it’s,  you  know,  interesting  enough  that 
others might stop and take a look at it.” (P20) 
Beyond sometimes not knowing which exact individuals 
belonged in their target imagined audience, many worried 
that they would miss out on something “interesting” from 
the  wider  audience  if  they  stuck  with  their  “typical 
expected  friend  group,”  as  a  23-year-old  woman  with  a 
college  degree  described  it  (P21).  A  49-year-old  man 
illustrated the same sentiment with an example: 

that 

“Just in case anyone else I know in Austin would say, hey, 
I’ve always wanted to go there, can I tag along?” (P26) 
A  subset  of  participants  also  highlighted 
the 
peripheral audience sometimes helped validate the post’s 
purpose.  For  instance,  a  51-year-old  woman  with  an 
associate’s degree shared a post to her whole network, but 
had her daughter in mind. She explained it like this:  
“You  know,  it’s  specific  to  this  one  person,  but  I  want 
everyone  to  know  about  it.  It  would  be  like,  I  guess, 
proposing while you’re on the jumbotron. . . . I guess it’s 
just a public display of private affection.” (P6)  
Similarly,  a  23-year-old  woman  with  some  college 
education  posted  about  a  family  fight  on  Facebook,  and 
thought about her sister-in-law as the target. The broader 
audience validated the sharing process for her: 
“In regards to that post, I feel like, she was on my mind to 
kind  of  like  settle  the  issue,  and  I  made  it  public  for 
everybody to see so it could kind of be like, like letting go 
of the issue. . . . So it feels kind of like, us letting go of the 
issue and just being okay because we made it public in a 
weird  way.  .  .  .  I  feel  like  having  an  audience  kind  of 
makes the issue disappear.” (P12) 

1494

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

In these examples, users had specific people in mind, yet 
they felt there were others beyond their imagination that 
should see the post. 
Rated PG for All Audience Members 
Another  common  rationale  for  sharing  broadly  was  that 
users felt their posts were appropriate enough to be seen 
by  any  of  their  contacts,  or  anyone,  and  thus  did  not 
“mind it going to a broader audience,” as a 75-year-old 
woman with an associate’s degree put it (P27). They were 
okay sharing broadly because they had already engaged in 
a  higher-level  privacy  management  strategy  of  self-
censoring. Even if participants felt a post was not relevant 
beyond  the  specific  audience,  as  a  50-year-old  with  a 
bachelor’s  degree  put  it,  he  could  not  “think  of  a  harm 
that” (P29) could come from sharing it more broadly. A 
61-year-old  woman  with  a  master’s  degree  described  it 
like this: 
“I don’t think I put stuff out there that I think would be, 
for  some  reason,  not  appropriate  for  anybody  to  see.  If 
it’s not then it shouldn’t be out there.” (P19)  
Participants  often  defaulted  to  sharing  broadly  unless  it 
contained really sensitive or inappropriate material. A 23-
year-old  woman  with  a  college  education  stated  how 
excluding people often did not even cross her mind: 
“I don’t really even think about posting it to a restricted 
group unless it’s something pretty private.” (P21)  
Similarly a 34-year-old with a master’s education stated: 
“It’s  not  necessarily  really  private  that  I  feel  like,  you 
know,  it’s  not  really  a  big  deal  to  share  it  through  a 
network where everyone can see it.” (P20) 
Overall,  users  shared  beyond  their  target  imagined 
audience in part because even though the content may not 
have  been  relevant  for  everyone,  such  bystanders  would 
not find the post inappropriate or offensive. 
Lacking the Technical Skills for a Targeted Performance  
Some  users  also  shared  broadly  because  they  lacked  the 
technical know-how to do otherwise. They did not know 
if  there  were  any  alternatives  besides  not  sharing  at  all, 
and if such capabilities existed, some did not know how 
to use them. A 64-year-old woman with a master’s degree 
assumed  the  only  way  to  directly  target  her  imagined 
audience  when  she  had  one  was  to  use  email  (P18).  A 
couple of participants were not confident that something 
such  as  the  list-  or  group-like  feature  existed  on  their 
social network site of choice. For instance, a 74-year-old 
man with a doctorate degree stated:  
“I would like maybe all of my postings go to [sic] close 
friends,  can  I  specify  people?  I  don’t  even  know.  Can  I 
specify people as close friends, and then have my postings 
only go to them? Or can I specify what a posting—who a 
posting will go to? That may be there, I don’t even know. 

1495

And it’s like, it’s not worth my time to figure it out. I don’t 
trust ’em.”  (P17)  
A  34-year-old  with  a  doctorate  also  discussed  how  if 
Facebook offered a feature like Google+ offers where you 
can  “separate  your  friends  out  into  these  circles,”  he 
would “definitely” use it (P28). 
Some  participants  were  aware  Facebook  offered  a  list 
feature, some had even used it, but some were “not quite 
sure how to limit it” as a 28-year-old woman in graduate 
school stated (P16). A 40-year-old woman with a college 
education discussed the feature’s usability: 
“I  just  wish  it  was  more  easy  [sic]  to  find—and  maybe 
even  where  you  could  somehow  strategize  it,  where  you 
can have these friends see this or that. I mean I guess you 
can, but I just never really have taken the time to really, 
to play around with it, and figure out what it all does. It 
just seems a little un-user-friendly.” (P15) 
Some  participants  also  mentioned  specific  posts  during 
the  study  where  they  would  have  shared  only  with  their 
target imagined audience had they known how to do so. 
For instance, a 75-year-old woman posted to her network 
information for her classmates. She said: 
“If it could have gone just to classmates, that would have 
been good, but . . .  I don’t know how to do that.” (P27) 
At least two participants also discussed how they shared 
broadly sometimes because they did not know how to get 
the  content  into  a  different  environment  than  where  it 
originated.  For 
the  75-year-old  woman 
mentioned above articulated it like this: 
“Okay so for example, if I’ve taken the picture and I want 
my  friend  Stacy  to  see  it,  then  it’s  under  my  complete 
control. I can just send it to her. . . . Something that I’ve 
seen on Facebook, I don’t know how to share it with just 
those specific people.” (P27) 
Similarly,  a  64-year-old  woman  with  a  master’s  degree 
discussed similar difficulties that would ensue if she saw 
something  on  Facebook  that  she  wanted  to  share  with  a 
subset of her contacts: 
“Like just say I see a cute Someecard so then I have to, I 
don’t really know how to do it, but I take a screenshot of 
it  and  then  I  have  to  send  an  email  out  so  I  gotta  go 
through, you know—I don’t have like a group or anything 
like that, so it’s just faster that way.” (P18) 
Finally,  while  the  majority  of  participants  in  the  study 
knowingly shared beyond their target imagined audience 
even if not by choice, there were a couple of participants 
who  were  not  aware  of  their  privacy  settings,  and  thus 
were oversharing much more than to their target imagined 
audience.  For  instance,  a  couple  of  participants  on 
Facebook thought their privacy settings were set to share 
with their contacts only, but in reality such settings were 
public.  A  few  participants  who  used  Twitter  were  not 

instance, 

aware  that  their  posts  were  publicly  available.  These 
examples  highlight  that  sometimes  sharing  widely  was 
not  a  choice,  but  it  was  in  part  dependent  on  a  person’s 
understanding of how the technology functioned.  
Performance Laziness and Difficulty 
Another rationale for sharing beyond the target imagined 
audience  was  apathy  for  using  any  sort  of  exclusionary 
tactic. A 21-year-old undergraduate student attributed it to 
a combination of “habit and laziness,” stating that for him 
“it’s  just  too  much  work”  to  segment  the  audience  (P3). 
Similarly a 28-year-old woman in graduate school stated, 
“I’m just too lazy to do otherwise” (P16). Or as a 34-year-
old with a doctorate degree described it: 
“Maybe it’s just the amount of effort needed to just share 
with a specific group.” (P28) 
Several  participants  noted  how  much  easier  it  was  to 
broadcast  than  to  target  a  specific  audience  in  whatever 
way.  For  instance,  a  50-year-old  man  with  a  bachelor’s 
degree stated that it was “the easiest way” to share a lot of 
information with “a diverse group of people,” particularly 
in comparison to “making 50 phone calls” or “sending a 

mass  email”  (P30).  A  49-year-old  man  talked  about 

creating a post that was only relevant to the people from 
his hometown, stating that it was “easier” to broadcast to 
his  entire  network  than  “try  to  look  up  everyone’s  cell 
phone  or  email”  (P26).  A  40-year-old  college-educated 
woman  also  highlighted  the  difficulty  that  arose  from 
trying to create lists on Facebook: 
“I had like a mom’s group and I had—but then it kind of 
got  .  .  .  like  I  wanted  certain  people  to  see  things—but 
they weren’t necessarily a mom—and I didn’t know where 
to  categorize  them,  and  then  there  were  certain  things  I 
didn’t want them to see, so it was like, it was too hard to 
remember all of that . . . Maybe if I could remember all 
the  people  that  I  put  on  different  lists  and  why,  you 
know—cause  even  with  some  of  those  lists,  I  have  some 
friends that are moms and they’re in my mom group, but 
then they’re a different religion, and I don’t want to say 
something that might offend them so it’s just, you really—
even when you have a list, it’s going to be very difficult to 
still do that I think.” (P15) 
Overall, users broadcasted broadly even when they had a 
specific audience in mind because it was easier to do so 
than to have to think about alternative ways to sector off 
their audience and only share with a sub-audience. 
Relying on the Audience or Site for Filtering 
People sometimes shared broadly because they left it up 
to  the  audience  or  the  site  to  filter  the  content  to  the 
targeted audience. In such cases users shared, and as one 
31-year-old  with  a  master’s  degree  stated,  then  just 
expected “the right people get to the right content” (P8).  

SESSION: UNPACKING SOCIAL NETWORKS

Some  participants  placed  the  burden  on  the  audience  to 
“self-select”  (P19).  A  21-year-old  undergraduate  student 
explained his philosophy like this: 
“People  who  don’t  care  about  it  will  just  scroll  over  it, 
and people who do, and who I’m aiming at, and who it is 
relevant  to,  will  hopefully  not,  and  they  will  react.  You 
know, let God sort ’em out sort of thing.” (P3)  
Such  people  noted  that  this  was  what  they  did  when 
looking at others’ posts. A 61-year-old woman stated: 
“Because I know that you can ignore me if you want to  
. . . you’ll scroll by just like I scroll by stuff.” (P19)  
Or as a 50-year-old man with a bachelor’s degree put it:  
“They  can  always  hide  it,  and  if  they,  as  a  habit,  don’t 
like  seeing  that  kind  of  thing  coming  through  from  me, 
they can limit the kinds of posts they get notifications of 
from me. So they’re in control of that.” (P29) 
Sometimes  users  shared  beyond  the  imagined  audience 
because they did not see it as their responsibility to filter 
their content or segment their audience.  
Going Where the Audience Is  
Finally,  a  handful  of  participants  noted  that  they  shared 
broadly out of necessity. This happened when participants 
needed  to  post  in  order  to  enter  into  a  contest,  and/or 
reach a certain audience. For example, a couple of times 
participants wanted to reach out to public figures, but they 
had no other way than to tweet at them publicly. As a 55-
year-old man with a high school education noted: 
“I  didn’t  really  want  to  do  it  [tweet  publicly  to  a 
politician],  but  I  had  to  do  it  to  get  a  hold  of  them 
because I couldn’t get a hold of them.” (P11)  
A  few  users  posted  broadly  on  Facebook  as  well  in  an 
attempt  to  reach  certain  people.  For  instance,  a  61-year-
old  woman  posted  photos  to  her  network  and  had  one 
particular person in mind, stating:  
“The only person I cared about seeing those pictures was 
his mother [the imagined audience], and she had it within 
10  minutes  and  shared  them  [laughs].  And  I  was  like 
okay, job done here, this is what I needed to do and it was 
right.” (P19) 
When asked why she felt she needed to share them with 
her  network  instead  of  emailing  or  sending  a  private 
message, she said, “Facebook is her life.” These examples 
demonstrate that sometimes users shared broadly because 
they felt they had no other choice if they wanted to reach 
a particular target audience. 
DISCUSSION 
This  study’s  findings  bring  to  light  information  on 
everyday  users’  audience  goals  and  strategies.  Although 
much privacy and audience work focuses on the audience-
limiting  strategies  people  use 
to  exclude  audience 
members, this research’s unique study design and diverse 

1496

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

sample  expands  the  audience  management  literature  in 
two important ways: (1) it helps expand our definition of 
audience  management  to  encompass  audience-reaching 
strategies,  and  (2)  it  provides  more  insight  on  audience 
management at the post level than past work has done. 
Audience  Management  Includes  Audience-Reaching 
Strategies, Too 
Although  most  privacy  and  audience-related  work 
explores people’s “preventative” [19], “risk management” 
[39], and “protective” [45] strategies, this work highlights 
that  people  are  also  engaged  in  strategies  to  reach  their 
imagined  audiences.  With  audience  goals  in  mind, 
everyday  social  network  site  users  engage  strategies 
similar to the ones broadcast professionals have long used 
to  target  their  audiences  [1,  11,  42,  44].  This  study 
highlights a list of these audience-reaching strategies and 
nuance  around  how  people  use  them.  Some  of  the 
targeting  strategies  illustrated  in  this  study  were  already 
hinted  at  in  prior  work  like  the  use  of  hashtags  [25], 
tagging [31], and language alteration [34]. However, this 
study provides additional audience-reaching strategies as 
well such as specifying the target audience by mentioning 
it  in  the  post,  using  inside  jokes,  interacting  with  the 
imagined audience, and considering timing. 
The Importance of Studying Audience Management at 
the Post Level 
While  this  work  describes  a  list  of  audience-reaching 
strategies people engage, it also focuses on the audience-
limiting  strategies  people  use  in  an  effort  to  block 
proactively 
targeted  audience. 
Although  much  research  has  looked  at  the  way  people 
manage 
this 
aforementioned  work  has  focused  on  people’s  general, 
hypothetical,  or  network-level  habits.  This  work 
contributes to the literature by focusing on the audience-
limiting practices people use when sharing specific posts. 
Although  participants  in  this  study  mentioned  using 
audience-limiting  strategies  identified  in  prior  research 
like  blocking  or  altering  privacy  settings  [4,  23,  29,  30, 
37, 39, 45, 46], these were not tactics participants in this 
study  regularly  noted  at  the  post  level.  While  they  may 
have  checked  up  on  their  privacy  settings  during  their 
social  network  site  tenure,  most  were  not  manipulating 
their  privacy  settings  each  time  they  posted  to  exclude 
those  outside  of  the  target  audience.  For  example,  if 
someone  had  in  mind  “pet  lovers,”  they  often  did  not 
create a list and only share with their contacts who love 
pets nor block anyone who was not a pet fan. 
The  only  audience-limiting  strategy  people  discussed 
explicitly  using  to  weed  out  non-targeted  audience 
members  was  the  steganographic  practice  of  encoding 
their posts with insiders’ information [26]. Prior research 
has  already  identified  the  importance  of  this  social 
strategy  for  teenagers  and  graduate  students  [26,  39], 
however,  this  work  confirms  the  importance  of  it  for  a 
group of diverse adults as well. This study also showcases 

their  audience  and  privacy,  most  of 

those  outside  of 

the 

1497

strategies, 

rather 

in  such  posting  behaviors?  Why  did 

that  steganography  functioned  as  both  an  audience-
reaching  and  audience-limiting  technique;  participants 
used steganographic insider’s information not only to get 
their  imagined  audiences’  attention,  but  also  to  exclude 
those  beyond  the  target  from  understanding  their  posts’ 
meaning and intent.  
By investigating audience management at the post level, 
our  findings  also  suggest  people  were  more  focused  on 
audience-reaching 
than  audience-
limiting strategies. Framed another way, rather than focus 
on  tactics  to  make  sure  certain  people  did  not  see  or 
understand  their  content,  they  used  tactics  to  make  sure 
certain  people  did  see  their  content.  By  implicitly  and 
explicitly  giving  cues  to  the  potential  audience  and/or 
algorithm  about  the  target  audience,  these  audience-
reaching strategies were attempts to get to “the right fish.” 
Knowingly Sharing Beyond the Imagined Audience 
What  the  aforementioned  results  suggest  is  that  people 
knowingly and regularly broadcasted posts that may have 
only been relevant to a subset of their potential audience 
with their whole networks (and beyond). So why did they 
engage 
they 
knowingly share such posts so broadly?  
Focusing on people’s rationales within the context of their 
shared posts, this study provides a list of reasons for why 
people  shared  broadly.  Similar  to  past  studies  focused 
explicitly  on  privacy  management  [17,  38,  39,  41],  this 
study found that people did not regularly use exclusionary 
tactics  in  part  because  of  the  skill,  time,  and  effort 
involved 
audiences. 
Additionally,  this  study  highlights  that  users  shared 
broadly because they had already engaged in higher-level 
privacy management through censoring their content, thus 
rendering  audience  management  at 
level 
unnecessary in their eyes, as prior research has also found 
[15,  25,  32,  38].  However,  by  exploring  this  research 
question  within  the  context  of  people’s  actual  shared 
posts,  this  study  identifies  additional  rationales  that  may 
be useful to researchers and designers. For instance, one 
of  the  most  common  reasons  for  sharing  broadly  was 
because  users  did  not  know  with  whom  specifically  to 
share a post. That is, although they had in mind the most 
relevant audience (e.g., “all who were interested in good 
cleaning tips”), they did not know which particular people 
in their networks fell into that category. Many also did not 
feel  it  was  their  responsibility  to  exclude  audience 
members, but that the filtering onus belonged to the site 
or  audience  members  themselves.  Finally,  sometimes 
people  did  not  engage  in  audience-limiting  strategies 
because  posting  broadly  could  function  as  an  audience-
reaching strategy when it was the only option to reach a 
target audience.  
An Irrelevance Quandary?  
Without 
strategies, 
participants  in  this  study  regularly  shared  their  posts 

audience-limiting 

their  diverse 

the  use  of 

in 

segmenting 

the  post 

broadly.  Although  many  had  engaged  in  higher-level 
privacy  management  strategies  like  self-censoring,  such 
sharing  habits  likely  led  to  actual  audiences  made  up  of 
people  beyond  the  target  audiences.  This  gives  some 
indication  that  people  may  routinely  share  irrelevant 
content with some of their audience members. While this 
study did not take into account the audience’s perspective, 
future  research  should  explore  if/how  such  irrelevant 
posting  habits  may  impact  the  overall  user/audience 
experience and relationships.  
STUDY LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
While  this  study  offers  a  highlight  of  what  some 
audience-management  strategies  entail,  the  list  is  likely 
not  exhaustive  and  future  research  should  continue  to 
explore these further including through the exploration of 
additional  social  network  sites.  For  instance,  while 
nobody in the study explicitly discussed paying to target 
their  posts,  some  platforms  allow  (e.g.,  Twitter)  or  have 
allowed  (e.g.,  Facebook)  everyday  users  to  pay  and 
promote their posts. Future work should also explore the 
prevalence of the strategies participants highlighted in this 
study, as well as which strategies may be most useful, and 
who  may  be  more  or  less  likely  to  use  them.  Relatedly, 
future work can explore the advantages and disadvantages 
of  each  strategy.  For  example,  while  some  of  the 
audience-reaching  strategies  participants  used  seem 
sophisticated  on  the  surface,  they  may  also  have  been 
overestimated  or  counterproductive.  For  instance,  many 
people tagged imagined audience members on Facebook, 
but  many  did  not  take  into  account  that  this  usually 
widened 
individuals’ 
networks.  The  disregard  for  the  audience  expansion  to 
others’ networks may also explain why tagging can lead 
to  awkward  or  embarrassing  moments  for  the  tagged 
individuals as prior research has found [24]. 
While this study had a diverse sample regarding age and 
gender,  and  studied  multiple  platforms,  participants  had 
more  experience  with  social  network  sites  than  most 
American adults online [9]. Additionally, future work will 
need  to  consider  alternative  and  creative  ways  (e.g.,  in-
person  observations)  to  study  the  social  network  site 
experience more holistically as it is possible exclusionary 
practices  like  lists  and  groups  play  a  larger  role  in  the 
overall  social  network  site  experience  than  portrayed  in 
these results (though prior research does not suggest this 
is the case [18, 19, 32, 41]). Finally, although this study 
utilized  survey  and 
interview  methods  as  well  as 
observations  of  people’s  social  network  site  practices, 
aspects  of  this  study  were  dependent  on  people’s  self-
reported responses. While such self-reported information 
typically aligned with their posts (e.g., if participants said 
they  tagged  to  reach  their  imagined  audience,  their 
associated  post  was  tagged),  as  with  any  self-reported 
data there may have been issues with recall, inaccuracies, 
and social desirability bias.  

their  audience 

tagged 

to 

the 

SESSION: UNPACKING SOCIAL NETWORKS

the 

typically 

instance,  because 

DESIGN IMPLICATIONS 
The  findings  shed  light  on  potential  design  and  user 
experience  implications  for  those  working  on  social 
network  site  technologies.  For  instance,  with  users 
highlighting their use of audience-reaching strategies and 
non-use of audience-limiting strategies for posting habits, 
rather  than  focus  solely  on  privacy  settings  or  lists,  one 
potential  solution  might  involve  altering  the  broadcast 
algorithm.  For  example,  social  network  sites  might  give 
posters the opportunity to tell the algorithm who the most 
relevant audience is more generally, or to whom the post 
should be broadcasted. This could come in the form of a 
box  where  users  submit  a  type  of  person  to  whom  to 
broadcast (e.g., “Share with my friends who like to run”). 
The broadcast algorithm would then use the information it 
has  in  other  forms  (e.g.,  profile  content)  to  broadcast  to 
the most relevant audience. Additionally, user experience 
teams  may  look  into  alternative  ways  for  posters  to  tell 
their  targeted  audiences  to  pay  attention  or  to  tweak 
current  ways.  For 
tagging 
functionality 
impacts  other  users’  online 
presence  and  can  expand  the  audience,  a  new  feature 
might allow users to broadcast their posts to their network 
while  quietly  notifying  target  audience  members  (e.g., 
similar to a BCC email mechanism). Additionally as this 
work  underscores  users’  interest  in  targeting  audiences, 
designers and engineers may look into giving users more 
metrics  and  tools  similar  to  those  that  professional 
broadcasters  regularly  use  (e.g.,  analytics  showcasing 
aggregated information about actual audiences).  
User  experience  teams  may  also  focus  more  on  the 
audience’s perspective. As this study demonstrates, some 
users  may  at  times  fill  up  their  contacts’  feeds  with 
irrelevant  content  as  they  broadcast  posts  that  may  only 
be  of  interest  for  a  sub-audience.  While  work  should 
continue  to  improve  audience-limiting  tools,  additional 
work can continue to explore alternative solutions that are 
less  cumbersome  and  remove  some  of  the  burden  from 
the  poster.  For  instance,  another  solution  might  involve 
training  the  algorithm  to  pick  up  on  imagined  audiences 
based  on  the  cues  people  leave  in  their  posts  (e.g.,  if  a 
person  posts  about  food,  the  algorithm  would  broadcast 
the post to those interested in food). Additional solutions 
may involve giving audience members more control over 
their  feeds,  beyond  options  to  universally  follow  or 
unfollow  individuals.  For  instance,  audience  members 
could  request  to  see  all  posts  about  certain  topics 
regardless of who shared them or request to not be shown 
posts  covering  certain  topics  (even  if  they  come  from 
close contacts). These design solutions are about helping 
people  reach  their  most  relevant  audiences  and  helping 
audiences receive the most relevant content.  
CONCLUSION 
Utilizing  mixed  methods  involving  a  diary  study  and 
follow-up interviews with a diverse group of adults, this 
research  explored  audience  management.  The  results 

1498

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

highlight that users engaged in several strategies to reach 
their targeted audiences, and rarely engaged in strategies 
to  technologically-limit  others  beyond  the  imagined 
audience. That is, people regularly shared posts that may 
have  been  relevant  for  a  specific  audience  with  their 
whole  network.  However  for  most,  this  was  a  conscious 
decision,  and  people  identified  several  rationales  for 
sharing broadly. Overall, this work highlights the need to 
study  audience  management  from  different  perspectives 
and levels of analysis as well as emphasizes the need to 
consider not only the strategies people use to limit access 
to  their  content,  but  also  the  strategies  people  engage  to 
garner access to their posts. As people increasingly turn to 
social  network  sites  to  share  their  life  updates,  people 
studying  and  building  such  technologies  should  stay 
attuned to users’ evolving audience goals and strategies. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We  are  grateful  to  Darren  Gergle  and  Jeremy  Birnholtz 
who  provided  integral  feedback  on  previous  versions  of 
this  project  as  members  of  the  first  author’s  dissertation 
committee. We are very thankful for the research support 
provided by Karina Sirota. Many people offered support 
and resources for this project including Brooke Foucault 
Welles,  David  Dworin,  Deen  Freelon,  Ericka  Menchen-
Trevino, Jeffrey Boase, Jens-Erik Mai, James G. Webster, 
Kelly  Garrett,  Luke  Hutton,  Miriam  Metzger,  Rachel 
Magee,  and  Sonja  Utz.  We  acknowledge  the  generous 
support to the first author from Northwestern University’s 
School  of  Communication  Graduate  Research  Ignition 
Grant,  Department  of  Communication  Studies  Graduate 
Dissertation  Research  Award,  and  the  TGS  Graduate 
Research  Grant 
the  Northwestern  University 
Research  Grants  Committee.  The  first  author  is  grateful 
for  the  time  and  resources  made  possible  thanks  to  the 
Facebook  Graduate  Fellowship, 
the  second  author 
acknowledges Facebook’s support through a research gift. 
We  also  give  a  big  thank  you  to  the  CSCW  AC, 
reviewers,  and  publications  staff  for  their  support,  time, 
and thoughtful feedback.  

from 

REFERENCES 
1. Ien Ang. 1991. Desperately seeking the audience. 

Routledge. 

2. Nancy K. Baym. 2013. Data not seen: The uses and 

shortcomings of social media metrics. First Monday 18, 
10. 

3. Michael S. Bernstein, Eytan Bakshy, Moira Burke, and 
Brian Karrer. 2013. Quantifying the invisible audience 
in social networks. In Proc. CHI, 21-30. 

4. danah boyd and Eszter Hargittai. 2010. Facebook 
privacy settings: Who cares? First Monday 15, 8. 

5. Petter Bae Brandtzæg, Marika Lüders, and Jan Håvard 
Skjetne. 2010. Too many Facebook “friends”? Content 
sharing and sociability versus the need for privacy in 

social network sites. International Journal of Human-
Computer Interaction 26, 11-12: 1006-1030. 

6. Eric C. Cook and Stephanie D. Teasley. 2011. Beyond 

promotion and protection: creators, audiences and 
common ground in user-generated media. In Proc. 
iConference, 41-47. 

7. Juliet Corbin and Anselm Strauss. 2008. Basics of 

qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for 
developing grounded theory. Sage. 

8. Ralf De Wolf and Jo Pierson. 2014. Who’s my audience 
again? Understanding audience management strategies 
for designing privacy management technologies. 
Telematics and Informatics 31, 4: 607-616. 

9. Maeve Duggan, Nicole B. Ellison, Cliff Lampe, 

Amanda Lenhart, and Mary Madden. 2015. Social 
media update 2014. Pew Internet & American Life 
Project.  

10. eBizMBA. 2013. Top 15 most popular social 

networking sites. Retrieved July 2013 from 
http://www.ebizmba.com/articles/social-networking-
websites 

11. Herbert J. Gans. 2004. Deciding what's news: A study 
of CBS Evening News, NBC Nightly News, Newsweek, 
and Time. Northwestern University Press. 

12. Greg Guest, Arwen Bunce, and Laura Johnson. 2006. 

How many interviews are enough? An experiment with 
data saturation and variability. Field methods 18, 1: 59-
82. 

13. Eszter Hargittai and Yuli Patrick Hsieh. 2012. Succinct 

survey measures of Web-use skills. Social Science 
Computer Review 30, 1: 95-107. 

14. Eszter Hargittai and Eden Litt. 2013. New strategies 

for employment? Internet skills and online privacy 
practices during people’s job search. IEEE Security & 
Privacy 11, 3: 38-45. 

15. Bernie Hogan. 2010. The presentation of self in the age 

of social media: Distinguishing performances and 
exhibitions online. Bulletin of Science, Technology & 
Society 30, 6: 377-386. 

16. Sanjay Kairam, Mike Brzozowski, David Huffaker, 

and Ed Chi. 2012. Talking in circles: Selective sharing 
in Google+. In Proc. CHI, 1065-1074. 

17. Pamela Wisniewski, David C. Wilson, and Heather 

Richter Lipford. 2011. A new social order: 
Mechanisms for social network site boundary 
regulation. In Proc. AMCIS. 

18. Patrick Gage Kelley, Robin Brewer, Yael Mayer, 
Lorrie Faith Cranor, and Norman Sadeh. 2011. An 
investigation into facebook friend grouping. In ed. 
Human-Computer Interaction–INTERACT. Springer. 
19. Airi Lampinen, Vilma Lehtinen, Asko Lehmuskallio, 

and Sakari Tamminen. 2011. We're in it together: 

1499

interpersonal management of disclosure in social 
network services. In Proc. CHI, 3217-3226. 
20. Airi Lampinen, Sakari Tamminen, and Antti 

Oulasvirta. 2009. All my people right here, right now: 
Management of group co-presence on a social 
networking site. In Proc. GROUP, 281-290. 

21. Eden Litt. 2015. The imagined audience: How people 

think about their audience and privacy on social 
network sites. Northwestern University. 

22. Eden Litt. 2012. Knock, knock. Who's there? The 

imagined audience. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media 56, 3: 330-345. 

23. Eden Litt. 2013. Understanding social network site 

users' privacy tool use. Computers in Human Behavior 
29, 4: 1649–1656. 

24. Eden Litt, Erin Spottswood, Jeremy Birnholtz, Jeffery 

T. Hancock, Madeline E. Smith, and Lindsay 
Reynolds. 2014. Awkward encounters of an “other” 
kind: Collective self-presentation and face threat on 
Facebook. In Proc. CSCW, 449-460. 

25. Alice E. Marwick and danah boyd. 2011. I tweet 

honestly, I tweet passionately: Twitter users, context 
collapse, and the imagined audience. New Media & 
Society 13, 1: 114-133. 

26. Alice E. Marwick and danah boyd. 2014. Networked 

privacy: How teenagers negotiate context in social 
media. New Media & Society 16, 7: 1051-1067. 

27. Matthew B. Miles and A. Michael Huberman. 1994. 
Qualitative data analysis: An Expanded Sourcebook. 
Sage. 

28. Maria Murumaa and Andra Siibak. 2012. The 

imagined audience on Facebook: Analysis of Estonian 
teen sketches about typical Facebook users. First 
Monday 17, 2. 

29. Xinru Page, Alfred Kobsa, and Bart P. Knijnenburg. 

2012. Don't disturb my circles! Boundary preservation 
is at the center of location-sharing concerns. In Proc. 
ICWSM, 266-273. 

30. Jorge Peña and Nicholas Brody. 2014. Intentions to 

hide and unfriend Facebook connections based on 
perceptions of sender attractiveness and status updates. 
Computers in Human Behavior 31: 143-150. 

31. Bryan Semaan, Heather Faucett, Scott Robertson, Misa 

Maruyama, and Sara Douglas. 2015. Navigating 
imagined audiences: Motivations for participating in 
the online public sphere. In Proc. CSCW, 1158-1169. 

32. Manya Sleeper, Rebecca Balebako, Sauvik Das, 

Amber Lynn McConahy, Jason Wiese, and Lorrie Faith 
Cranor. 2013. The post that wasn't: exploring self-
censorship on facebook. In Proc. CSCW, 793-802. 

SESSION: UNPACKING SOCIAL NETWORKS

33. Frederic Stutzman and Woodrow Hartzog. 2012. 

Boundary regulation in social media. In Proc. CSCW, 
769-778  

34. Dai Tang, Tina Chou, Naomi Drucker, Adi Robertson, 

William C. Smith, and Jeffery T. Hancock. 2011. A 
tale of two languages: Strategic self-disclosure via 
language selection on Facebook. In Proc. CSCW, 387-
390. 

35. Mike Thelwall. 2011. Privacy and gender in the social 

web. In Privacy online: Perspectives on privacy and 
self-disclosure in the social web, Sabine Trepte and 
Leonard Reinecke (eds.). Springer, 251-265. 

36. Jan E. Trost. 1986. Statistically nonrepresentative 

stratified sampling: A sampling technique for 
qualitative studies. Qualitative sociology 9, 1: 54-57. 
37. Jessica Vitak. 2012. The impact of context collapse 

and privacy on social network site disclosures. Journal 
of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 56, 4: 451-470. 
38. Jessica Vitak, Stacy Blasiola, Sameer Patil, and Eden 
Litt. 2015. Balancing audience and privacy tensions on 
social network sites. International Journal of 
Communication 9: 1485–1504. 

39. Jessica Vitak and Jinyoung Kim. 2014. "You can't 
block people offline": Examining how facebook's 
affordances shape the disclosure process. In Proc. 
CSCW, 461-474. 

40. Yi-Chia Wang, Moira Burke, and Robert E. Kraut. 

2013. Gender, topic, and audience response: an 
analysis of user-generated content on facebook. In 
Proc. CHI, 31-34. 

41. Jason Watson, Andrew Besmer, and Heather Richter 

Lipford. 2012. +Your circles: sharing behavior on 
Google+. In Proc. SOUPS. 

42. James G. Webster. 2014. The marketplace of attention: 
How audiences take shape in a digital age. MIT Press. 

43. James G. Webster, Patricia F. Phalen, and Lawrence 

W. Lichty. 2014. Ratings analysis: audience 
measurement and analytics. Routledge. 

44. James G. Webster and Jacob Wakshlag. 1985. 

Measuring exposure to television. In Selective exposure 
to communication, Dolf Zillmann and Jennings Bryant 
(eds.). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 35-62. 

45. Pamela Wisniewski, Heng Xu, Heather Lipford, and 
Emmanuel Bello-Ogunu. 2015. Facebook apps and 
tagging: The trade‐off between personal privacy and 
engaging with friends. Journal of the Association for 
Information Science and Technology. 

46. Alyson L. Young and Anabel Quan-Haase. 2009. 

Information revelation and internet privacy concerns 
on social network sites: A case study of facebook. In 
Proc. C&T, 265-274. 

 

1500

