CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Analyzing Organizational Routines in Online Knowledge
Collaborations: A Case for Sequence Analysis in CSCW

Brian C. Keegan,1 Shakked Lev,2 Ofer Arazy 2,3

1 Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA

2 Department of Information Systems, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel
3 School of Business, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada

bkeegan@acm.org, levshakked@gmail.com, oarazy@is.haifa.ac.il

ABSTRACT
Research into socio-technical systems like Wikipedia has
overlooked important structural patterns in the coordination
of distributed work. This paper argues for a conceptual re-
orientation towards sequences as a fundamental unit of analy-
sis for understanding work routines in online knowledge col-
laboration. We outline a research agenda for researchers in
computer-supported cooperative work (CSCW) to understand
the relationships, patterns, antecedents, and consequences of
sequential behavior using methods already developed in ﬁelds
like bio-informatics. Using a data set of 37,515 revisions
from 16,616 unique editors to 96 Wikipedia articles as a case
study, we analyze the prevalence and signiﬁcance of differ-
ent sequences of editing patterns. We illustrate the mixed
method potential of sequence approaches by interpreting the
frequent patterns as general classes of behavioral motifs. We
conclude by discussing the methodological opportunities for
using sequence analysis for expanding existing approaches to
analyzing and theorizing about co-production routines in on-
line knowledge collaboration.

Author Keywords
Wikipedia; peer production; online knowledge collaboration;
sequence analysis; socio-technical system; organizational
practice; routines

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.3 Information Interfaces and Presentation: Group and
Organization Interfaces (collaborative computing, computer
supported cooperative work)

INTRODUCTION
Once upon a time, organizational researchers trafﬁcked in
platitudes that “X is an organization that works in prac-
tice, but not in theory” where X might be Linux, Wikipedia,
GitHub, or many other “open” production systems. Far from
being boundary cases with little “real world” relevance, the
replication of these models’ success across domains outside

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CSCW’16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02 $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819962

of software and encyclopedias has prompted the re-evalaution
of many core economic, psychological, and social frame-
works for organizations. In particular, concepts like “online
knowledge collaboration” and “commons-based peer produc-
tion” deﬁne organizational models where distributed mem-
bers self-organize to create knowledge-based goods in the ab-
sence of hierarchies or markets [10, 19].
While theories and methods from network science have been
brought to bear to understand the relationships that structure
online knowledge collaboration [3, 60], these predominately
adopt a static view of collaboration. Conversely, studies ex-
ploring the dynamics of how these collaborations emerge and
change over time often overlook the role of interaction pat-
terns in structuring these systems. Reconciling both of these
streams of research, sequences should become a fundamen-
tal unit of analysis for capturing how patterns of interac-
tion unfold over time into coherent structures capturing co-
production routines. Sequence analysis methods have been
widely used in biology and sociology for decades, and the
richness and scale of event log data available to HCI, CSCW,
and information system researchers naturally lend themselves
to such sequence analysis. In addition to adapting these quan-
titative methods from enumerating and comparing sequence
patterns, these sequences likewise invite qualitative inquiry to
contextualize their prevalence and interpret their role in struc-
turing socio-technical behavior. Despite its mixed methods
lineage and potential, sequence methods have largely been
overlooked for understanding questions about organizational
routines within online knowledge collaborations.
Complex organizational practices are composed of more ba-
sic behavioral patterns that are in many ways analogous to
the basic genetic sequences encoding complex proteins [25,
69]. Socio-technical systems like Wikipedia contain abun-
dant event logs encoding sequence data about the series of re-
visions made to artifacts (i.e., articles) by individuals (i.e., ed-
itors). Research into the temporal dynamics of online knowl-
edge collaboration has received sustained attention across
scholarship in HCI and information systems. Largely speak-
ing, this research has employed two primary approaches for
capturing system dynamics: (1) “aggregating” sequence logs
to represent a particular process, creating multiple “snap-
shots” of the process over time [63], or (2) “collapsing” se-
quence logs to calculate a pair-wise relationship between en-
tities (e.g. afﬁliation between users), often forming a network
of these entities and using social network analysis (SNA)

1065

techniques to study the structure of the network [37, 39, 30].
While our interest is analyzing the sequences of production
and coordination activities that make up work routines, this
prior work aggregates and collapses event sequences, thus
obscuring the sequential ordering and structures in longitu-
dinal records of co-production activities.
In this paper we
offer a general approach for representing and analyzing event
log data from peer production systems that employs methods
from sociology and bio-informatics in order to track behav-
ioral motifs and identify the routines of collaborative work.
In the following section, we review prior work from sociol-
ogy and organizational theory around organizational routines
to understand the dynamics of social change, and contrast this
line of scholarship with research that has examined the tem-
poral dynamics of online peer production communities. A
research agenda employing sequences within socio-technical
systems as a fundamental unit of analysis has the potential to
expand theories and methods for both established CSCW top-
ics like recommendation systems and crowdsourcing as well
as emerging CSCW topics like online education, citizen sci-
ence, and crisis informatics.
In order to illustrate our proposed framework, we describe a
case study that explores the co-production sequences. Build-
ing on theoretical frameworks of generative routines [18], our
empirical analysis focuses on the sequences of contributors
collaborating to create a Wikipedia article. Using a repre-
sentative sample of 93 articles from English Wikipedia, with
37,515 editing activities made by 16,616 distinct contribu-
tors, this case explores whether the co-production entails a
small cohort of editors who work closely together, or if con-
versely the production of content within Wikipedia is built
upon lengthy editing sessions by the same editor. Our anal-
ysis of the behavioral sequences reveal complex and non-
random patterns and shed light on the prevalence of behav-
ioral motifs (i.e., generative routines) that organically emerge
as contributors make choices about when and how to engage
in online knowledge collaboration. Towards the end of this
paper, we outline research questions in these CSCW topics to
be explored using sequence analysis methods.

BACKGROUND AND REVIEW
Sequence analysis shares a rich interdisciplinary literature
with psychology, economics, and sociology where it exam-
ines patterns within temporally-ordered data,
independent
variables that inﬂuence these patterns, and how these patterns
inﬂuence dependent variables. Critically, adjacent elements
of a sequence are typically not random, but have strong de-
pendencies reﬂecting topical, causal, or other latent similari-
ties [2]. Traditional sequence analyses may model the step-
by- step transitions between events or analyze the whole se-
quence of events by measuring distances between them, iden-
tifying unique sequences, or matching similar “families” of
sequences together. Sequence analysis methods have a rich
mixed methods history and have been used to model depen-
dencies in participation shifts during conversations [27], to
analyze reciprocated interactions on team performance [57],
and to suggest new ways to develop social theory [52].

1066

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

We note that the use of these methods for understanding or-
ganizational processes have primarily focused on production
and coordination in traditional co-located, synchronous, and
small-scale co-located organizations, which are fundamen-
tally different from the context of the current investigation:
distributed, asynchronous, and large-scale online knowledge
collaborations. Our goal here is to bridge the gap between
methodological developments in sequence analysis and their
potential to use large-scale event logs around online knowl-
edge collaborations to understand complex social processes.
This section reviews prior work on organizational routines
and their role in facilitating coordination, and connects it to
the research stream investigating temporal dynamics within
technology-mediated collaboration, as well as to the theoreti-
cal and ethnographic work that aims at understanding patterns
of interaction in online knowledge collaboration.

Organizational routines
Organizational routines are the primary means by which orga-
nizations coordinate work [8]. Coordination entails managing
dependencies between activities [47]. Organization design
theory suggests that coordination can be achieved through
a variety of mechanisms [28, 62], but points to organiza-
tional routines as the foundation of any work process that
involves coordination among multiple actors. Routines re-
fer to repeated patterns of behavior that are bound by rules
and customs and that do not change very much between it-
erations [20]. Routines are the product of explicit attempts
to design work practices; they are conducive in helping retain
organizational history, but they can also be a source of inertia.
An alternative view emphasizes the emergent and dynamic
dimension of routines that are referred to using evolutionary
terms like “adaptation” or “mutation [49].” Pentland and col-
leagues [51, 54] used grammar as an analogy to explain vari-
ation in routines: routines consist of rules that allow people to
select elements of a repertoire in order to construct a particu-
lar sequence of behavior. Feldman [21] suggested that newly-
introduced sequences of action can also lead to changes in
rules and procedures. She introduced agency into the notion
of routine and viewed routines as improvisational (or “per-
formative”). This perspective highlights the internal dynamic
of routines, where continuous change is the result of partici-
pants’ reactions to outcomes of previous iterations of the rou-
tine. Thus, such routines are not merely repetitive but are
generative because they are reﬁned and facilitate knowledge
co-production.
In an attempt to reconcile the two perspectives, Feldman and
Pentland [20, 53] present an ontology of organizational rou-
tines distinguishing between: (a) the ostensive aspect of a
routine embodies what we typically think of as the structure;
and (b) the performative aspect embodies the speciﬁc actions,
by speciﬁc people, at speciﬁc times and places, that bring the
routine to life. The structural/ostensive aspect enables peo-
ple to account for speciﬁc performances of a routine; while
the dynamic performative/dynamic aspect creates, maintains,
and modiﬁes those structural aspects. The relationship be-
tween structural and dynamic aspects of routines creates an
on-going opportunity for variation, selection, and retention of

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

new practices and patterns of action within routines. There-
fore, routines allow organizations to achieve the balance be-
tween adaptability and stability, affecting their abilities to
adapt to changing circumstances.
Studies of organizational routines typically involve ethno-
graphic case studies, offering rich interpretations of speciﬁc
practices, but a limited capacity to more broadly illuminate
the structure and dynamics of routines and patterns. More-
over, the sheer scale of digital trace data within long-term and
large-scale socio-technical systems’ event logs complicate
many traditional quantitative and qualitative research meth-
ods [3, 45]. Developing a more general framework requires
grammatical or lexical approach to explain the diversity of
routine elements and sequences across contexts and organi-
zations [25]. Such a “grammatical” approach integrating in-
depth ﬁeld studies with archival digital trace data would per-
mit a mixed methodological approach to triangulating across
levels of analysis, cases, and time.

Online knowledge collaborations
Online knowledge collaborations occur in the absence of tra-
ditional organizational mechanisms like stable membership,
convergence, sustained interaction, or shared goals, but in-
stead rely upon ﬂuid boundaries, norms, participants and in-
teractions [19]. Even so, empirical analyses of online knowl-
edge collaborations have largely adopted a static view of mo-
tivations, roles, and routines, ignoring how work unfolds and
changes over time in relation to other events [13]. The suc-
cess of peer production systems primarily relying upon dis-
tributed, volunteer labor can be understood by examining the
artifacts within these collaborations as the focal point where
small, self-motivated contributions gradually accumulate and
inspire others to contribute in kind [34]. Collaborators in
online knowledge collaborations negotiate tensions between
changing and retaining established artifacts within systems
by adopting specialized roles, shifting production foci, and
employing identiﬁable action patterns [38].
Online knowledge collaborations like Wikipedia and open
source development projects rely upon detailed records of
contribution and communication patterns. Many socio-
technical systems archive records and other meta-data about
changes in the state of the system into event logs. These data
are valuable for contributors to trace changes across versions
of documents [24], to evaluate others’ contributions [61], and
to build additional tools to support collaboration [17]. Users’
contributions drive the development of artifacts within the
system, but these contributions also re-shape the governance
mechanisms among developers, portending new roles and
capacities within the online community [14]. This agency
versus structure tension manifests as a changing emphasis
between experimenting with new ideas and processes on the
one hand [48] and supporting stable organizational routines
and social roles on the other [23, 29]. Event log data captures
these complex interactions, by encoding both the agency of
contributors to act across artifacts and respond to others’
contributions as well as recording events that structure the
community such as the development of rules.

Sequence analysis
Following calls to analyze the micro-level processes of peer
production systems [44] and despite the reliance on event logs
to understand how work processes and roles are structured
over time in prior research [29], these analyses have largely
ignored the role of detailed sequences in log data and over-
looked the temporal and artifact-related dependencies. Prior
research investigating co-production dynamics has either ag-
gregated sequence log to represent a particular process, cre-
ating multiple “snapshots” of the process over time, or “col-
lapsed” sequence logs to calculate a pair-wise relationship be-
tween entities, forming a network of these entities and using
social network analysis techniques to study the structure of
the network [37, 39, 30]. Less relevant to our investigation
are prior works that employed information visualization tech-
niques –– rather than a formal knowledge representation ––
to depict the dynamics of collaborative work [18, 59, 65].
Few studies have gone further to provide a more detailed ac-
count of temporal dynamics within peer-production through
the combination of the two approaches highlighted above and
by generating a series of temporal snapshots of network struc-
ture [31]. While these prior works capture some aspects of the
temporal dynamics underlying peer production, they aggre-
gate and collapse event sequences, rather than analyze pat-
terns within sequences of co-production routines. Another
relevant stream of research has analyzed patterns within event
sequences, but was restricted to a single phase transitions, for
example in studying activity [67], contributor [50] or role [7]
transitions.1 Despite the various approaches for studying tem-
poral dynamics in online production communities [23, 31,
36], research in the area –– in particular, peer production –
– has not yet developed approaches and methods for identi-
fying patterns of co-production activities from event log se-
quences [25]. Few recent studies have attempted to either an-
alyze multi-stage transitions from event log data [26] or apply
sequence methods from bio-informatics [4, 25, 69]. Nonethe-
less, these studies have employed simple knowledge repre-
sentation schemes, often with an event of a single type.
Our goal in this paper is to extend existing approaches to se-
quence analysis by proposing a general framework for ana-
lyzing multi-stage and multi-type co-production routines, by
employing event log sequences and relying on methods com-
mon in bio-informatics. Because event logs within online
knowledge collaborations encode meta-data about the who,
what, when, where, and how of socio-technical activities, an
analysis of sequence logs could reveal the routines within ar-
tifact coordination and co-production. As we detail in the
subsequent section, such event logs could allow researchers
to enrich the representation of behavioral changes and orga-
nizational structure at multiple levels of analysis while us-
ing a mixture of quantitative and qualitative methods. Much
as computational methods from natural language processing
or social network analysis enable researchers to extract new
features from a corpus of unstructured data, we imagine se-
quence analysis becoming a similar methodological toolkit
for researchers to interrogate data. In the remainder of the
1The restriction to a single phase transition is often associated with
the analytic approaches employed (e.g. Markov models).

1067

Activity
Edit type

Editor

Artifact Performer Order
Article
Time
1:01
2:02
3:03
4:04
5:05
6:06

U1
U2
U3
U1
U4
U1
Table 1. Example of an event log.

X
X
X
X
X
X

Rephrase Text (RT)
Change Markup (CM)

Add Content (AC)

Fix Typos (FT)

Add Vandalism (AV)
Delete Vandalism (DV)

RT

CM AC

F T

AV

DV

X

X

X

X

X

X

U1

U2

U3

U1

U4

U1

1:01

2:02

3:03

4:04

5:05

6:06

Figure 1. The event log in Table 1 can be represented as a sequence of
activities (top), artifacts (middle), or performers (bottom).

paper, we use a case study to explore the potential of quan-
titatively mining and qualitatively interpreting sequence data
derived from socio-technical event logs. Generalizing from
this case study, we outline a proposed research agenda for
employing large-scale event log data to understand the rela-
tionships, patterns, predictors, and consequences of sequence
data across various organizational phenomena. Finally, we
discuss the implications this research agenda has for extend-
ing sequence methods to empirically study and theorize rou-
tines in technology-mediated collaborations.

SEQUENCE ANALYSIS METHODOLOGY FRAMEWORK
The availability of detailed sequential event log data in large-
scale socio-technical systems provides substantial opportu-
nities to extend interdisciplinary empirical research around
routines in new organizational forms. Understanding the
distribution, evolution, and generative role of activity se-
quences within these systems can improve theories about on-
line collective action, distributed work, and shared gover-
nance. Socio-technical systems like Wikipedia record the
complete history of every change made to an article since
the ﬁrst edit as well as every revision made by any user.
Analogous event logs likewise exist for open source reposi-
tories containing histories of the commits from every user to
a project, and social networking sites archiving the history
of actions and posts users have made. These event logs con-
tain distinct records encoding a variety of meta-data related
to production (e.g., developing an encyclopedia article), coor-
dination (e.g., discussion around who should do what), user
interactions (e.g., comments by one user on another user’s
personal page), and governance (e.g., policy enforcement).
Given the diverse affordances of socio-technical systems,
we will bracket our proposed framework by focusing on
the modality of users collaborating to create artifacts (e.g.,
Wikipedia), although alternatives such as users managing re-

1068

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

lationships to facilitate interpersonal communication (e.g.,
Twitter) certainly exist. Following on prior work from “pro-
cess mining” that extracts information from event logs to un-
derstand how organizations manage business processes [64],
we employ four event log features to construct sequences that
capture organizational routines [63]:
Activity - A system action such as a revision to an article.
Artifact - An entity which is acted upon such as an article.
Performer - An entity executing the activity such as a user.
Order - An index deﬁning a sequence such as a timestamp.
A simple example of an event
log is given in Table 1
for contributions (“commits”)
from a variety of users
{U1, U2, U3, U4} to a single artifact X. As a generalizable
framework, we construct activities, artifacts, performers, and
order broadly. Activities are not merely edits or commits,
but the granting or revocation of permissions, creation of
new relationships, or instances of communicating between
users. Artifacts are not merely information-based products,
but may also refer to coordination elements of various types
like discussion or email threads or governance repositories
logging the history of permission, promotion, or enforcement
actions. Performers are not only single human users, but po-
tentially sub-users within an account (e.g., characters in an
online game) or automated users (e.g., anti-vandalism bots
on Wikipedia). Alternative frameworks emphasizing inter-
personal communication and relationships communications
might employ ego-to-alter elements as opposed to the user-
to-artifact constructs as well.

Step 1: Identiﬁcation of sequences
This event log of “users taking actions on an object” encodes
at least three kinds of sequences from Table 1: (1) the se-
quence of performers (e.g., users) who acted (U1–U2–U3–
U1–U4–U1), (2) the sequence of activities (e.g., commits) that
were taken (RT –CM–AC–F T –AV –DV ), and (3) the se-
quence of artifacts (e.g., articles from the set X) that were
acted upon (X–X–X–X–X–X). Each of these three se-
quence types are trivial when looking at the event log of a
single performer, the event log of a single activity, and the
event log of a single artifact, respectively. For example, Ta-
ble 1 represents a simple case of an event log related to a
single artifact, where there is meaningful variation in the se-
quence of activities (edit types) and of performers (users),
but no variation in artifacts (articles). Crucially, these three
sequences types have relationships with each other and may
also re-occur at other times within the same artifact’s event
log as well in other artifacts’ event logs. Figure 1 describes
the three types of sequences that could be derived from the
example in Table 1.

Step 2: Schematization of sequences
Once the fundamental elements representing online knowl-
edge production have been deﬁned, there is a need to for-
mulate a knowledge representation scheme that would cap-
ture the particular sequences of elements that are most rele-
vant for the speciﬁc research question at hand. For example,
questions pertaining to personal relationships between partic-
ipants and their social networks require that the representation

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

capture participants’ identities.
In contrast, research ques-
tions around the temporal evolution to the community’s or-
ganizational structure call for representing participants’ roles
and the timing of role-transition events (but not their iden-
tities). We deﬁne our knowledge representation scheme in
Table 2 with an example provided in Figure 2.

Step 3: Analysis of sequences
The third step in our proposed framework calls for the anal-
ysis of the extracted sequences. Quantitative methods devel-
oped independently in bioinformatics, natural language pro-
cessing, and sociology have independently developed and ex-
tended methods for analyzing similarities and variation pat-
terns of sequence data that could be employed to analyze se-
quential behavior across organizations [25, 69]. Methods in
this vein focus on three classes of analysis:
Pattern mining. Using enumerative and deterministic opti-
mization methods to discover the types and frequencies of
different sequences within a data set [15]. The number of
sequences and tests for their likelihood against some base-
line expectation can reveal important patterns [32].

Sequence similarity. A sequence’s similarity to other se-
quences can be evaluated based on notions of proximity,
where more deviations in the elements of one sequence
compared to the other implies a larger “distance” [16, 66]
using techniques such as dynamic time warping. These
might be represented as a “phylogenetic tree” clustering
similar sequences together or “dynamic time warping” to
represent continuous time series as a sequence of discrete
tokens, like letters [11, 46].

Probabilistic analysis. A sequence can also be the realiza-
tion of an underlying process that might generate alterna-
tive sequences as well [43]. Dynamic programming meth-
ods and Hidden Markov Models (despite their limitations)
analyze sequences to understand the probability of the ob-
served patterns as a result of transitions between ﬁnite
states [56].

Each of these methods reﬂect different modeling assump-
tions. While developed for domains other than online peer
production, these tools can generally be applied to sequence
data of any kind with substantial potential for generating
novel metaphors for understanding complex behavior [25].

Step 4: Interpretation of sequences
The ﬁnal step of our sequence analysis methodology frame-
work is to employ qualitative methods to interpret and trian-
gulate the observed patterns. Such qualitative analysis may
rely on secondary and archival data from the online com-
munity, interviews with community members [12], or a ﬁeld
study [36]. Employing qualitative methods allow for enrich-
ing the results obtained through quantitative sequences with
a deep understanding of the contextual factors contributing to
the observed patterns. Such a mixed method approach can
yield richer insights regarding the motivations and contexts
for co-production routines.

1069

U1

U2

U3

U1

U4

U1

E

E

E

C

E

B

1:01

2:02

3:03

4:04

5:05

6:06

Figure 2. The sequence from the example event log in Figure 1 (top) can
be schematized using the rules from Table 2 (bottom).

CASE STUDY
The focus of this empirical
investigation is the English
Wikipedia and its community of editors. In contrast to the
organization of work within traditional organizations, in the
creation of a Wikipedia article each contributor is free to gen-
eratively enact a role in the moment [19]. Thus, contribu-
tors choose not only when and if to participate in the co-
production process, they are also free to determine the exact
nature of their activity (with very few restrictions, e.g. a non-
registered member is not allowed to create a new Wikipedia
article). The goal of this case study is to explore a particular
aspect in co-production routines: the prevalence of different
sequences of editing patterns, using the contributor’s ID as
the focal point. Such an analysis has the potential to yield
insights regarding the number of contributors participating in
article co-creation and the sequences of their product-centric
interaction (e.g., discovering “ping-pongs” between contribu-
tors collaboratively improving the article).

Sample and Data Extraction
Our sample included 93 articles that provide a representa-
tion of Wikipedia’s topical categories and this sample has
been employed in earlier studies [6, 5]. The set of articles
was selected based on randomization and a stratiﬁed sam-
pling of Wikipedia’s topics, congruent with Wikipedia’s top-
level classiﬁcation [41] (categories: culture, art, and religion;
math, science, and technology; geography and places; people
and self; society; and history and events). From this original
set of 96 Wikipedia articles, 3 were discontinued and their
edit history is no longer available, leaving us with 93 arti-
cles. We tracked all activities to this sample of articles, from
each article’s inception until December 31, 2012. Altogether,
this data set includes 37,515 editing activities made by 16,616
distinct contributors.
Our investigation is primarily based on a large-scale quan-
titative analysis of Wikipedia system activity logs, which is
complemented with a qualitative analysis. While the quanti-
tative analysis is essential for identifying those patterns that
recur frequently and for drawing statistical conclusions, the
qualitative analysis allows for a deeper understanding as to
why and how co-production unfolds. For the quantitative
analyses, we employed data harvested from Wikipedia logs.
We queried the Wikipedia API recording the time and con-
tributor of each edit made to articles in our sample. In ad-
dition, we tracked the activity of all contributors who have
edited articles in our sample, recording key events in con-
tributors’ Wikipedia career (e.g., from the date of ﬁrst edit to
Wikipedia). For each editing activity in each of the articles in
our sample, we recorded the contributor’s ID and the timing

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Label Description

A

B

C

D

E

F

The contributor also made the previous
editing session in this article
The contributor was active in the edit-
ing session preceding the last session
The contributor was active in this arti-
cle 3-5 editing sessions prior
The contributor was active in this arti-
cle ≥6 editing session prior
The ﬁrst editing session of the contrib-
utor to this article
The ﬁrst editing session of the contrib-
utor in Wikipedia

Count % Size Duration Last session Last same-session
2,228

8% 705

2.00

3.15

2.00

1,835

6% 1447

1,350

5% 623

3,944

14% 812

19,562

68% 553

4

0% 429

0.89

0.94

0.75

0.75

1.25

1.71

4.61

4.64

11.66

6.25

4.8

26.2

192.4

n/a

n/a

Table 2. Coding system. Average session duration is measured in hours, average time since last session and average time since same user last session is
measured in days.

of activities. Each article was then represented as a vector of
temporally-adjacent sequential editing activities.
In addition, qualitative analysis was used in order to gain a
deeper understanding of a few recurring patterns as examples.
For this analysis, we employed a combination of manual and
automated methods, relying on both Wikipedia (e.g., using
the version compare tool to manually determine the nature
of the particular activity) and external resources (e.g., Web
activity related to the topic of a particular Wikipedia article,
as a means of identifying real-world events that may have
triggered Wikipedia editing activity).

Data representation
In order to analyze sequences of activities, it was essential
that we devise a consistent way for representing: (a) the fun-
damental unit of activity; and (b) a sequence of activities. We
chose an editing session as the basic unit of analysis, collaps-
ing sequential edits made by the same contributor within a
very short period of time [26]. Often, contributors would save
their edit-in-process, where each saved version is recorded in
Wikipedia log as a revision of the article.
We sought a more meaningful unit of analysis, and collapsed
sequential edits within the 10 minutes into a single edit ses-
sion. The 10-minute threshold was determined based on a
statistical analysis of time-between-edits. The time stamp of
the collapsed editing session was deﬁned as the duration be-
tween the timing for the ﬁrst and last edit activities included
in that session. Consider the example of a series of edits
made by user U1: U1(10:10)–U1(10:12)–U1(10:21); this edit
activity sequence will be collapsed onto the editing session:
U1([10:10,10:21]).
In investigating sequences in recurring
patterns, we process all articles in the data set together. After
collapsing all edit activity vectors, 28,923 vectors of editing
sessions remained.
In order to express sequences of activities (i.e., motifs), it was
essential that we devise a novel representation of contribu-
tor sequence motifs. Given our focus on the sequences of
contributors co-creating the articles, we needed to design a
generic motif representation that could represent similar se-
quences by different contributors. For example, consider the

set of four contributors {U1, U2, U3, U4}: we wanted to cre-
ate a single motif to capture the following similar sequences:

U1 − U1 − U2 − U2 − U3
U2 − U2 − U4 − U4 − U1
U3 − U3 − U1 − U1 − U2

These all represent 2 consecutive editing sessions by the same
contributor, followed by two consecutive sessions by a differ-
ent contributor, then followed by an editing session by a third
contributor.
The questions our representation tries to address are: (1) Who
is the person making the most recent edit? (2) Is it the same
person who has edited the prior edit? (3) An earlier edit to
the same article? (4) Or does this edit represent his ﬁrst activ-
ity in the particular article? While prior works have proposed
various approaches for representing co-production motifs in
Wikipedia, these motif representations were not appropriate
for the more general purpose. Our proposed motif represen-
tation traverses the editing session vectors for each article in
our sample, starting from the earliest session, and for each
editing session records the most recent time that same con-
tributor was active, as seen in Table 2.

Distribution of sequences
We begin by presenting descriptive statistics for motif labels
(see Table 2). We notice that the vast majority of sessions
(68%) represent a contributor’s ﬁrst-time activity in the par-
ticular article (label E), followed by labels representing a
non-recent activity by that contributor (D; 14%). The anal-
ysis of size of revision shows that revisions by the contribu-
tor making the edit session before the last (B) is the largest
(roughly 1500 characters; possibly indicating edit wars, see
details below), while those making the ﬁrst edit to Wikipedia
(F ) tend to make smaller changes. Consecutive edit sessions
by the same contributor (A) are of a longer duration, indicat-
ing that they are often composed of several edits. An analysis
of the time between editing sessions reveals that contributors
new to the article (E) tend to edit after long dormant periods
(on average, almost 12 days), contributors making the edit

1070

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

session before the last (B) often quickly re-act to the pre-
vious session (on average, under 2 days; representing ping-
pongs between contributors). Finally, an analysis of the times
between same-contributor sessions shows that inactive con-
tributors (D) often stay away from editing an article for pro-
longed periods (on average, over six months).
Table 3 below presents the most frequent motifs in lengths of
2-4 labels.2 As can be seen from these results, the vast major-
ity of motifs represent sequences of activities by editors new
to the article (label E), sometimes interrupted by an editing
session by a contributor that was active a while ago (D). This
is not surprising, given that 68% of single-label motifs rep-
resent new-comers (E) and sessions by inactive contributors
(D) are second most frequent.
A more telling statistics calculates those motifs that appear
substantially more (or less) times than what is expected by
chance alone. Assuming that the appearance of a label is in-
dependent of the appearance of the previous labels, this is
calculated independently for each motif length. That is, the
calculation of by-chance occurrence assumes there is no de-
pendency between sequential labels, such that the expected
frequency of every motif is simply the multiplication of the
frequencies of all its labels. For example, the expected fre-
quency of the motif B–C–A is 6% x 5% x 8% = 0.024%.
Our analyses identiﬁed those motifs that appear signiﬁcantly
above (or below) chance, using a two-tailed Z-test. We fo-
cus our analyses on the patterns that reoccur frequently in our
sample: 2-motif sequences reoccurring at least 200 times; 3-
motif sequences with more than 100 occurrences; and 4-motif
sequences with more than 50 occurrences. When calculating
statistical signiﬁcance levels for the Z-test, we apply the Bon-
ferroni correction: a statistical method for counteracting the
problem of multiple comparisons (family-wise error rate) [9].
The Bonferroni correction is very conservative, and comes
at the cost of increasing the probability of producing false
negatives, and consequently reducing statistical power. Thus,
statistical signiﬁcance after applying this correction suggests
that the null hypothesis could be rejected with very high con-
ﬁdence.
Table 4 below presents the most signiﬁcant (highest absolute
Z scores) for motifs of 2-4 labels (the frequency of all
motifs in this table is signiﬁcantly above/below chance at
p < 0.001; with Bonferroni correction). As Table 4 reveals,
those motifs that appear signiﬁcantly above/below chance
are quite different from the most frequent motifs described
in Table 3. We note that while few of the signiﬁcant motifs
are very common (namely sequences of E),
the other
statistically signiﬁcant motifs are less common. For example,
same contributor motifs (label A) appear signiﬁcantly more
than what is expected by chance alone: the motif A–A–A is
expected to occur in 0.05% of 3-label motifs, while it appears
1.69% of the times; Z-score = 131 (p < 0.001).

2We analyzed motifs of up to 10-label length, and in essence the
patterns observed for these longer motifs were quite similar to the
shorter motifs presented in the tables. Because of space limitations,
we decided to exclude these longer motifs from this paper.

Label

3rd

1st
2nd
E
E
E
D
D E
E
B
E
B
E
E
D
E
E
E
D E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
D
D E

Count Fraction

4th

14,003
2,789
2,686
1,014
1,003
10,469
2,024
1,873
1,742
7,973
1,397
1,383
1,348
1,227

48.6%
9.7%
9.3%
3.5%
3.5%
36.4%
7.0%
6.1%
6.1%
27.8%
4.9%
4.8%
4.7%
4.3%

E
E
D
E
E
E
E
D
D E
E
E
E
E

Table 3. Most frequent sub-sequences.

4

Label
1
3
2
A A
B B
E A
A E
E E
A A A
B B B
E E E
C B B
B A A
A A A A
B B B B
B A A A
A A A E
C A A A

Expected Observed Z-Score

0.59%
0.40%
5.21%
5.21%
45.74%
0.05%
0.03%
30.94%
0.02%
0.04%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.03%
0.00%

2.91%
1.36%
2.83%
3.48%
48.57%
1.69%
0.57%
36.42%
0.18%
0.25%
1.13%
0.29%
0.14%
0.43%
0.07%

51.2
25.7
-18.2
-13.2
9.6
130.8
58.2
20.1
19.6
18.6
323.5
121.9
41.9
38.0
35.2

Table 4. Most frequent sub-sequences and Z-scores. All sequences in
tables appear signiﬁcantly above or below chance at p < 0.001 (with
Bonferroni correction).

Behavioral motifs
A synthesis of the results presented above points to the emer-
gence of several typical motifs, which shed light on the na-
ture of co- contributor sequences in Wikipedia. In trying to
interpret the meaning of the emerging patterns, we rely on
qualitative analysis. Below, we describe the key patterns that
emerge and explain their implications for our understanding
of generative routines within peer-production.

Solo contributor motifs
Much of the production work in Wikipedia is the result of a
series of consecutive editing sessions made by the same con-
tributor. Despite same-user editing session (label A) to make
up only 8% from all labels, many of the multi-label motifs in-
clude a series of A labels. Commonly an A editing session is
the result of the collapse of several edits (on average spanning
3.15 minutes). It is interesting to note that even after collaps-

1071

4

Example

Count Z-Score

Label
1
2
3
A A
A A A
A A E
A A A A U1-U1-U1-U1-U1
A A A E U1-U1-U1-U1-U2

51.2
130.8
12.1
323.5
38.0
Table 5. Uninterrupted Same-contributor sequences, counts, and Z-
scores. All sequences in tables appear signiﬁcantly above or below
chance at p < 0.001 (with Bonferroni correction).

U1-U1-U1
U1-U1-U1-U1
U1-U1-U1-U2

839
487
245
325
122

4

Example

Label
1
2
3
B B
B B B
B B E
E B B
B B B B U1-U2-U1-U2-U1-U2
B B B E U1-U2-U1-U2-U1-U3
B B E E U1-U2-U1-U2-U3-U4

U1-U2-U1-U2
U1-U2-U1-U2-U1
U1-U2-U1-U2-U3
U2-U1-U2-U1

Count Z-Score

393
165
167
136
83
53
100

25.7
58.2
10.1
6.5
121.9
21.6
6.5

Table 6. Reactive contributor sequences, counts, and Z-scores. All se-
quences in tables appear signiﬁcantly above or below chance at p <
0.001 (with Bonferroni correction).

ing immediate same-contributor edits onto editing sessions,
we still observe in Table 5 an above-chance occurrence of se-
quences of label A. Often, A label editing sessions represent
a quick reaction to a previous editing session (average time
between is 2 days).
The literature on peer-production has paid little attention to
the nature of co-contributor sequences. A recent work on
open source software development projects suggests that (a)
the overwhelming majority of work is accomplished with
only a single programmer working on a task and (b) when
tasks appear too large for an individual they are more likely to
be deferred until they are easier, rather than being undertaken
through structured teamwork [34]. Our ﬁndings suggest that
Wikipedia, too, may rely on a single contributor work ses-
sions (as opposed to multi-contributor teamwork). This result
stands in contrast to earlier accounts of Wikipedia which de-
picted co-production as a tight networked co-authorship.

Reactive contributing motifs
The second interesting pattern we observe represents back-
and-forth editing sessions (“ping-pongs”) between active
contributors. Two-contributor ping-pongs may occur in im-
mediate sequence (e.g., B–B motifs) or may be interrupted
by a third user edit (e.g., B–C–B–B), and are characterized
by a short duration between editing sessions (1.7 days for B
label, compared to the 9-day average across all labels). As il-
lustrated in Table 6, such motifs occur signiﬁcantly more than
what is expected by chance alone.
Remarkably, despite the underlying assumption that large-
scale technology-mediated online collaborations are the re-
sult of multiple contributors working together, the literature
on Wikipedia – and more broadly, studies of online produc-

1072

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

4

Example

Label
1
2
3
E E
E E E
E E E E U1-U2-U3-U4

U1-U2
U1-U2-U3

Count Z-Score

14,003
10,469
7,973

9.6
20.1
28.7

Table 7. Common inactive contributor sequences, counts, and Z-scores.
All sequences in tables appear signiﬁcantly above or below chance at
p < 0.001 (with Bonferroni correction).

tion communities – have rarely provided empirical accounts
of co-production work that involves a restricted set of indi-
viduals working together. Interestingly, the one form of ping-
pong that has been discussed in prior studies concerns de-
structive editing activities (e.g., edit wars between vandals
and vandalism ﬁghters) [41, 65, 68].
A qualitative analysis of a selective set of “ping-pong” mo-
tifs shows that many of those motifs correspond to edit wars
(in almost all cases, the vandal was a non-registered member,
identiﬁed only by his IP address). For example, an analysis
of the “Flying Car” article found that active-contributor se-
quences entailed vandalism-revert edit wars in August 2006
(4 vandalism edits, each followed by a revert), June 2007
(3 vandalism-revert pairs), and May 2008 (vandalism-revert-
vandalism-revert). Label B is characteristic of these ping-
pongs and reﬂects an average large edit (over 1400 charac-
ters; more than double the average size of all labels), pos-
sibly reﬂecting ‘revert’ type edits (which are the size of the
entire article content). Nonetheless, we did also observe few-
and-active contributor sequences that represent consecutive
sessions by constructive activity. For example, we observed
multiple periods of constructive ping-pongs for the “Orange
Revolution” article: in February 2006, August 2006 and Jan-
uary 2010 (a series of sequential revisions by two contribu-
tors, where one contributor adds new content and the other
reorganizes content on the page).

Inactive contributor motifs
The third pattern emerging from our analysis is that those
editing the article for the ﬁrst time tend to arrive consequently.
Moreover, editing sessions represented by the label E often
correspond to a single edit: their editing sessions are not the
result of collapsing multiple edits (their average duration is
0.75 minutes). Despite the high expected appearance for label
E (comprising close to 70% of all labels), motifs representing
a series of E labels appear signiﬁcantly more than anticipated
by chance alone. Table 7 describes those sequences appear-
ing signiﬁcantly more than was is expected by chance alone,
while Table 8 presents examples for the reverse effect —- new
editors on an article remain engaged —- showing that it ap-
pears signiﬁcantly below chance.
We offer two alternative interpretations for these sequences.
First, we proposed that sequences of ﬁrst-time editors may
represent dormant periods where “owners” do not attend to
the article. This is implied by the lengthy times between the
preceding editing session and the label E session (over 11
days). Similarly, the duration leading to ﬁrst-time-Wikipedia-
edit (label F ) is also long, over 6 days. Our second explana-

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

4

Example

Label
1
2
3
U1-U1
E A
U1-U1-U2
E A E
U1-U2-U2
E E A
U1-U3-U4-U3-U3-U4-U1-U2-U2
D E A
U1-U1-U2-U2
A E A
E A E E U1-U1-U2-U3
E E A E U1-U2-U2-U3
E E E A U1-U2-U3-U3
D E E A U1-U4-U6-U7-U4-U5-U1-U2-U3-U3
D E A E U1-U4-U6-U6-U4-U5-U1-U2-U2-U3

Count Z-Score

815
493
565
107
58
336
356
431
56
61

-18.2
-16.6
-14.3
-6.8
-5.4
-13.4
-12.7
-9.8
-7.0
-6.6

Table 8. New-comer contributor non-sequential sequences, counts, and Z-scores. All sequences in tables appear signiﬁcantly above or below chance at
p < 0.001 (with Bonferroni correction).

Label

Example

3

1
2
A E
B E
C E
E A E U1-U1-U2
A E E U1-U1-U2-U3
B E E U1-U2-U1-U3-U4

U1-U1-U2
U1-U2-U1-U3
U1-U3-U4-U1-U2

Count Z-Score

1,003
986
791
493
639
612

-13.2
-7.3
-4.1
-16.6
-12.0
-7.8

Table 9. Unusual contributor sequences, counts, and Z-scores. All se-
quences in tables appear signiﬁcantly above or below chance at p <
0.001 (with Bonferroni correction).

tion suggests that there are sudden shocks (events internal to
Wikipedia or external) that are attracting editing activities by
ﬁrst-time contributors. Earlier accounts of Wikipedia have
demonstrated that articles about breaking news incidents ex-
hibit high-tempo coordination dynamics, with structures and
dynamics distinct from those observed among articles about
non-breaking events [40].
In order to explore these bursts of activity by peripheral mem-
bers, we performed a follow-on analysis seeking to identify
the event that triggered those sequences. We studied Google
searches for the keywords corresponding to articles’ titles,
ﬁnding that often peaks in the usage of that particular key-
words are associated with the start of E sequences, imply-
ing that an external event (attracting the Google searches)
has triggered the burst of activity by those ﬁrst-time contrib-
utors. For example, Google searches for the Canadian actor
Cameron Bright peeked in August 2009 (possibly associated
with the anticipated release of the ﬁlm “The Twilight Saga:
New Moon” where he played a leading role), and at the same
time the Wikipedia article for Cameron Bright saw a burst of
activity by ﬁrst-time arrivals to this article.

Distinctive motifs
The forth pattern we observe in Table 9 is that newcomers to
the article (label E) are unlikely to contribute after an editing
session made by a previously-active contributor (labels A, B,
or C). The rare occurrence of A–E and C–E motifs implies
that there are activity periods where insiders and “owners” of
an article concentrate their effort. During those times, out-

1073

siders are unlikely to join the co-authoring effort. To the best
of our knowledge, this particular motif has not been reported
in prior studies of peer production.

Case Study Discussion
Our case study illustrates the potential of sequence analysis to
illuminate deeper patterns within online knowledge collabo-
rations using a mixture of qualitative and quantitative meth-
ods [58]. We used a method to capture relative activity of ed-
itors, deﬁned a set of sequential patterns, measured their fre-
quency within a cross-sample of Wikipedia data, and tested
the likelihood of observing patterns compared to chance and
using the Bonferroni correction to increase conﬁdence in the
validity of the signiﬁcance of the observed results. Having
identiﬁed the prevalence of many quantitative patterns occur-
ring signiﬁcantly more than random, we employed a qualita-
tive analysis to iteratively code the data, identifying different
types of multi-label motifs. Grouping motifs that represent
similar sequence characteristics, we were able to identify four
distinct key patterns. Some of these patterns were already
documented in Wikipedia (e.g., destructive ping-pongs), oth-
ers reported for other peer-production projects but not in
Wikipedia (e.g., co-production relying on a single contributor
work sessions, as opposed to multi-contributor teamwork),
and yet others have not yet been documented in Wikipedia
or more broadly in peer-production (e.g., sequences of pro-
ductive ping-pongs).
This case study is illustrative of the potential for a sustained
research agenda that would employ sequence analysis meth-
ods originally developed in sociology, biology, and other
ﬁelds, in order to analyze complex organizational processes
within peer production communities and online knowledge
collaborations [25, 69]. Event logs archiving the activities,
artifacts, performers, and order of actions are common across
socio-technical systems, but only a handful of analyses to
date have explored the temporal or sequential patterns within
these activity sequences. We outlined a preliminary set of ap-
proaches for deﬁning different relationships within sequences
based on varying levels of analysis. A range of established
methods from pattern mining, sequence similarity, and prob-
abilistic analysis are available for quantitative modeling of
socio-technical event log data.

SEQUENCE ANALYSIS RESEARCH AGENDA FOR CSCW
While sociologists have championed the role of sequence data
for understanding questions about the prevalence of patterns
within sequences, the independent predictors of sequence pat-
terns, and the consequences of sequence patterns [1], these re-
search questions have made few in-roads to human-computer
interaction (HCI) or computer-supported cooperative work
(CSCW). Having described our proposed framework for se-
quence analysis of socio-technical trajectories and having il-
lustrated its application through a case study, we now turn our
attention to outlining a research agenda for the application of
this framework to answer questions about the conﬁguration,
prevalence, and relationship of sequence data in the ﬁeld of
CSCW. We ﬁrst discuss this research agenda at the method-
ological level, describing various types of research objectives
that could be addressed through sequence analysis. We then
proceed to review common CSCW research domains and set-
tings and provide examples of how our framework could be
applied across them.

Relationships within Sequences
Sequences are fundamentally relational constructs that con-
nect a series of activities, artifacts, and performers together.
We primarily deﬁne these sequences by a time order, where
elements are made to be adjacent if they occur after each
other.
Instead of generating an artifact-oriented event log
by sub-setting Wikipedia’s entire event log by a single arti-
cle’s event log as we did in Table 1, we could also subset
Wikipedia’s event log by a single user’s contribution history.
This user-oriented event log would reveal the sequence of ac-
tions of a single user constituting their editing history over
time and across artifacts, documenting the accumulation of
actions that ultimately deﬁne a social identity or a role [7,
29]. Alternatively, sub-setting on a single edit type [42] could
reveal distinctive sub-classes of work or the evolution of rou-
tines. Each of the sequences generated from these smaller
subsets can then be used as a case and compared against
each other in subsequent analyses. Thus a sequence of multi-
dimensional events might be “projected” onto a single dimen-
sion. That is, a single contribution can be a member of dif-
ferent types of sequences depending on the unit of analysis
employed at the performer (editor), artifact (article), or ac-
tivity (edit type) levels, and these different sequences can be
compared in turn.

Recurring Patterns across Sequences
Questions about patterns within sequences primarily ask
whether there are typical sub-sequences. How common or
unusual is a pattern or motif? Do some actions reliably
follow others? Can we interpret a cluster of highly-similar
sequences as representing a class of behavior? Furthermore,
the potential of extracting multiple sequences from event logs
likewise invite questions about the alignments between these
different sequences, for example: are changes in activity
types coupled with changes in performers? Finally, the use
of probabilistic models allows us to analyze changes in the
likelihood of state transitions between a series of adjacent
sequences.

1074

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Interpretation of Sequences
Event log data in socio-technical systems like Wikipedia and
GitHub enables a kind of archival ethnography (or informa-
tion archaeology) by which the preceding and subsequent ac-
tions can be re-read and re-interpreted, much as a contempo-
raneous user would have also interacted with the subject [33].
Sequence analysis methods can be used as a way of trian-
gulating between nested approaches: “zooming out” from
simple dyadic relationships to identify macro-social statisti-
cal patterns about similarity, and “zooming in” to narratively
interpret quantitative outliers as the consequence of speciﬁc
contexts, emergent patterns, or crucial turning points that the
quantiﬁcation overlooked [58]. Qualitative analysis is like-
wise crucial for identifying breaks in the chain of reasoning
and threats to validity when translating data extracted from
information systems through analytical modeling and trans-
formed to the relevant analytical constructs under study [35].

Antecedents of Sequenced Behavior
The patterns observed in sequences are not random, but rather
reﬂect path-dependencies underlying social processes such as
collaboration and conﬂict. This class of questions can explore
how other behavioral or psychological constructs of people or
technological affordances of a technology inﬂuence the kinds
of sequences that activities, artifacts, and performers subse-
quently become embedded within. For example, Wikipedia
editors engaged in anti-vandalism work are likely to have
very distinct sequential patterns compared to editors engaged
in copy-writing. These organizational and external contexts
also inﬂuence the kinds of sequences observed: high-tempo
collaborations following crises may prompt different kinds of
sequences than those following traditional, low-tempo collab-
orations [39].

Consequences of Sequenced Behavior
Sequences may inﬂuence other outcomes observed in online
knowledge collaborations. Research may explore how cer-
tain activity patterns inﬂuence individuals’ performance (e.g.,
administrative promotions) as well as organizational perfor-
mance (e.g., the production of high-quality content). Inves-
tigating the predictors of article quality in Wikipedia is an
active research area [5, 55] and future research could explore
the relationships between particular sequences of activity and
article quality. In addition, the organizational literature dis-
cusses ways in which joint involvement in routines could fa-
cilitate the formation of relationships [22], thus a possible
area for exploring the relationship between co-creation se-
quences and the creation of interpersonal relationships.

Implications for CSCW Research
Our framing and case study emphasized the relevance of
sequence analysis methods for understanding online knowl-
edge collaborations such as peer-production (and in partic-
ular, Wikipedia). However, these methods also have clear
applications to other CSCW domains. Table 11 identiﬁes
six established and emerging CSCW sub-topics and provides
examples for research questions that could be addressed by
employing sequence analysis approaches. We illustrate each
CSCW sub-topic with three research questions, as well as

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Topic

Collaborative ﬁltering

Online social networks

Crowdsourcing

Online education

Crisis informatics

Citizen science

commitment or quality? (Recurring Pattern)

(Interpretation)

(Antecedent)

(Relationships)

relationship strength? (Antecedent)

engagement? (Consequence)

a sequence of users’ other ratings? (Recurring Pattern)

to traditional collaborative ﬁltering methods? (Consequence)

Research Questions
• How do users’ rating of the same items vary based on the position of the items within
• What are features that predict the beginning and end of users’ rating sessions?
• How does the accuracy of recommendations using sequence similarity compare
• Are there similarities in the sequences of users’ creating and deleting relationships?
• Do users’ information seeking sequences differ by demographics, skill, personality, or
• How do variations in the sequence of items presented in a stream or feed inﬂuence user
• Are there sequences in a worker’s early history that predicts their subsequent level of
• Can the sequences of HITs completed by multiple workers reveal shared latent interests?
• How does HIT quality vary in relation to the task demands of prior tasks? (Consequence)
• How do speciﬁc teaching elements disrupt the ﬂow of successfully completing course
• What do clusters of course participation sequences reveal about students’ interests and
• Does the sequence of participation in prior courses inﬂuence subsequent course
• What are common behavioral sequences taken by users in the immediate aftermath of
• How do users adopt social roles and employ routines in response to the sequence
• How were pre-existing routines and behaviors disrupted by an event and how long did
• To what extent do contributors’ motivations and attitudes determine their future
• What are the sequences of activities that predict one’s commitment, formal positions
• What do the sequences of feedback (ratings, comments) around a reported observation

content? (Recurring Pattern)

backgrounds? (Antecedent)

this disruption persist? (Consequence)

participation patterns? (Antecedents)

taken, and sustained participation? (Consequences)

engagement and performance? (Consequence)

an event? (Recurring Pattern)

of new information about an event? (Interpretation)

tell us about the reliability of this observation? (Interpretation)

Table 10. Examples of research questions for extending sequence analysis methods into other CSCW topics.

map each of these research questions back to one of the re-
search objectives described above. This table is not intended
to exhaust all of the potential sub-topics that exist within
CSCW, but rather to illustrate the potential for the proposed
approach across a variety of areas that have been at the center
of CSCW research: collaborative ﬁltering, online social net-
works, crowdsourcing, online education, crisis informatics,
and citizen science, among many other domains. The anal-
ysis summarized in Table 10 outlines how sequence analysis
could extend our understanding of socio-technical behavior
across diverse CSCW domains.

CONCLUSION
Event log data in socio-technical systems like Wikipedia en-
code a rich variety of content and meta-data about who is
contributing what, where, when, and how. Our framework

for analyzing behavioral sequences in event log data intends
to answer questions pertaining to the structure and dynamics
of online knowledge collaboration. Our research framework
adapts a generalizable deﬁnition of event logs, and outlines
the process of identifying, schematizing, analyzing, and in-
terpreting sequences of activities, artifacts, or performers that
co-occur. It is important to emphasize that interest in studying
the temporal dynamics within online collaboration is not new;
however, prior studies investigating dynamics within peer-
production tended to “collapse” and “aggregate” data, thus
losing important details regarding temporal sequences. Se-
quence analysis methods are able to mitigate these concerns
and provide a richer description of the temporal dynamics
underlying socio-technical systems. We outlined a step-by-
step procedure for employing sequence analysis in a variety
of CSCW domains and in demonstrating the validity of this

1075

approach through a case study that explored the prevalence
and statistical signiﬁcance of contributors’ activity sequences
in the context of Wikipedia.
This case study examining Wikipedia editors’ sequential ed-
its to articles represents an implementation of the “grammat-
ical” models proposed by theorists of “practice” in organiza-
tional studies. Much as language permits variation in form
to convey similar meanings, organizations may support vari-
ations in patterns of actions to achieve similar goals. The
prevalence (or absence) of repeated patterns of behavior in
both structural and performative processes has been a cor-
nerstone of theoretical developments in the areas of organi-
zational routines and practice theory. However, empirically
testing these grammatical models has been limited by the dif-
ﬁculty of obtaining data from ethnographic ﬁeld studies. To
date, there is very little empirical support for these grammati-
cal theories of organizational routines. Socio-technical event
log data has the variability, breadth, and granularity to adapt
grammatical models of organizational routines to understand
the variation, selection, and retention of new practices and
patterns of actions in technology-mediated social participa-
tion. By schematizing contributors’ activity histories relative
to each other, we were able to identify patterns of action oc-
curring signiﬁcantly above (or below) chance. Findings from
our empirical case study provide support for Feldman’s idea
of performativity in organizational routines, whereby people
adopt or abandon routines in response to others’ actions.
As a methodological contribution, this research agenda is
a call to extend methods for examining and interpreting
the relationships, patterns, antecedents, and consequences
of sequences in event log data across socio-technical sys-
tems. While underutilized within CSCW, methods for ana-
lyzing, aligning, and modeling sequences are well-developed
in ﬁelds like bio-informatics, thus inviting potentially com-
pelling analogies for future theoretical elaboration. Far from
being a framework applicable only to peer production or on-
line knowledge collaborations, sequence analysis methods
have substantial potential to become a ﬁrst-class method to
answer research questions about event log data. Consider
natural language processing or network science: both pro-
vide researchers with a set of tools drawn from to extract
features and structured information from complex, multidi-
mensional data; both have long, interdisciplinary histories;
and both have been adapted to support mixed methods re-
search. We foresee a future where scholars studying online
group processes could draw from a portfolio of techniques
that includes sequence approaches alongside CSCW’s other
mixed methods like content or network analysis.
Although developed as a quantitative method, sequence anal-
ysis approaches have very high potential for supporting mixed
methods inquiry in the context of event log analysis. Results
from sequence analysis can identify common patterns or out-
liers, which invite closer scrutiny. Because sequences involve
actors and artifacts with attributes like status or quality (re-
spectively), these co-variates allow comparison of different
kinds of data measuring the same phenomena.
In addition
to juxtaposing across distinct kinds of data, these data can

1076

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

also be modeled in relation to each other as predictors or
consequences of other processes.
In effect, sequence anal-
ysis methods can provide a set of second-order behavioral at-
tributes that are conceptually and theoretically distinct from
ﬁrst-order attributes like counts or intensities. Notwithstand-
ing the merits of methods such as content analysis of tex-
tual data or network analysis of dyadic interactions, we main-
tain that integrating ﬁrst- and second-order behavior features,
opens up a whole new set of ways to complement and con-
ﬁrm other approaches for contextualizing, triangulating, and
conﬁrming socio-technical behaviors.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Darren Gergle and the reviewers for
their valuable feedback on an earlier version of this paper,
Adam Balila for assistance with data extraction and organi-
zation, Deborah Keegan for copy-editing, and the Wikimedia
Foundation and Wikipedians who support it for making these
data available for research. This work was partially supported
by SSHRC Insight Grant 435-2013-0624.

REFERENCES
1. Andrew Abbott. 1990. A primer on sequence methods.

Organization Science 1, 4 (1990), 375–392.

2. Andrew Abbott. 1995. Sequence analysis: new methods

for old ideas. Annual Review of sociology (1995),
93–113.

3. Ritu Agarwal, Anil K. Gupta, and Robert Kraut. 2008.
Editorial Overview–The Interplay Between Digital and
Social Networks. Information Systems Research 19, 3
(2008), 243–252. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/isre.1080.0200

4. Ofer Arazy and Arie Croitoru. 2010. The Sustainability
of Corporate Wikis: A Time-series Analysis of Activity
Patterns. ACM Trans. Management Information Systems
1, 1 (2010), 6:1–6:24. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1877725.1877731

5. Ofer Arazy and Rick Kopak. 2011. On the measurability
of information quality. Journal of the American Society
for Information Science and Technology 62, 1 (2011),
89–99. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/asi.21447

6. Ofer Arazy, Oded Nov, Raymond Patterson, and Lisa

Yeo. 2011. Information Quality in Wikipedia: The
Effects of Group Composition and Task Conﬂict.
Journal of Management Information Systems 27, 4
(2011), 71–98. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.2753/MIS0742-1222270403

7. Ofer Arazy, Felipe Ortega, Oded Nov, Lisa Yeo, and

Adam Balila. 2015. Functional Roles and Career Paths
in Wikipedia. In Proc. CSCW 2015. ACM, 1092–1105.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675257

8. Markus C Becker. 2008. The past, present, and future of
organizational routines. In Handbook of Organizational
Routines. Edward Elgar Publishing.

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

9. Yoav Benjamini and Yosef Hochberg. 1995. Controlling

the False Discovery Rate: A Practical and Powerful
Approach to Multiple Testing. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological) 57, 1
(1995), 289–300.

10. Yochai Benkler. 2006. The Wealth of Networks: How
Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom.
Yale University Press, New Haven, CT, USA.

11. Donald J Berndt and James Clifford. 1994. Using

Dynamic Time Warping to Find Patterns in Time Series..
In Proc. KDD 1994. AAAI, 359–370.

12. Susan L. Bryant, Andrea Forte, and Amy Bruckman.

2005. Becoming Wikipedian: Transformation of
Participation in a Collaborative Online Encyclopedia. In
Proc. GROUP 2005 (GROUP ’05). ACM, 1–10. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1099203.1099205

13. Kevin Crowston, Kangning Wei, James Howison, and

Andrea Wiggins. 2008. Free/Libre Open-source
Software Development: What We Know and What We
Do Not Know. ACM Computing Survey 44, 2 (2008),
7:1–7:35. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2089125.2089127

14. Cleidson De Souza, Jon Froehlich, and Paul Dourish.
2005. Seeking the source: software source code as a
social and technical artifact. In Proc. GROUP 2005.
197–206.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1099239

15. A. P. Dempster, N. M. Laird, and D. B. Rubin. 1977.

Maximum Likelihood from Incomplete Data via the EM
Algorithm. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society.
Series B (Methodological) 39, 1 (1977), 1–38.

16. Wil Dijkstra and Toon Taris. 1995. Measuring the

Agreement between Sequences. Sociological Methods &
Research 24, 2 (1995), 214–231.

17. Nicolas Ducheneaut. 2005. Socialization in an Open

Source Software Community: A Socio-Technical
Analysis. Computer Supported Cooperative Work
(CSCW) 14, 4 (2005), 323–368. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10606-005-9000-1
18. Cody Dunne, Nathalie Henry Riche, Bongshin Lee,

Ronald Metoyer, and George Robertson. 2012.
GraphTrail: analyzing large multivariate, heterogeneous
networks while supporting exploration history. In Proc.
CHI 2012. ACM, 1663–1672. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2208293

19. Samer Faraj, Sirkka L Jarvenpaa, and Ann Majchrzak.
2011. Knowledge collaboration in online communities.
Organization Science 22, 5 (2011), 1224–1239.

20. MS Feldman and BT Pentland. 2003. Reconceptualizing

Organizational Routines as a Source of Flexibility and
Change. Administrative Science Quarterly 48 (2003),
94–121. 1.

21. Martha S. Feldman. 2000. Organizational Routines as a
Source of Continuous Change. Organization Science 11,

1077

6 (2000), 611–629. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/orsc.11.6.611.12529

22. Martha S. Feldman and Anat Rafaeli. 2002.

Organizational Routines as Sources of Connections and
Understandings. Journal of Management Studies 39, 3
(2002), 309–331. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1467-6486.00294
23. Danyel Fisher and Paul Dourish. 2004. Social and

temporal structures in everyday collaboration. In Proc.
CHI 2004. ACM, 551–558. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/985692.985762

24. Andrea Forte, Vanesa Larco, and Amy Bruckman. 2009.

Decentralization in Wikipedia Governance. Journal of
Management Information Systems 26, 1 (2009), 49–72.
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.2753/MIS0742-1222260103
25. James Gaskin, Nicholas Berente, Kalle Lyytinen, and

Youngjin Yoo. 2014. Toward Generalizable
Sociomaterial Inquiry: A Computational Approach for
Zooming in and Out of Sociomaterial Routines. MIS
Quarterly 38, 3 (2014), 849–A12.

26. R. Stuart Geiger and Aaron Halfaker. 2013. Using edit
sessions to measure participation in wikipedia. In Proc.
CSCW 2013. ACM, 861–870. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2441776.2441873

27. David R. Gibson. 2005. Taking Turns and Talking Ties:

Networks and Conversational Interaction. Amer. J.
Sociology 110, 6 (2005), 1561–1597.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/428689

28. Jody Hoffer Gittell and Leigh Weiss. 2004. Coordination

Networks Within and Across Organizations: A
Multi-level Framework. Journal of Management Studies
41, 1 (2004), 127–153. DOI:http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6486.2004.00424.x
29. Eric Gleave, Howard T Welser, Thomas M Lento, and

Marc A Smith. 2009. A conceptual and operational
deﬁnition of’social role’in online community. In Proc.
HICSS 2009. IEEE, 1–11.

30. S.P. Goggins, M. Gallagher, J. Laffey, and C. Amelung.
2010. Social Intelligence in Completely Online Groups -
Toward Social Prosthetics from Log Data Analysis and
Transformation. In Proc. SocialCom. IEEE, 500–507.
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SocialCom.2010.79
31. Sean Goggins and Eva Petakovic. 2014. Connecting

Theory to Social Technology Platforms A Framework
for Measuring Inﬂuence in Context. American
Behavioral Scientist 58, 10 (2014), 1376–1392. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0002764214527093

32. Jiawei Han, Hong Cheng, Xin Dong, and Xifeng Yan.

2007. Frequent pattern mining: current status and future
directions. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 15, 1
(2007), 55–86.

33. Christine Hine. 2000. Virtual ethnography. Sage.
34. James Howison and Kevin Crowston. 2014.

Collaboration Through Open Superposition: A Theory
of the Open Source Way. MIS Quarterly 38, 1 (2014),
29–A9.

35. James Howison and Andrea Wiggins. 2011. Validity

Issues in the Use of Social Network Analysis with
Digital Trace Data. Journal of the Association for
Information Systems 12, 12 (2011), 767–797.

36. Isa Jahnke. 2010. Dynamics of social roles in a

knowledge management community. Computers in
Human Behavior 26, 4 (2010), 533–546. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2009.08.010
37. David Jurgens and Tsai-Ching Lu. 2012. Temporal

Motifs Reveal the Dynamics of Editor Interactions in
Wikipedia.. In Proc. ICWSM 2012. AAAI, 162–169.

38. Gerald C. Kane, Jeremiah Johnson, and Ann Majchrzak.

2014. Emergent Life Cycle: The Tension Between
Knowledge Change and Knowledge Retention in Open
Online Coproduction Communities. Management
Science 60, 12 (2014), 3026–3048. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2013.1855

39. Brian Keegan, Darren Gergle, and Noshir Contractor.
2012. Staying in the loop: structure and dynamics of
Wikipedia’s breaking news collaborations. In Proc.
WikiSym 2012. ACM, 1:1–1:10. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2462932.2462934

40. Brian Keegan, Darren Gergle, and Noshir Contractor.

2013. Hot Off the Wiki Structures and Dynamics of
Wikipedia’s Coverage of Breaking News Events.
American Behavioral Scientist 57, 5 (2013), 595–622.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0002764212469367

41. Aniket Kittur, Bongwon Suh, Bryan A. Pendleton, and

Ed H. Chi. 2007. He Says, She Says: Conﬂict and
Coordination in Wikipedia. In Proc. CHI 2007. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 453–462. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1240624.1240698
42. Travis Kriplean, Ivan Beschastnikh, and David W.

McDonald. 2008. Articulations of Wikiwork:
Uncovering Valued Work in Wikipedia Through
Barnstars. In Proc. CSCW 2008. ACM, 47–56. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1460563.1460573

43. John D. Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando

C. N. Pereira. 2001. Conditional Random Fields:
Probabilistic Models for Segmenting and Labeling
Sequence Data. In Proc. ICML 2001. Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers Inc., 282–289.

44. Karim R Lakhani and Eric von Hippel. 2003. How open

source software works: “free” user-to-user assistance.
Research Policy 32, 6 (2003), 923–943. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0048-7333(02)00095-1

45. David Lazer, Alex Sandy Pentland, Lada Adamic, Sinan

Aral, Albert Laszlo Barabasi, Devon Brewer, Nicholas

1078

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Christakis, Noshir Contractor, James Fowler, Myron
Gutmann, and others. 2009. Life in the network: the
coming age of computational social science. Science
323, 5915 (2009), 721.

46. Jessica Lin, Eamonn Keogh, Wei Li, and Stefano

Lonardi. 2007. Experiencing SAX: a novel symbolic
representation of time series. Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery 15, 2 (2007), 107–144.

47. TW Malone and K Crowston. 1994. The

interdisciplinary study of coordination. Comput. Surveys
26 (1994), 119. 1.

48. Kumiyo Nakakoji, Yasuhiro Yamamoto, Yoshiyuki
Nishinaka, Kouichi Kishida, and Yunwen Ye. 2002.
Evolution patterns of open-source software systems and
communities. In Proceedings of the international
workshop on Principles of software evolution. 76–85.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=512055

49. Richard R Nelson and G Sidney. 2005. Winter. 1982. An

evolutionary theory of economic change. Cambridge:
Belknap (2005).

50. J.F. Olson, J. Howison, and K.M. Carley. 2010. Paying
Attention to Each Other in Visible Work Communities:
Modeling Bursty Systems of Multiple Activity Streams.
In Proc. SocialCom 2010. 276–281. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SocialCom.2010.46

51. Brian T. Pentland. 1995. Grammatical Models of

Organizational Processes. Organization Science 6, 5
(1995), 541–556.

52. Brian T. Pentland and Martha S. Feldman. 2007.
Narrative networks: Patterns of technology and
organization. Organization Science 18, 5 (2007),
781–795.

53. Brian T. Pentland and Martha S. Feldman. 2008.

Designing routines: On the folly of designing artifacts,
while hoping for patterns of action. Information and
Organization 18, 4 (2008), 235–250. DOI:http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.infoandorg.2008.08.001

54. Brian T. Pentland and Henry H. Rueter. 1994.

Organizational Routines as Grammars of Action.
Administrative Science Quarterly 39, 3 (1994), 484–510.

55. Sam Ransbotham and Gerald C. Kane. 2011.

Membership Turnover and Collaboration Success in
Online Communities: Explaining Rises and Falls from
Grace in Wikipedia. MIS Quarterly 35, 3 (2011),
613–627.

56. Hugues Salamin and Alessandro Vinciarelli. 2011.

Introduction to Sequence Analysis for Human Behavior
Understanding. In Computer Analysis of Human
Behavior, Albert Ali Salah and Theo Gevers (Eds.).
Springer London, 21–40.

57. R. K. Shelly. 1997. Sequences and Cycles in Social

Interaction. Small Group Research 28, 3 (1997),
333–356.

64. Wil MP van der Aalst, Boudewijn F van Dongen,

Joachim Herbst, Laura Maruster, Guido Schimm, and
AJMM Weijters. 2003. Workﬂow Mining: a survey of
issues and approaches. Data & Knowledge engineering
47, 2 (2003), 237–267.

65. Fernanda B. Vi´egas, Martin Wattenberg, and Kushal

Dave. 2004. Studying Cooperation and Conﬂict
Between Authors with History Flow Visualizations. In
Proc. CHI 2004. ACM, 575–582. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/985692.985765

66. Zhengzheng Xing, Jian Pei, and Eamonn Keogh. 2010.

A Brief Survey on Sequence Classiﬁcation. SIGKDD
Explorations Newsletter 12, 1 (2010), 40–48.
67. Yutaka Yamauchi, Makoto Yokozawa, Takeshi

Shinohara, and Toru Ishida. 2000. Collaboration with
Lean Media: How Open-source Software Succeeds. In
Proc. CSCW 2000. ACM, 329–338. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/358916.359004

68. Taha Yasseri, Robert Sumi, Andr´as Rung, Andr´as

Kornai, and J´anos Kert´esz. 2012. Dynamics of Conﬂicts
in Wikipedia. PLoS ONE 7, 6 (2012), e38869. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0038869

69. Yongjin Yoo. 2012. Digital Materiality and the

Emergence of an Evolutionary Science of the Artiﬁcial.
In Materiality and Organizing: Social Interaction in a
Technological World, Paul M. Leonardi, Bonnie A.
Nardi, and Jannis Kallinikos (Eds.). Oxford University
Press.

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

58. Mario Luis Small. 2011. How to Conduct a Mixed

Methods Study: Recent Trends in a Rapidly Growing
Literature. Annual Review of Sociology 37, 1 (2011),
57–86. DOI:http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.soc.012809.102657

59. Marc A. Smith and Andrew T. Fiore. 2001.

Visualization components for persistent conversations.
In Proc. CHI 2001. ACM, 136–143. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/365024.365073

60. Arun Sundararajan, Foster Provost, Gal

Oestreicher-Singer, and Sinan Aral. 2013. Information
in Digital, Economic, and Social Networks. Information
Systems Research 24, 4 (2013), 883–905. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/isre.1120.0472

61. Jason Tsay, Laura Dabbish, and James Herbsleb. 2014.
Inﬂuence of Social and Technical Factors for Evaluating
Contribution in GitHub. In Proc. ICSE 2014. ACM,
356–366. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2568225.2568315
62. Michael L. Tushman and David A. Nadler. 1978.

Information Processing as an Integrating Concept in
Organizational Design. The Academy of Management
Review 3, 3 (1978), 613–624. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/257550

63. Wil MP van der Aalst, Hajo A Reijers, and Minseok
Song. 2005. Discovering social networks from event
logs. Computer Supported Cooperative Work 14, 6
(2005), 549–593.

1079

