CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Surveillance & Modesty on Social Media: 

How Qataris Navigate Modernity and Maintain Tradition 

Qatar Computing Research Institute 

Carnegie Mellon University Qatar 

Sarah Vieweg 

Doha, Qatar 

svieweg@qf.org.qa 

Adam Hodges 

Doha, Qatar 

adamhodges@cmu.edu 

those  from  which 

ABSTRACT 
Recent research on social media use in the Middle East and 
North  Africa  (MENA)  region  has  focused  on  their  role  in 
the Arab Spring uprisings, but less work has examined the 
more  mundane  uses  of  these  technologies.  Yet  exploring 
the way populations in the MENA region use social media 
in everyday life provides insight into how they are adapted 
to  cultural  contexts  beyond 
they 
this  process,  we 
originated.  To  better  understand 
interviewed  eleven  Qatari  nationals  currently  living  in 
Doha, Qatar. Our analysis identifies ways users, particularly 
females,  practice  modesty,  manage  their  own  (and  by 
extension) their family’s reputation, and use social media to 
monitor  and  protect  others.  These  findings  are  placed 
within a framework of social, or participatory surveillance, 
which challenges conventional notions of surveillance as a 
form of control and instead shows how surveillance has the 
potential to be empowering. 
Author Keywords 
Arab Studies; Middle East; Modernization; Modesty; Qatar; 
Social media; Surveillance; Tradition 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous. 
INTRODUCTION 
Previous studies of the use of social media among residents 
of the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region have 
examined contexts of war and civil unrest [2,19,29], with a 
large 
the  Arab  Spring  uprisings 
[1,9,17,31,37]. Less work has been done on everyday use of 
social  media.  Yet  these  everyday  uses  raise  interesting 
questions about how people who live in societies that value 
family, adherence to religious authority, and proper public 
comportment  use  social  media  that  are  conceived  of  and 
designed  around  Western  ideologies  and  social  practices. 

focus  placed  on 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of  all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee pro vided that copies are 
not  made  or  distributed  fo r  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on  the first page. Copyrights 
for  components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be 
honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or 
republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific  permission 
from 
Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02...$15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819966 

fee.  Request  permissions 

and/or  a 

is 

Although  social  media  have  global  reach,  they  are  not 
universal in the sense that they are understood and related 
to in the same way around the world. In other words, even 
as social media are globally used, they are not used in the 
same way in all countries and cultural contexts [22].  
Our aim, therefore, is to contribute to the CSCW literature 
by better understanding how social media, which are used 
to connect, see, be seen, and communicate (among a host of 
other  tasks),  are  perceived  and  oriented  to  within  Qatari 
society, especially among educated females. In addition, we 
aim  to  further  theorize  the  concept  of  surveillance  as  it 
relates  to  social  media  use  in  an  effort  to  complicate  and 
expand  the  way  this  concept  is  applied  in  social  media 
research.  
As  a  nation  undergoing  fast  development  in  an  effort  to 
modernize  and  transition  to  a  knowledge-based  economy, 
Qatar’s  vision  for  the  future,  as  laid  out  in  the  Qatar 
National  Vision  2030  [24], 
to  modernize  while 
preserving its traditions. That the preservation of traditional 
types  of  social  order  are  by  definition  at  odds  with  what 
Giddens [11] refers to as “the discontinuities of modernity” 
speaks to the dilemma that many Qataris find themselves in 
as  they  attempt  to  embrace  modernity  while  maintaining 
strong  adherence  to  the  Islamic  religious  values  that 
undergird  traditional  Qatari  social  structure.  Social  media 
hold  an  interesting  position  within  this  dual  push  to 
modernize and  preserve  tradition.  On  the  one  hand,  social 
media  epitomize  the  type  of  technological  innovation 
responsible for the globalization of modernity. On the other 
hand,  the  diffusion  of  social  media  (as  with  any  form  of 
technology)  into  new  milieux  necessarily  entails  a  certain 
amount of recontextualization that adapts the technology to 
local  circumstances.  In  this  way,  global  technologies  are 
“glocalized”  or  “indigenized”  [7]  as  they  are  appropriated 
within local cultural contexts.  
It is against this backdrop that we look at how a group of 
Qataris appropriate social media sites, such as Instagram or 
Twitter,  and  repurpose  them  in  ways  that  fit  within  their 
lifestyle  and  ethos.  The  tactics  used  by  our  Qatari 
participants to mold social media within the framework of 
Qatari  society  are  an  example  of  how  they  negotiate  their 
own path toward modernity while working to preserve and 
uphold traditional values and expectations.  
In the sections that follow, we provide a brief description of 
Qatar  and  Qatari  cultural  practices,  related  work,  and  our 

527

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

for 

laborers, 

methods. We then analyze our interview data. Our analysis 
illuminates  the  ways  in  which  our  participants  negotiate 
identities as they participate on and interact through social 
media.  In  particular,  we  consider  how  culturally-specific 
facets of both individual and collective identity are enacted 
and maintained in ways that meet the expectations of users’ 
audiences,  while  allowing 
self-expression  and 
enjoyment. 
BACKGROUND 
Qatar  is  a  small  country  to  the  east  of  Saudi  Arabia  that 
reaches  into  the  Arabian  Gulf.  Along  with  Saudi  Arabia, 
Kuwait,  Bahrain,  the  United  Arab  Emirates  (UAE),  and 
Oman, it is part of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), an 
intergovernmental political and economic union.  
A Growing Population, Economy 
In  early  2015,  Qatar’s  population  was  approximately  2.3 
million compared to its 1991 population of 350,000. Much 
of  that  population  is  comprised  of  expatriates;  only  about 
10%  of  the  population  living  in  Qatar  are  Qatari  citizens, 
who are the focus of this study. Due to reliance on a foreign 
workforce,  particularly  manual 
the  gender 
distribution in Qatar as a whole is 75% male, 25% female 
[23].  These  numbers  underscore  the  rapid  growth  and 
changes the country has faced and continues to undergo.  
Qatar’s massive natural gas and oil reserves make it one of 
the wealthiest countries in the world; it is this wealth that 
funds  the  drive  to  modernize.  According  to  the  World 
Bank,  the  per  capita  GDP  of  Qatar  is  $97,519.  As  a 
comparison,  the  per  capita  GDP  of  the  United  States  is 
$54,630; in India, it is $1,596  [32].1 However, despite the 
wealth  of  Qatar  as  a  nation,  it  is  important  to  understand 
that 
is—like  any  other 
population—a  complex  and  varied  community;  not  all 
Qataris enjoy extreme wealth, and there is a sizable middle 
and lower class [16]. 
With  its  growing  economy  and  affluence,  Qatar  has  been 
positioning  itself  as  a  player  on  the  world  stage  [15].  The 
2022 World Cup will take place in Qatar, which has played 
host to several other high-profile sporting events in recent 
years.  In  addition  to  the  national  interest  in  bringing 
renowned  athletic  competitions  to  the  country,  Qatar  is 
attempting  to  establish  a  “knowledge-based”  economy  as 
part of the government’s National Vision 2030 [24]. Within 
the  GCC,  Qatar  is  seen  as  comparatively  progressive 
regarding  post-secondary  education,  and  has  established  a 
2500-acre  campus  called  Education  City  that  is  home  to 
branches of several universities—six American, one British, 
and one French. The aim is to provide prestigious, Western 
educational  opportunities  to  male  and  female  students 
living in the region [13].  

indigenous  population 

the 

1  These  figures  represent  averages  from  2010  to  2014  in  current  US 
dollars.   

528

Religious Values, National Dress 
Most  Qataris  identify  as  Arab,  and  virtually  all  are  Sunni 
Muslim who practice Wahhabism, a branch of Sunni Islam 
that involves strict interpretations of religious texts [16]. As 
a  traditional  Islamic  society,  daily  life  in  Qatar  revolves 
around 
religious  practice.  Patriarchal  norms  dictate 
behavior and etiquette, and gender segregation is common 
and often expected. In addition, the honor and reputation of 
one’s  family  is  of  the  utmost  importance;  individuals’ 
behavior  is  a  direct  reflection  upon  their  extended  family, 
and upholding cultural standards is essential. [13]. 
Qatari  females  and  males2  are  expected  to  wear  national 
dress when in public. Females wear a loose black robe over 
their clothing, and a scarf to cover their hair, known as an 
abaya  and a shayla, respectively.  In addition, some opt to 
cover  their  faces  in  public,  though  it  is  not  required. 
Females may choose to wear a niqab, a cloth that covers the 
entire face except the eyes, a gheshwa, a semi-opaque veil 
that covers the entire face, or a batoola, a mask that is often 
gold  in  color  that  covers  most  of  the  face.  Males  wear  a 
long white robe called a thobe, and a headpiece comprised 
of  a  circular  black  band  called  an  agal,  which  sits  atop  a 
long  scarf,  the  ghutra.  In  a  country  where  expatriates 
outnumber  Qatari  nationals,  the  national  dress  acts  as  a 
marker of Qatari identity. Of equal importance, the national 
dress  preserves  a  sense  of  modesty  for  both  males  and 
females where cultural norms and expectations are to cover 
in public to at least below the knees and past the shoulders.  
Social Media Use in the MENA Region 
Social  media  of  various  sorts  are  popular  in  Qatar,  and 
many  Qataris  use  them  daily.  A  report  sponsored  by  the 
Qatar  Ministry  of 
Information  and  Communication 
Technology that focused on social media use in Qatar was 
published  in  2014;  it  details  basic  information  regarding 
social media and social messaging use among Qataris and 
other  citizens  of  the  GCC  who  live  in  Qatar.  Among 
Qataris,  Instagram  is  the  most  popular  social  media 
application;  65%  of  Qataris  use 
it.  The  next  most 
commonly used app trails behind by almost twenty points – 
46%  of  Qataris  use  Twitter,  44%  use  Facebook,  and  39% 
use Snapchat [25].   
In pursuing the current research, our participants were clear 
about  their  fondness  for  social  media;  they  enjoy  posting 
photos, commenting, receiving and giving “likes” to others, 
and gathering information. Social media are a welcome and 

2 Throughout this article we use the terms “female” and “male” to refer to 
the conventional gender identities of “woman” and “man.” In Gulf Arab 
culture, females are commonly referred to as “girls” until they are married, 
as  the  descriptor  “woman”  connotes  that  a  female  that  has  experienced 
sexual  relations  [18].  In  wishing  to  avoid  any  possible  offense,  we  are 
careful not to place either identity on our female participants. However, the 
reader will see the terms “girl” and “woman” arise in direct quotes when 
they are used by participants, and in references to sources that specifically 
choose one term or the other. 

SESSION: INTERNATONAL INSIGHTS

fun addition to many Qataris’ lives; some spoke of how it 
has changed their lives for the better by giving them access 
to information they would not have otherwise.  
The positive reception of social media in Qatar echoes the 
survey and focus group data examined by Al Jenaibi in the 
United  Arab  Emirates  [3].  The  author  found  that  users 
consider  social  media  an  effective  means  for  gathering 
news,  for  developing  business,  and  for  entertainment, 
among other uses.  
However, as previous research has shown, social media use 
in Qatar—and in the Arabian Gulf region more generally—
is  shaped  by  regionally  specific  cultural  values.  In  her 
research on Qataris’ uses of social media, Rajakumar [26] 
surveyed  100  Qatari  females  on  their  uses  of  Twitter, 
Blackberry  Messenger,  and  Facebook.  She  highlights 
participants’ “creative approaches” to using Facebook, and 
demonstrates  the  agency  they  display  to  avoid  particular 
activities on Facebook as they manage their public images. 
Similarly, League and Chalmers [18] interviewed 42 Arab 
female  university  students,  most  of  whom  were  raised  in 
Qatar,  19  of  whom  are  Qatari.  They  were  interested  in 
understanding  self-expression  in  social  networking  sites, 
and found that reputation was important to how participants 
managed their identities, particularly as it relates to cultural 
values.  
Outside  of  Qatar,  Al  Omoush  and  colleagues  studied  the 
impact of Arab cultural values on Facebook use, and found 
that  the  majority  of  users  in  the  Arab  world  are  young 
students  (aged  13-24),  who  are  influenced  by  what  the 
authors term “Arab cultural values” as they go about online 
social networking activity [4]. However, the authors do not 
define what they precisely mean by “Arab cultural values,” 
so  we  are  left  uncertain  as  to  which  populations  they 
researched  and  what  exactly  they  were  hoping  to  show 
regarding  their  outcomes  vis-à-vis  “Arab  cultural  values.” 
Adopting  a  cross-cultural  framework,  Ur  and  Wang 
examined privacy as it relates to SNS, but minimal attention 
is paid to Arab users [34].  
Examining  technology  use  vis-à-vis  Arab  cultural  norms 
and  expectations,  Alsheikh  and  colleagues  performed  an 
ethnographic  study  of  Arab  couples,  and  looked  at  how 
individuals who are in relationships use technology to stay 
in  touch  with  their  long-distance  partners.  The  authors 
argue  for  culturally  sensitive  design  that  considers  their 
participants’  values.  They  go  on  to  recommend  ways  to 
support agency, allowing users to “enact particular cultural 
roles in the context of their relationships” [6]. 
Similarly, Mark et al. [19] point out that Western ideologies 
do  not  translate  well  to  non-Western  settings  vis-à-vis 
technology  adoption  and  use.  The  authors  looked  at  how 
Iraqi citizens adopt and use various technologies to stay in 
touch, gather information, and self-organize during the Iraq 
war  that  began  in  2003.  They  find  that  their  participants 
exhibit resilience through their uses of technology in their 

 

529

disrupted  environments.  The  same  authors  [2]  also  look 
more  closely  at  Iraqi  blogs  published  during  the  war,  and 
find  that  bloggers  and  their  followers  were  able  to 
participate  in  conversations  that  would  not  have  been 
possible otherwise. The dialogs between bloggers and their 
followers  led  to  greater  understandings  of  the  situation  by 
both populations within and outside Iraq. Likewise, Semaan 
and Mark performed an in-depth analysis that looks at how 
Facebook is used by Iraqis affected by the ongoing conflict 
in  their  country.  They  find  ways  in  which  features  of 
Facebook  are  employed  to  help  those  in  need,  locate 
information  about  loved  ones,  and  maintain  a  sense  of 
normalcy in the midst of upheaval [29].  
As these various lines of research demonstrate, social media 
use is profoundly shaped by community specific values and 
needs. With this background in mind, we examine the way 
values  and  traditions  shape  the  way  Qataris  use  social 
media. 
METHOD 
Both authors live and work in Qatar, and have established 
relationships with Qataris. However, we are acutely aware 
of  our  roles  as  outsiders,  asking  questions  about  a 
population with which we are familiar but of which we are 
not a part. As the first author recruited participants for this 
study,  she  was  careful  to  explain  the  questions  she  was 
asking, and why she was inquiring about social media use 
among  Qataris.  The  interviewees  were  enthusiastic  about 
participating,  and  some  have  expressed  interest  in  the 
outcomes of the study, which have been provided to them.  
The first author conducted in-depth interviews with eleven 
participants between January and March 2015. Participants 
were 
and  professional 
interviewees  were  direct 
connections.  Some  of 
first  author,  and  others  were 
connections  of 
recommended 
direct 
connections  of  the  first  author.  In  Qatari  society,  one’s 
personal  connections,  or  wasta,  plays  an  important  role  in 
conducting  business.  Recruitment  for  the  study  therefore 
proceeded through such connections resulting in a modified 
snowball method.  
As the first author approached Qatari adults with whom she 
has  relationships,  she  asked  them  to  speak  about  their 
experiences with social media. The only eligibility criteria 
for  inclusion  in  the  study  was  being  a  Qatari  citizen.  All 
participants  have  at  least  some  undergraduate  education; 
most  have  a  bachelor’s  degree,  and  one  holds  a  master’s 
degree.  All  are  bilingual  in  Arabic  and  English.  In  total, 
three males and eight females were interviewed, with ages 
ranging  from  21  to  38.  Due  to  the  practice  of  gender 
segregation  in  Qatari  society,  and  the  preference  of  some 
Qataris  not  to  socialize  with  non-family  members  who  do 
not identify with their own gender, the first author—who is 
female—had greater access to females.  

through  personal 

recruited 

the 

the 

as 

potential 

participants 

by 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

recurring  points  of 

Ten interviews were in person and one took place via video 
chat;  interviews  lasted  from  21  minutes  to  1  hour  10 
minutes.  All  interviews  were  conducted  in  English,  a 
language  in  which  all  participants  use  daily  in  work  and 
educational  settings.  The  interviews  were  framed  as  an 
informal  conversation  about  social  media  use.  The  first 
author  began  with  three  basic  questions  to  start  the 
conversation.  What  social  media  sites  are  you  aware  of? 
Which do you use? How do you use them? From there, the 
discussion  was  allowed  to  progress  naturally  to  cover 
various  aspects  of  social  media  use  as  dictated  by  the 
responses  and  interests  of  the  interviewees,  including 
discussion of why certain sites and services were used for 
particular reasons, what participants liked and disliked, and 
what  they  thought  about  the  role  of  social  media  in  their 
lives. Interviews were recorded and later transcribed by the 
first author.  
We  used  ethnographically  informed  discourse  analysis  to 
analyze the data. We looked closely at not only what was 
said  by  our  participants,  but  at  how  their  discourse  is 
situated within a broader cultural context. In replaying the 
interviews  and  reading  the  transcripts,  we  pinpointed 
common themes that arose across the interview data. This 
inductively  draws  out 
interest 
highlighted by the participants. At the same time, we drew 
upon theoretical ideas from existing literature and personal 
ethnographic insights to relate these recurring themes to the 
specific  ethnographic  context  and  wider 
theoretical 
framework. This approach to the data therefore involves a 
form  of  “theoretically  informed  induction.”  As  Tracy  [33] 
explains  of  this  approach,  the  “tapes  and  transcripts  are 
repeatedly  studied  to  identify  interesting  practices,  where 
notions of what is interesting are shaped by knowing what 
observed  practices  would  challenge  or  extend  theorizing.” 
Given  the  importance  of  repeated  listening  to  the  data  to 
extract  meaning,  we  consider  the  transcription  of  the 
interviews the first step in the analytic process. Rather than 
using  a  transcription  service,  the  first  author  performed  a 
close  transcription  of  the  data  while  paying  attention  to 
paralinguistic  detail  such  as  prosody  and  laughter.  This 
allowed  us  to  cue  into  subtle  aspects  of  meaning  in  the 
interaction  between  the  first  author  and  participants  as  we 
extracted its ethnographic significance for the analysis.  
As  we  went  through  our  analysis,  we  noted  themes  that 
emerged  through  participants’  discourse.  Our  participants 
spoke  about  social  media  use  vis-à-vis  marriage  practices, 
how families employ social media to update each other and 
maintain  contact,  and  how  they  can  negatively  impact 
relationships and minimize face-to-face communication. In 
the  current  study,  we  focus  on  two  of  the  themes: 
empowerment through surveillance and modesty.  
SURVEILLANCE, MODESTY 
In Qatari culture, the onus is on the individual to constantly 
manage  the  reputation  of  their  family.  When  in  public, 
individuals  must  behave  in  a  manner  that  complies  with 

 

530

 

surveillance 

that 

established cultural expectations [13].  Females in particular 
have a singular role in maintaining the good name of their 
families  as 
the  “cultural  and  symbolic  bearers  of 
community  identity”  that  is  placed  upon  them  within 
Islamic  culture  [30].  One  aspect  of 
this  reputation 
management 
involves  being  observed  by  others. 
Participants  spoke  about  the  need  to  continually  monitor 
public  behavior  in  a  variety  of  contexts,  such  as  while 
driving  in  one’s  car,  walking  in  a  shopping  mall,  or 
participating  in  social  media  conversations,  among  other 
activities. If an individual makes a misstep that is observed 
by  other  Qataris,  the  damaging  news  will  likely  make  its 
way back to their family. Again, women in particular are in 
a  position  of  great  responsibility  when  it  comes  to 
upholding  the  family’s  reputation;  their  comportment  in 
public is bound by strict religious and cultural standards. 
This  led  us  to  ask,  how  do  Qatari  females  uphold  the 
modesty  that  is  expected  of  them  as  they  participate  in 
social  media  sites?  What  tactics  do  they  employ?  More 
broadly,  how  do  Qataris  (both  females  and  males)  adapt 
social  media  to  the  unique  circumstances  of  their  culture? 
How do they use social media to balance the dual goals of 
modernizing while preserving tradition?  
Conventional Views of Surveillance 
Conventional  conceptions  of 
surveillance  are  well 
represented  by  Bentham’s  “panopticon,”  which  evokes  an 
image  of 
is  hierarchical.  The 
implementation of a panoptic system is one in which power 
the 
is  firmly 
surveillance,  while 
left 
vulnerable  and  without  control.  Those  under  surveillance, 
whether they are being actively watched or not, internalize 
the  idea  that  they  are  constantly  under  scrutiny,  and 
therefore avoid missteps, avoid anti-social acts, and behave 
in a way that is deemed acceptable and normal by those in 
their surrounding environment [5,10]. 
The conventional notion of “surveillance” is one in which 
there  is  a  clear  power  relation;  the  powerful  watches, 
assesses, and in some cases controls the less powerful. This 
type  of  surveillance  is  linked  to  the  notion  of  “gaze.”  For 
example,  Siraj  writes  about  women  being  under  a 
“communal gaze,” or a “gaze of surveillance” in a Muslim 
community in urban Scotland [30]. The author stresses the 
importance  some  women  place  on  appropriate  dress  in 
public  spaces  as  a  reflection  of  their  modesty,  but  also 
because  they  are  frequently  watched  by  members  of  the 
community who will report inappropriate behavior to their 
families.  
Participatory, Social Surveillance 
Recently,  however,  scholars  have  begun  to  challenge  the 
conventional  conception  of  surveillance  as  the  only  way 
surveillance unfolds, pointing out that surveillance need not 
always  be  hierarchical,  nor  viewed  negatively.  They  show 
how the customary dynamic between the surveillor and the 
surveilled  can  be  disrupted.  The  restrictions  and/or 

the  one  performing 
is 

the  one  being  surveilled 

in 

the  hands  of 

SESSION: INTERNATONAL INSIGHTS

to 

it  can  be  expanded 

expectations  of  those  under  surveillance  are  one  aspect  of 
the relationship. However, when we interrogate the notion 
of surveillance and begin to dissect how it works and what 
it  can  accomplish, 
include 
“technological  mediation” 
that  can  empower  without 
necessarily violating [5]. Surveillance can become a means 
for social media users to gain advantage by exhibiting their 
own agency and power to control what others see and under 
which  circumstances.  Surveillance  can 
involve  equal 
footing among all parties, and when we consider the use of 
social networking sites vis-à-vis surveillance, we see how it 
can be empowering for users as it “facilitates new ways of 
constructing  identity.”  Surveillance  provides  a  new  and 
different  context  in  which  to  socialize,  both  with  close 
friends  and  family,  and  potentially  with  strangers  if  users 
choose  to  open  their  profiles  to  the  public.  Albrechtslund 
[ibid] calls this “participatory surveillance.”  
Similarly, Marwick [21] frames this type of surveillance as 
“social surveillance,” and points out that it can be used as a 
tool  of  empowerment.  The  author  defines 
social 
surveillance as the use of Web 2.0 sites to see what friends, 
family and acquaintances are “up to” through “technologies 
that are designed for users to continually investigate digital 
traces  left  by  the  people  they  are  connected  to.”  Marwick 
emphasizes  that  social  surveillance  results  in  social  media 
users  self-managing  their  behavior.  As  both  the  surveillor 
and  the  surveilled  are  conceptualized  as  social  agents  (as 
opposed to, for example, a powerful government entity on 
the  one  hand,  and  a  powerless  individual  on  the  other),  a 
view of what is expected, accepted, and not accepted is co-
created  among  users 
In  other  words,  social 
surveillance can be viewed as empowering in that it affords 
individuals  agency  over 
self-presentation,  and  co-
construction of collective values and identities.   
Social Surveillance in a Relationship-Based Culture 
Social surveillance is apparent in our data when one of our 
participants discusses why she appreciates social media use 
in  Qatar,  particularly 
the  engagement  of  various 
government  ministries  with  members  of  the  public  via 
Twitter  and  Instagram.  P3  recounted  an  example  of  how 
social  media  are  used  as  tools  of  surveillance  to  garner 
positive  reactions  and  appease  public  distress  regarding 
behaviors that do not contribute to the common good as it is 
understood and enacted by Qataris: 
“Some guy, he was at a fun city for children3, he found an 
inappropriate  picture  on  one  of  the  toys.  So  he  [took  a 
photo]  and  mentioned 
they 
[responded]  to  him,  and  they  covered  it  temporarily  and 
told  him  [they]  will  fix  it….the  Ministry  of  Interior,  if 
something  [illegal  is  happening],  people  mention  it,  and 
they respond.” 

the  ministry,  and 

[21]. 

to 

it 

                                                             
3 Due to the hot temperatures that endure for much of the year, indoor play 
areas for children are common in shopping malls in Qatar. They include 
rides, games, and small open spaces for physical activity. 

 

531

relationship-based 

P3  explained  that  the  photo  was  posted  to  a  social  media 
site with a message directed at the Ministry of Interior. The 
conventional approach to surveillance might view this type 
of  communication  and  regulation  of  behavior  in  an 
Orwellian light, emphasizing the hierarchical position of the 
government  ministry  over  the  less  powerful  citizens.  The 
government might be said to surveil “through the eyes” of 
ordinary  citizens  to  regulate  behavior  in  a  top-down 
manner.  
Yet this is not how Qataris generally view this type of act. 
In  Qatar,  being  corrected  for  anti-social  behavior  is  a 
typical means by which behavior is regulated. In the above 
excerpt, P3 is not complaining about the management of the 
children’s play area, she is lauding the use of social media 
communication as a way to maintain environments that are 
safe  and  acceptable.  Here,  social  media  enables  a  type  of 
surveillance that empowers P3 and others to work together 
to communicate what is collectively deemed appropriate.  
In  broader  terms,  social  or  participatory  surveillance 
integrates  well  with  the  types  of  interactions  typical  of  a 
high-context, relationship-based culture. As Hall [12] points 
out in making his distinction between low-context and high-
context cultures, a high-context culture values relationships 
and often holds a collectivist orientation. Drawing on Hall, 
Hooker [14] explains how the interpersonal connections of 
a 
for 
communicating behavioral expectations. Whereas rules are 
often written down, posted on signs, and thereby expected 
to be followed in low-context, rules-based cultures such as 
those of the United States and Western Europe, in a high-
context, relationship-based culture like Qatar it is common 
for  the  norms  to  be  personally  communicated.  Simply 
writing them down without adding the relational element to 
their  transmittal  may  convey  the  attitude  that  they  are 
unimportant  or  non-binding.  The  connections  developed 
through online participatory surveillance in Qatar therefore 
act  as  important  links  in  the  relational  chain  that  allows 
citizens 
to  communicate  shared  cultural  norms  and 
behavioral expectations.  
As 
social  media 
communications  have  provided  Qataris  another  avenue  to 
engage  in  relationship-based  cultural  practices.  Social 
media  afford  users  a  way  to  personally  communicate 
behavioral 
are 
generally welcomed and positively received among Qataris.  
To  further  illustrate  this  point,  when  asked  about  what  he 
posts on Instagram, P8 elaborates on activities regarding the 
encouragement of socially acceptable behavior: 
“[I]usually  post  pictures  of  me,  um,  like  the  experience  I 
face for example, when I don’t like something on the street, 
when  I  watch  something  weird,  when  I  am  proud  of 
something.  I, 
the  picture  along  with  a 
description…for example, someone throwing rubbish out of 
the window.”  

expectations—communications 

like,  share 

comments, 

evidenced 

important 

in  P3’s 

culture 

are 

that 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

to 

these  ends 

P8’s story is an additional example of how social media are 
used  as  a  way  to  collectively  regulate  behavior.  When  he 
sees people throwing litter out of car windows, he takes a 
photo  of  the  offense  and  posts  it  on  Instagram  and/or 
Twitter.  His  hope  is  that  others  will  do  the  same,  and 
motivate  people  to  keep  Qatar  clean  and  litter-free.  The 
popularity  of  social  media  in  Qatar  empowers  P8  to 
communicate behavioral expectations to others not adhering 
to social norms. 
In contrast, many Western expats living in Qatar are often 
uncomfortable by the use of social media to keep a watchful 
eye on residents. For example, in March 2014, the Ministry 
of Municipality and Urban Planning launched a cleanliness 
campaign  to  remind  residents  not  to  litter  [28].  The 
campaign  posted  signage  around  the  city  that  included 
slogans such as “Don’t spit on public property” and “Don’t 
throw  garbage  over  public  beaches.”  But  in  addition  to 
these simple statements of “rules” (very familiar to Western 
expats  accustomed  to  rules-based  cultural  practices),  the 
signs also included the following slogan: “We see you, you 
are  not  alone.”  From  a  Western  perspective,  such  a 
statement  seems  to  provide  an  implicit  message  that  Big 
Brother is watching. Yet for many Qataris, the slogan acts 
as  a  reminder  of  the  collective  dimension  required  to 
enforce shared expectations. Indeed, social media have also 
been  harnessed 
in  other  government 
campaigns,  such  as  efforts  to  curb  irresponsible  driving 
where residents can take photos of offenders and send them 
to  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior.  In  essence,  these  examples 
are ways in which Qataris apply social media to situations 
that  allow  them  to  encourage  and  maintain  traditional, 
socially acceptable behavior. 
Doing Hijab and Individual Identity  
The  importance  of  expressing  modesty  in  public  spaces  is 
symbolized by females’ practice of “doing hijab” [27]. The 
hijab is the traditional head covering worn by many Muslim 
females. Likewise, wearing the abaya and shayla are forms 
of doing hijab in that they index proper modesty. Siraj [30] 
argues that the hijab (or the abaya and shayla) is more than 
merely a piece of fabric worn to cover a female’s hair; it is 
an  “embodiment  of  modesty…it  offers  women 
the 
opportunity  to  assert  themselves  in  religious  practice  and 
allows  them  to  integrate  within  society.”  In  other  words, 
these  displays  of  modesty  allow  females 
to  assert 
themselves  as  “respectable”  while  going  about  their  daily 
lives  in  public  places.  Surveillance  by  members  of  a 
female’s  community  contributes  to  the  careful  attention 
paid  to  presenting  a  modest  image  when  in  public.  This 
holds for females in Qatar, and in many  communities and 
countries in which Islamic law is observed [27,30,36].  
Beyond forms of dress, the practice of doing hijab can be 
extended to actions and behaviors performed by Qataris as 
they  interact  in  social  media  contexts.  Qatari  females 
employ  methods  to  protect  themselves  from  unwanted 
attention  while  still  actively  participating  on  Instagram, 

Facebook, and other social media sites. Like the wearing of 
the abaya and shayla in public, the tactics adopted by Qatari 
females  on  social  media  sites  allow  them  to  display 
modesty while still expressing their individual identities.  
The most obvious indicator of doing hijab online is the lack 
of  photos  of  one’s  entire  face.  None  of  our  female 
participants  posted  pictures  of  their  faces  on  any  social 
media  sites,  which  is  similar  to  what  Rajakumar  found  in 
her study of Qatari girls [26]. In addition, Semaan and Mark 
discuss  the  lack  of  profile  photos  among  Iraqi  female 
Facebook users who wish to adhere to societal norms [29]. 
It  is  a  violation  of  Qatari  cultural  norms  for  females  to 
publically show photos of their entire faces that are not for 
professional purposes.4  
Publically posting photographs of oneself, or one’s family 
and friends, is a highly regulated practice among Qataris. In 
addition to Qatari females not posting photos of their faces, 
some Qatari males also avoid this practice. Public posting 
of photos of children’s faces is more common, though some 
families choose to refrain from doing this as well. However, 
there are differing views among Qataris of what exactly is 
appropriate  regarding  photos  of  faces,  particularly  female 
faces.  Some  females  will  not  post  any  part  of  their  faces, 
while  others  will  post  photos  that  show  only  part  of  their 
face so as to remain unidentifiable.   
For females, avoiding the posting of photos of one’s entire 
face  is  a  way  to  protect  themselves  from  potentially 
negative attention—publically displayed photos, they point 
out, may end up in the wrong hands, and the spreading of 
one’s photos to non-relative males would bring shame to a 
female and her family. Generally speaking, there is a sense 
that photos of one’s face are not meant to be seen or shared 
among strangers [26].  
During  a  conversation  about 
Instagram  use,  when 
discussing the photos she posts, P11 explains that she will: 
“post  half  my  face,  cuz  you  know  we  cannot  post  our 
pictures…so maybe part of my dress, part of my face.” 
In  avoiding  photos  of  the  entire  face,  P4  talks  about  how 
females will post other types of images on social media: 
“Most  of  the  girls  [who]  are  on  Facebook  will  put  like  a 
flower, or some pictures of trips…or even if they put their 
body,  it  will  be  like  from  a  far  distance  so  nobody  can 
recognize them.” 
Just as League and Chalmers [18] point out in their survey 
of  Facebook  usage  among  Arab  girls  living  in  Qatar,  the 
tactics discussed by both P11 and P4 afford Qatari females 
creative  ways  to  express  their  individual  identities  while 
adhering  to  cultural  norms  of  modesty.  They  use  a 
communicatory medium that opens them up to surveillance, 

                                                             
4 It is permissible for a female to show her face in a photo for professional 
reasons, i.e. a workplace website, or press release. 

 

532

SESSION: INTERNATONAL INSIGHTS

and  are  careful  to  express  appropriate  levels  of  modesty. 
However,  rather  than  being  agentless  actors  that  simply 
reproduce  cultural  expectations,  the  Qatari  females  in  our 
interviews  exercise  agency  as  they  carve  out  their  own 
forms  of  self-expression  through  the  posting  of  photos. 
Qatari females know they are being surveilled, but the state 
of surveillance does not equate to a lack of agency.  
Whereas “selfies” may dominate the feeds of social media 
users  in  Western  societies,  there  is  no  reason  why 
technologies  that  are  common  sites  for  the  posting  of 
photos  (e.g.  Facebook,  Instagram)  should  necessarily 
involve  a  focus  on  photos  of  the  self.  In  contrast  to  the 
Western tendency towards selfies, or photos of friends and 
family that show faces, these Qatari females demonstrate a 
different way to use social media. In other words, as social 
media  are  appropriated  by  Qataris,  they  are  repurposed  to 
fit the needs and expectations of the local Qatari context. 
In  addition  to  creative  uses  of  photos,  another  practice 
adopted by some Qatari females is to maintain two accounts 
within the same social media site. For example, P5 says: 
“like my friends, they have two accounts, accounts they can 
show  their  parents,  and  accounts  for  themselves…like 
accounts  where  they  post  their  photos,  like  from  the  lips 
down, they post it.” 
P5 explains that some of her friends have an Instagram or 
Facebook account in which they do not post any photos of 
themselves. Then, in a separate account, these same friends 
will  post  photos  that  show  parts  of  their  faces,  and  other 
photos which may not be condoned by family members, but 
which they would still like to share. 
Separately,  P7  discusses  how  she  manages  her  Facebook 
account. She attended college abroad, and while there, was 
permitted  to  interact  with  non-family  males  via  social 
media.  Her  parents  are  aware  of  this,  and  accept  her 
Facebook  relationships  as  they  began  in  an  educational 
setting,  and  they  trust  that  P7  does  not  communicate 
inappropriately  with  any  of  her  Facebook  contacts. 
However, not all family members approve of this practice. 
Below, P7 talks about her extended family, many of whom 
are opposed to her social media associations: 
“[H]ere 
they  don’t  accept 
friendship  between  a  boy  and  a  girl.  When  I  studied  in 
<country>  I  had  many  friends,  and  colleagues  which  are 
boys…and when I used to come in Qatar for my vacations, 
[my extended family said] ‘oh yeah, you have this guy on 
Facebook,  why  do  you  have  him?  Why  do  you  find  him? 
What does he tell you?’  It’s none of your business! So then, 
it’s  like,  ok,  for  you  guys,  for  your  mentality,  I’m  gonna 
give  you  whatever  you  want….So  like  these  people,  like, 
Type A, they can see whatever I want them to see, and Type 
B, they know my personality, they know me, and they know 
that  this  is  accepted…I  can  show  them  whatever  I 
want....[M]y cousins, my uncles, like they’re, they’re a bit 
like closed, and like they don’t like this…they followed me 

in  Qatar,  most 

families 

 

533

on Facebook just to know what I’m doing, and I got trouble 
from  this…they  keep  calling  me,  like  ‘why  are  you  doing 
this’? Like the name of the family, and, I was like, I’m not 
doing  anything  wrong!  [Y]ou  say  it’s  wrong.  It’s  not 
wrong.” 
P7 is aware of what she can control, and not control, when 
it comes to social media. Her tone and explanation in this 
passage  indicates  exasperation  with  her  extended  family, 
and signifies that she is being needlessly constrained. In the 
hopes  of  avoiding  further  familial  strife,  and  seeking  to 
appease those family members who do not agree with her 
choices and behavior (despite those choices and behaviors 
being sanctified by her parents), P7 manages her Facebook 
account  in  a  way  that  is  presentable  to  her  uncles  and 
cousins.  P7  is  aware  that  she  is  being  surveilled,  so  she 
leverages  the  privacy  settings  of  Facebook  in  a  way  that 
empowers  her  to  present  herself  as  mindful  of  the  family 
reputation,  and  which  her  uncles  and  cousins  consider 
acceptable.  Thus,  what  we  see  here 
first,  an 
acknowledgement  of  conventional  surveillance  by  P7.  But 
the  story  about  surveillance  does  not  end  there.  P7  then 
engages in a form of participatory surveillance that allows 
her  to  enact  a  form  of  collective  identity  management  for 
her  extended  family  while  expressing  herself  to  different 
audiences online. 
As described by P5 and P7, these tactics avoid the “context 
collapse”  [20]  typically  associated  with  social  media 
platforms  where  multiple  audiences  are  brought  together 
within a single context. As Marwick and boyd point out in 
their  study  of  Twitter,  users  adopt  a  variety  of  tactics  to 
navigate  the  multiple  audiences  they  address  through 
tweets. But another way to avoid the issues that accompany 
context  collapse  is  to  set  up  different  accounts  aimed  at 
discrete  audiences,  as  P5  describes,  or  to  manage  privacy 
settings, as in the case of P7. The viability of these tactics is 
made possible by the way many Qataris maintain exclusive 
access  to  their  feeds  for  different  audiences.  P5  mentions 
one account where parents (and family) would have access, 
and another where only close friends would have access. P7 
invokes  this  same  principle  by  tightly  managing  privacy 
settings  on  her  Facebook  account.  P5  and  P7’s  tactics  are 
not unlike those used by the participants in Woltrop’s [36] 
study of young Muslim women in urban Denmark who use 
Facebook 
in  both  visible  and  “invisible”  ways 
to 
communicate with friends, and with non-family males. 
Other interviewees also talked about how they set up tightly 
regulated  and  closely  monitored  friend  lists  for  Instagram 
and  Twitter.  For  example,  several  participants  said  that 
Instagram  and  SnapChat  are  only  for  family  and  close 
friends.  The 
strangers  or  even 
acquaintances  to  see  their  photos  or  have  access  to 
commenting  is  not  acceptable.  Discussing  concerns  about 
privacy,  P2  said  that  she  gives  access  to  only  34  family 
members and close friends to see her Instagram account: 

idea  of 

is, 

inviting 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

“I don’t allow anyone. I have a lot like, I have like two or 
three invitations, but I actually decline them. Yeah, because 
you know I have a lot of private things.” 
P2  spoke  about  the  images  she  posts  to  Instagram,  and 
showed the first author her account. Her photos consisted of 
food,  landscapes,  flowers,  and  accessories.  P2  had  a  story 
behind each of her photos, and explained why she took it, 
and why she chose to share it on Instagram. She spoke of 
Instagram as a diary of sorts, something to be shared with 
only a select few, and not for public consumption.  
In another interview, P6 said that she allows only about 20 
people to follow her Instagram account—again, only family 
and close friends. P6 allows cousins to follow her, but only 
females. She later discusses receiving a request from a male 
cousin who wanted to follow her on Instagram: 
“Cousins  can  follow  me,  but  the  female,  not  the  male…I 
have  one  cousin,  he’s  a  male,  but  I  didn’t  accept  him 
because…all the subjects, or the pictures that I’m posting, 
are for ladies, and he understands that.” 
It  is  customary  in  Gulf  Arab  culture  for  male  and  female 
cousins to be separated around the age of puberty. So while 
P6  knows  her  male  cousin,  allowing  him  to  see  her 
Instagram  photos  or  to  interact  with  him  through  the  site 
would  be  inappropriate.  By  denying  her  cousin’s  request, 
P6  is  maintaining  the  collective  identity  of  the  extended 
family  by  choosing  not  to  interact  inappropriately  with  a 
male, even though he is part of that same family. In effect, 
her  cousin’s  request  placed  P6  in  a  position  to  assert  her 
authority  as  someone  who  is  attentive  to  the  family 
reputation,  and  which  empowers  her  to  maintain  her 
identity as a modest female. 
In sum, as females “do hijab” on social media, they do so 
with an eye toward how the persona they put forth will be 
received  by  actual  or  potential  audiences.  The  state  of 
surveillance  can  be  empowering  as  it  allows  them  the 
opportunity  to  voluntarily  engage  with  others  as  they 
construct 
this  way,  as 
Albrechtslund  [5]  points  out,  participatory  (i.e.  social) 
surveillance is “about the act of sharing yourself—or your 
constructed identity—with others.” As seen in the interview 
excerpts  above,  Qatari  females  find  creative  ways  to 
express 
their 
audiences  as  they  work  within  the  expectations  of  their 
cultural tradition.  
Modesty and Collective Identity 
Perhaps more important than the expressions of individual 
identities seen in the previous section is the co-construction 
of familial identity. After all, much of the interactive work 
done  on  social  media,  especially  as  it  revolves  around 
communicating expectations of modesty, occurs against the 
backdrop  of  a  collectivist  cultural  orientation.  How  a 
female presents herself is just as important for her family’s 
collective  position  in  society  as  it  is  for  her  individual 
status. 

identities  and  manage 

individual 

their 

their 

individual 

identities.  In 

P7 spoke at length about her male relatives’ expectations of 
her behavior on social media and the tactics they implement 
to  regulate  her  behavior  and  preserve 
the  family’s 
reputation. Her brothers do not allow her to access or view 
their Instagram profiles; she cannot see what they post, and 
vice-versa. She explains: 
“They don’t want their friends to see my posts or anything, 
so they don’t add me.”  
Later, P7 says:  
“I  don’t  follow  them  and  they  don’t  follow  me…because 
once  I  followed  my  brother,  and  whenever  he  posted 
something, I would like it, and make a comment, and then 
his friends started to ask ‘who is this?’ so he unfollowed me 
and blocked me.”  
P7 explains that it is unacceptable for her to be in any kind 
of communication with the friends or acquaintances of her 
brother. This would violate the practice of properly “doing 
hijab”  online.  It  would  be  seen  as  an  act  of  immodest 
behavior observable by others. But here, P7’s brother helps 
her do hijab by taking the step to unfollow her on Instagram 
and  block  access  to  his  posts.  This  ensures  the  gendered 
separation  that  is  expected  between  P7  and  her  brother’s 
male friends.  
As  noted  earlier,  violations  of  modesty  expectations  and 
other unacceptable behavior tend to make their way back to 
the family. But the disappointment felt by the family arises 
not simply out of what the violation means for the female as 
an individual, but also for the way the violation negatively 
constructs the family as a group. As a result, online social 
surveillance  provides  a  means  by  which  family  members 
co-construct  familial  identity.  The  moment  P7  posted  a 
comment  to  her  brother’s  Instagram  photo,  she  entered  a 
public  space  in  which  she  was  exposed  to  non-relative 
males.  That  exposure  violates  the  cultural  norms  of 
modesty. So, by blocking her, her brother protects not only 
P7, but the reputation of their family as well. 
Given  the  relationship-based,  collectivist  orientation  of 
Qatari society, social surveillance operates to communicate 
shared  behavioral  expectations.  As  discussed  earlier, 
personally  communicating  these  expectations  is  central  to 
high-context,  relationship-based  cultural  practices.  Social 
media provide a new way to document what is deemed to 
be  inappropriate  behavior  and  to  call  out  or  shame  group 
members for exercising improper judgment.  
P7 goes on to describe the way using social media as a tool 
for surveillance enters into these practices of enforcing and 
communicating modesty violations: 
“…we’re  not  supposed  to  go  out  without  our  abayas,  but 
some  people  do…,so  when  you  post  this  on  social 
media…then  people  are  gonna  say  ‘wait,  this  is  not  your 
culture.’ So it affects them somehow.”  
When asked to explain, P7, elaborated:  

 

534

SESSION: INTERNATONAL INSIGHTS

the  ability 

“[Y]ou  don’t  know  the  person,  you  just  like  saw  her,  you 
just ‘look guys, look what I found today…cuz once me and 
my cousin were at [popular, crowded area of Doha], and 
there  was  someone  in  his  Bentley  and  he  was  like…he 
opened  the  roof,  and  he  had  a  girl  with  him.  My 
cousin…took  a  picture  of  them,  and  she  [posted  to 
Instagram] ‘look guys! Someone out with her boyfriend!’” 
P7 goes on to explain that the female in question may have 
been with her brother or her husband. But if she was in a 
compromising  situation,  it  is  entirely  possible  that  such  a 
photo will make the rounds on Instagram, someone would 
identify her, and the episode would cause the family of the 
female in question shame.  
In each of these excerpts from P7, at issue is not simply the 
female’s identity as a socially recognized and “respectable” 
subject (although it certainly includes that) but also how the 
female’s family as a whole will be identified within wider 
society.  It  is  not  merely  individuals  who  are  under 
surveillance  when  they  step  out  in  public,  but  entire 
families. And through the use of social media, others within 
the  Qatari  community  have 
to  enforce 
expectations, thereby helping to maintain tradition. 
After  talking  about  how  other  Qatari  females  have  been 
negatively  impacted  by  their  photos  being  circulated  on 
social media, P7 explains why she is very mindful of who 
she will share photos and videos with: 
“It’s  like  um,  they  can  see  me,  like  I  don’t  cover  my  face 
when I go out, but cuz like, as a Qatari society, pictures for 
especially  girls…they  make  a  lot  of  trouble.  Especially  if 
they  went  in  the  wrong  hands…cuz  you  don’t  want  the 
reputation to come about you. For example, when you’re in 
a car and [there is] music you know, you’re singing a song 
whatever, ok, and you take a video. Ok, so my friend, I’m 
not  sure  if  she’s  gonna  show  it  to  someone.  And  this 
someone…says oh <P7> sings when she drives, or dances 
when she drives, or whatever, you know, and these things 
spread. So when I do these things, I just send it to people 
that I’m sure of.” 
Like  many  females  her  age,  P7  enjoys  driving  in  the  city 
with her friends, listening to music, and having fun as they 
travel  around  Doha.  Sometimes,  they  take  photos  and 
videos of their experiences, but P7 will only partake in the 
photographing or recording if she is absolutely certain that 
the person with the photos or video will not share them. Her 
concern is that the file will wind up in the wrong hands, and 
she and her family’s reputation will be negatively affected. 
She is intensely aware of the repercussions that will come 
to pass for both her—and more importantly—her family, if 
a  photo  or  video  spreads  through  the  Qatari  community 
without her consent.  
In another interview, P11 discusses why she will not allow 
photos of herself to be made available publicly. Her careful 
management of her photos is due to the concern that they 
could be misconstrued or used against her or her family: 

 

535

intersubjective 

interactions 

in  a 

relationship-based  culture,  but 

“Because  unfortunately  a  lot  of  Qatari  men  misuse  these 
social  media,  and  I’ve  noticed  that,  I  mean,  if  a  guy,  if  a 
Qatari guy found a full picture of a girl, for example, in her 
room, or in her car, he can use that photo negatively…so 
that’s  why  women,  Qatari  women,  they  don’t  post  their 
pictures.” 
When asked about how males might use photos negatively, 
P11 went on: 
“[T]hey will just…they will spread the photo, and they will 
say ‘oh this girl, her name is this, her dad is this, blah blah 
blah,’ and people will start talking bad, and unfortunately, 
this is how it goes. Yeah, so we need to be careful on what 
we’re posting.” 
Not only do these excerpts illustrate the way social media 
are  appropriated  to  communicate  and  enforce  behavioral 
norms 
it  also 
underscores  the  way  family  identities  are  co-constructed 
through 
among  Qataris. 
Although  work  on  identity  and  interaction  has  focused  on 
the  intersubjective  positioning  of  the  individual  self  and 
others  [8],  here  we  see  the  co-construction  of  familial 
identities—that  is,  the  social  positioning  of  a  collective 
family in relation to other families.  
The  collective  enforcement  of  modesty  is  also  well 
illustrated with the furor that erupted over images of young 
Qataris involved in a service learning trip to Brazil during 
the summer of 2014. As part of a charity effort, four young 
females and three young males journeyed to Brazil to help 
rebuild  a  school.  The  trip  was  originally  sponsored  by 
Vodafone Qatar and was filmed as part of a documentary. 
As  part  of  the  documentary  film  project,  video  clips  were 
posted  online  after  the  students  arrived  in  Brazil.  But  the 
clips  were  negatively  received  back  in  Qatar  where  many 
Qataris took to social media to denounce what they deemed 
to  be  modesty  violations  as  the  film  clips  showed  the 
females with hair uncovered and wearing Western clothes. 
In the end, the public outcry effectively communicated and 
ultimately  enforced  cultural  expectations 
insofar  as 
Vodafone Qatar withdrew its support for the trip. The trip 
and the making of the documentary nevertheless continued 
through to fruition [35]. 
DISCUSSION 
The  ways  in  which  social  media  are  used  in  practices  of 
online  surveillance  must  be  closely  examined  from  the 
cultural perspective of the users involved in those practices. 
Whereas  a  conventional  perspective  on  surveillance—
highly influenced by hierarchical assumptions about power 
and by Western ideologies of the individual—might impose 
a top-down, Big Brother type framework to explain the way 
social  media  are  used 
to  enforce  and  communicate 
behavioral norms, we argue that such a view of surveillance 
needs  to  be  complicated  and  expanded  to  include  other 
conceptions  of  surveillance.  Throughout  our  data  and 
analysis,  we  see  how  our  participants  utilize,  respond  to, 

[5], 

and maneuver around various types of surveillance in ways 
that  empower  them  to  exercise  individual  agency.  This 
imbues  them  with  the  power  to  creatively  express  their 
individual  identities  and  co-construct  familial  identities  in 
line with the norms of their culture.  
We  find  the  conception  of  surveillance  in  terms  of 
participatory  or  social  surveillance  particularly  fruitful  for 
understanding  the  dynamics  of  social  media  use  within 
Qatari society. Instead of reducing those under surveillance 
“to  a  powerless,  passive  subject  under  the  control  of  the 
‘gaze’” 
the  concept  of  participatory  or  social 
surveillance adopts the view of power put forth by Foucault 
[10].  In  this  view,  power  circulates  throughout  society  so 
individuals  comprise  nodes  of  “capillary  power.”  In  this 
way,  instead  of  an  all-powerful  agent  exerting  top-down 
power on powerless individuals, social media users exercise 
power as they interact on social media sites. The image of 
capillary nodes corresponds well with the structure of social 
networking  sites  where  each  user  effectively  represents  a 
node in a wider network. In this way, social media users are 
empowered  as  they  participate  in  social  surveillance  to 
construct shared norms and communicate those norms.  
It is not that these social media users simply internalize the 
external  gaze  of  a  dominant  entity  to  enforce  cultural 
expectations. That would be, as Albrechtschlund [5] points 
out,  “the  pseudo-participation  we  know 
the 
Panopticon  and  Orwell’s  Nineteen  Eighty-Four.”  Rather, 
they  actively  construct  those  expectations  in  line  with  a 
collective vision of what it means to be Qatari in a modern 
world.  In  a  relationship-based  society  where  behavioral 
norms  must  be  personally  communicated  if  they  are  to  be 
upheld, 
those 
social 
communicative practices.  
Conceptions  of  surveillance  are  often  presented  in  the 
literature as an either/or proposition, as if surveillance can 
only  be  viewed  from  either  one  perspective  or  the  other. 
Indeed,  we  have  emphasized  the  participatory  view  of 
surveillance  in  this  analysis  in  an  effort  to  counter  the 
traditional  way  of  viewing  surveillance  that  seems  to  us 
incongruent  with  the  way  social  media  is  primarily 
understood  and  oriented  to  by  the  participants  in  the 
relationship-based society we studied. But we do not mean 
to suggest from this analytical emphasis that only one form 
of surveillance or the other exists in any given situation, nor 
traditional 
do  we 
conception  of  surveillance  and 
in 
patriarchal  societies.  Rather,  it  is  important  to  recognize 
that surveillance comprises myriad dimensions. In arguing 
that conceptions of surveillance need to be complicated and 
expanded, we therefore suggest that the CSCW community 
move 
toward  an  understanding  of  surveillance  as 
comprising  multiple  dimensions  to  differing  degrees.  The 
analytical  task  therefore  becomes  one  of  first  determining 
which  dimension  predominates  in  certain  social  practices 
and  then  unraveling  the  trace  left  behind  by  the  other 

to  completely  dismiss 

surveillance 

enables 

online 

intend 

the 

the  role 

it  plays 

from 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

traditional  values.  The  difficulty  of 

dimension within those practices. The latter task is beyond 
the scope of the current paper, but is one we hope to take up 
in further research that continues to complicate and expand 
our understandings of surveillance and social media use. In 
particular,  future  work  that  builds  on  our  current  study 
needs  to  understand  to  what  extent  the  practice  of  “doing 
hijab”  may  become  limiting  to  participants  even  while  it 
allows them to exercise agency.  
Moreover, as our study shows, the use of social surveillance 
among  these  Qataris  provides  an  important  avenue  by 
which  they  negotiate  the  challenge  of  modernizing  while 
preserving 
that 
challenge  is  made  apparent  in  Giddens’  statement  that 
“inherent  to  the  idea  of  modernity  is  a  contrast  with 
tradition” [11]. Yet, as we have illustrated in our analysis, 
the  adoption  of  modern  technologies  such  as  social  media 
afford  Qataris  a  modern  means  to  engage  in  familiar, 
relationship-based cultural practices that empower them to 
uphold  traditional  religious  values  and  social  mores.  In 
many  ways,  social  media  hold  substantial  potential  for 
relationship-based  societies  given  the  relationship-based 
nature  of  social  media  sites,  providing  new  technological 
means to network, connect, and communicate.  
Limitations 
The most salient limitation of the current study is that our 
analysis is limited to a small sub-set of Qataris. As such, the 
sample of Qataris we interviewed is not fully representative 
of  the  society  as  a  whole.  Notably,  the  participants  in  our 
interviews  comprise  younger,  educated,  mostly  female 
English-speaking Qataris. Our claims are therefore limited 
in scope and are not meant to provide an all-encompassing 
description of social media behavior across all demographic 
groups  in  Qatari  society.  Moreover,  the  participants  may 
represent a self-selection bias in that they all self-identify as 
adhering to Qatari norms and values; we did not talk with 
anyone who openly flouts or resists those norms.  
Nevertheless, with this limited group, we gain insight into 
how  social  media  are  used  in  ways  that  reflect  and/or 
reinforce Qatari cultural norms, particularly as experienced 
by females who have a greater responsibility in upholding 
tradition.  The  tactics  our  interviewees  employ  when  using 
social media speak to the way they use the technologies in 
relation  to  Qatari-specific  sensibilities.  We  suggest  that 
similar  tactics  may  be  employed  by  other  Qataris  that  use 
social media. But further research is required to probe the 
specific uses for which social media is employed by other 
Qatari citizens, especially those who are monolingual Arab 
speakers,  of  older  generations,  or  without  any  tertiary 
education.  Furthermore,  given  the  focus  on  females  in  the 
current study, it would be interesting to gain greater insight 
into the social media practices of Qatari males. The results 
of this study can serve as the foundation for further research 
that  focuses  on  larger  and  more  diverse  aspects  of  Qatari 
society,  and  asks  farther-reaching  questions.  Ultimately, 
such research could speak to the design and production of 

 

536

SESSION: INTERNATONAL INSIGHTS

explaining 

how 

the 

through 

transformation, 

the  “traditional” 

media aimed at users who share the values and norms we 
describe. 
CONCLUSION 
The  research  we  present  describes  the  social  media 
experiences of a group of educated, mostly female Qataris 
who  currently  navigate  such  sites  with  a  constant  need  to 
reinterpret existing features to fit expectations, particularly 
as  those  expectations  relate  to  a  sense  of  preserving 
tradition. We point to ways in which users construe social 
media  to  fit  their  needs,  and  highlight  how  surveillance 
within  a  high-context  society  manifests  via  social  media 
use.  Future  work  will  focus  on  how  to  bring  together  the 
“modern”  and 
technological 
means. 
Overall,  we  provide  an  analysis  of  the  practices  that  a 
sample of Qataris engage in as they navigate various social 
media, 
the 
reinterpretation, the owning, of these sociotechnical objects 
are now becoming subject to “processes of localization that 
make  their  regional  appropriation  distinctive”  [22].  Social 
media  sites  and  services  in  the  United  States  are  not,  in 
practice, the same social media sites and services in Qatar, 
even  though  they  bear  the  same  names  of  “Instagram,” 
“Facebook,”  and  so  on.  The  way  these  social  media  are 
viewed,  used,  and  appropriated  is  specific  to  the  local 
contexts  to  which  they  migrate.  People  work  within  the 
confines  and  limitations  of  the  technology,  and  within  the 
expectations of their cultural norms to present and represent 
themselves through social media. Our aim has been to draw 
awareness to how Qatari cultural practices are enacted and 
performed  via  social  media.  This  will  lead  to  future 
research that continues to examine how non-Western users 
can  be  accommodated,  and  empowered,  through  social 
media use. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank our participants for their time and feedback; and 
we  are  grateful  to  several  anonymous  reviewers  who 
provided insightful and helpful comments. 
REFERENCES 
1.  Norah Abokhodair, Daisy Yoo, and David McDonald. 
2015. Dissecting a Social Botnet: Growth, Content and 
Influence on Twitter. In Proceedings of the ACM 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
and Social Computing (CSCW ’15), 839-851. 

2.  Ban Al-Ani, Gloria Mark, and Bryan Semaan. 2010. 
Blogging Through Conflict: Sojourners in the Age of 
Social Media. In Proceedings of the 3rd International 
Conference on Intercultural Collaboration (ICIC ’10), 
29-38. 

3.  Badreya Nasser Abdullah Al Jenaibi. 2011. Use of 

Social Media in the United Arab Emirates: An Initial 
Study. Global Media Journal, Arabian Edition. 1, 2: 3-
27. 

 

537

4.  Khaled Al Omoush, Saad Ghaleb Yaseen, and 

Mohammad Atwah Alma’aitah. 2012. The impact of 
Arab cultural values on online social networking: The 
case of Facebook. Computers in Human Behavior. 28: 
2387-2399. 

5.  Anders Albrechtslund. 2008. Online Social Networking 

as Participatory Surveillance. First Monday. 13, 3.  

6.  Tamara Alsheikh, Jennifer A. Rode, and Siân E. 

Lindley. 2011. (Whose) Value-Sensitive Design? A 
Study of Long-Distance Relationships in an Arabic 
Cultural Context. In Proceedings of the ACM 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
and Social Computing (CSCW ’11), 75-84. 

7.  Arjun Appadurai. 1990. Disjuncture and difference in 

the global culture economy. Theory, Culture, and 
Society. 7: 295-310. 

8.  Mary Bucholtz and Kira Hall. 2005. Identity and 

interaction: a sociocultural linguistic approach. 
Discourse Studies. 7, 4-5. 585-614. 

9.  Nahed Eltantawy and Julie B. Wiest. 2011. Social 
Media in the Egyptian Revolution: Reconsidering 
Resource Mobilization Theory. International Journal 
of Communication. 5. (2011), 207-1224. 

10.  Michel Foucault, M. 1972. The Archaeology of 

Knowledge and the Discourse on Language. Pantheon 
Books, New York, NY. 

11.  Anthony Giddens. 1990. The Consequences of 

Modernity. Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA.  

12.  Edward T. Hall. 1976. Beyond Culture. Anchor Books, 

New York, NY. 

13.  Geoff Harkness. 2012. Out of Bounds: Cultural 

Barriers to Female Sports Participation in Qatar. The 
International Journal of the History of Sport. 29, 15. 
(October 2012), 2162-2183. 

14.  John N. Hooker. 2012. Cultural Differences in 

Business Communication. In Handbook of 
Intercultural Discourse and Communication, C.B. 
Paulston, S.F. Keating, and E.S. Rangel (eds.). Wiley, 
Chichester, UK, 389-407. 

15.  Mehran Kamrava. 2013. Qatar: Small State, Big 

Politics. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY. 

16.  Tanya Kane. 2012. Transplanting Education: A Case 
Study for the Production of “American-style” Doctors 
in a Non-American Setting. Ph.D. Dissertation. 
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. 

17.  Habibul Haque Khondker. 2011. Role of the New 

Media in the Arab Spring. Globalizations. 8, 5: 675-
679. 

18.  Rodda League and Ivana Chalmers. 2010. Degrees of 
Caution: Arab Girls Unveil on Facebook. In Gender 
and Citizenship in the Middle East, S.R. Mazzarella 
(ed.). Syracuse University Press, Syracuse, NY, 27-44. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.C
D.  

33. Karen Tracy. 2007. The Discourse of Crisis in Public

Meetings: Case Study of a School District’s
Multimillion Dollar Error. Journal of Applied
Communication Research. 35, 4: 418-441.

34. Blase Ur and Yang Wang. 2013. A Cross-Cultural
Framework for Protecting User Privacy in Online
Social Media. In Proceedings of the International
World Wide Web Conference (WWW ’13), 755-762.
35. Lesley Walker. 2015. Documentary Recaps Qataris’
Charity Amazon Trip But Skirts Controversy. Doha
News, (19 January 2015). Retrieved October 11, 2015
from http://dohanews.co/documentary-recaps-qataris-
charity-amazon-trip-skirts-controversy

36. Karen Waltorp. 2013. Public/private negotiations in the

media uses of young Muslim women in Copenhagen:
Gendered social control and the technology-enabled
moral laboratories of a multicultural city. International
Communication Gazette. 75, 5-6: 555-572.

37. Volker Wulf, Kaoru Misaki, Meryem Atam, David

Randall, and Markus Rohde. 2013. ‘On the Ground’ in
Sidi Bouzid: Investigating Social Media Use during the
Tunisian Revolution. In Proceedings of the ACM
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
and Social Computing (CSCW ’13), 1409-1418.

19. Gloria Mark, Ban Al-Ani, and Bryan Semaan. 2009.
Resilience Through Technology Adoption: Merging
the Old and the New in Iraq. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’09), 689-698.

20. Alice Marwick and danah boyd. 2011. I tweet honestly,

I tweet passionately: Twitter users, context collapse,
and the imagined audience. New Media & Society. 13,
1: 114-133.

21. Alice Marwick. 2012. The Public Domain: Social

Surveillance in Everyday Life. Surveillance & Society.
9, 4: 378-393.

22. Daniel Miller. 2011. Tales from Facebook. Polity

Press, UK.

23. Ministry of Development Planning and Statistics. 2015.

Population. Retrieved October 11, 2015 from
http://www.qsa.gov.qa/eng/populationstructure.htm.

24. Qatar National Vision 2030. 2008.

http://www.gsdp.gov.qa/portal/page/portal/gsdp_en/qat
ar_national_vision/qnv_2030_document

25. Damian Radcliffe. 2014. Social Media in the Middle

East: The Story of 2014.
http://www.ictqatar.qa/sites/default/files/social_media_
research_summary_english_final.pdf

26. Mohanalakshmi Rajakumar. 2012. Faceless Facebook:
Female Qatari Users Choosing Wisely. In New Media
Literacies and Participatory Popular Culture Across
Borders. Bronwyn T. Williams and Amy A. Zenger
(eds.). Routledge, NY, NY. 125-134.

27. Tabassum F. Ruby. 2005. Listening to the voices of

hijab. Women’s Studies International Forum. 29.
(2006) 54-66.

28. Victoria Scott. 2014. Qatar Officially Launches

Cleanliness Campaign. Doha News (20 March 2014).
Retrieved October 11, 2015 from
http://dohanews.co/details-confusing-cleanliness-
campaign-official-launch/.

29. Bryan Semaan and Gloria Mark. 2012. ‘Facebooking’
Towards Crisis Recovery and Beyond: Disruption as
Opportunity. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social
Computing (CSCW ’12) 27-36.

30. Asifa Siraj. 2011. Meanings of modesty and the hijab

amongst Muslim women in Glasgow, Scotland.
Gender, Place and Culture. 18, 6. (December 2011),
716-731.

31. Ekaterina Stepanova. 2011. The Role of Information
Communication Technologies in the ‘Arab Spring.’
PONARS Eurasia Policy Memo No. 159.

32. The World Bank. 2015. GDP Per Capita. Retrieved

October 11, 2015 from

538

