CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Moving Western Neighborliness to East? A study on Local

Exchange in Bangladesh

Federico Cabitza, Angela Locoro, Carla Simone and Tunazzina Sultana

Universita’ degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca

Viale Sarca 336, 20126 Milano, Italy

{cabitza,angela.locoro,simone,sultana}@disco.unimib.it

ABSTRACT
This paper focuses on the main question whether so-
cial media speciﬁcally conceived to enable local exchange
trading schema can be adopted in diﬀerent contexts than
the western digitized society, where those systems have
been considered a feasible alternative to money-based
capitalism. We report a qualitative study employing fo-
cus groups to study the factors which may aﬀect the
adoption of these social media in Bangladesh, a de-
veloping country that exhibits characteristics such as
strong young unemployment, gender-oriented underem-
ployment, aging population, but also a reduced access to
the service economy due to the lack of spare time. The
beneﬁts of local exchange seem to be particularly ﬁtting
the urban and social structure of Bangladesh.

Author Keywords
Time Accounting Systems; Time Banks; Developing
Countries

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.3 Group and Organization Information interfaces
and presentation

INTRODUCTION
Local Exchange Trading Schema (or Systems, anyway
LETS) regard the informal, yet normed, “exchange of
goods and services within a group” [2] on the basis of
proximity and reciprocity. They are widely promoted
as initiatives with a potential for local economic devel-
opment [2] by establishing a community currency that
is alternative to the traditional monetary one and by
coordinating members of a local community in the pur-
suit of objectives that often combine economic, social,
community, ethical and environmental goals [28]. These
schema of joint and social actions are also seen as “a re-
sponse to the local social and economic consequences of
globalization” [23] and capitalism, and as a resource for

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and
that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. Request permissions
from Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW’16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA
2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02?$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819971

1766

the development of “areas suﬀering from a shortage of
cash where untapped capacity is accompanied by unmet
needs” [28]. LETS that regard service exchange only
are usually referred to in terms of Time Banking sys-
tems, or simply Time Banks: this kind of systems are
the focus of this paper.

One the authors of the present study is from Bangladesh
and, during her PhD program, she studied a number of
LETS experiences, and wondered whether this kind of
initiatives could be replicated in the context of where
she was from, that is the urban neighborhoods within the
steadily growing megalopolis of Bangladesh, where some
of the notorious alienating factors of western cities [28],
[19] could soon arise or are already manifest [8]. To
address this research question, we undertook a qualita-
tive research on Time Banks. However, following the
wariness of [6] in adopting the bank metaphor (which
is so ingrained with the concept of interest on assets,
consumable capitals and saving as an end in itself), in
this research we use the expression “Time Accounting
System” (TAS) to explicitly avoid the unintended aﬃni-
ties with the bank concept and also to emphasize that:
i) the local currency which allows to extend to a com-
munity the one-to-one relationship typical of barter or
work provision is “time”, under the assumption that ev-
eryone’s time is valued equally (“one hour equals one
hour” is the typical motto); ii) the main activity that
enables a network of fair exchanges is accounting, that is
the artifact-based record-keeping that is necessary to ac-
count for (i.e., report) what each member of the system
has received (spent) and given (earned) and the related
balance; and iii) what is exchanged is time devoted to
work, and the system, seen as a socio-technical ensemble
of actors, regards the articulation of this exchange (not
only in terms of mere accounting).

According to [5], western countries already show a reno-
vated interest for this (not new) form of favor-exchange
based on time and for its computational counterpart [5,
6, 31]. This interest is motivated by two main contingen-
cies: i) the massive lack of employment of vast propor-
tions of the population; and ii) the pervasive presence of
mobile devices as a means to connect and empower net-
works of people and communities at large (which is not
surprising, considering that one yearly mobile subscrip-
tion + the phone device costs approximately less than

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

5% of the average yearly salary). In this light, we aim
to study how (and primarily if ) this kind of schema,
and the promoting technologies, could be received in
developing countries, where strong urbanization, high
levels of unemployment (especially among the younger)
and low-income households are phenomena intertwined
and connected to the progressive adoption of the west-
ern model of “civilization” and to the appropriation of
the related “way of life”: to the best of our knowledge,
this kind of research has never been accomplished before.
To pursue our aim, we have focused on Bangladesh, by
many respects the most densely populated country in
the world that is undergoing a rapid socio-economic and
demographic change, and where approximately half of
the population is young, un- or under-employed. More
precisely, we have focused on the emerging chain of cities
in the Bengal region which count more than 35 million
inhabitants.

In what follows, we ﬁrst give some brief elements on the
social context of Bangladesh and we introduce the main
motivations and background of this research considering
the role of ICT in general, and of those systems that can
help set up, maintain and run a TAS in particular. We
then report and discuss the main ﬁndings from a series
of focus groups that explore the main challenges and
opportunities related to the introduction of this class of
applications in the social context under consideration.
Finally, a short conclusion summarizes the main points
of the contribution and indicates the next steps of our
research.

The social context
In Bangladesh the 78% of the total labor forces are males
and only 22% are females, though women constitute
about 50% of the total population1. The unemployment
rate is about 5% and underemployment (i.e. working
only a few hours a week at very low wages) is estimated
as being 40%2. The share of the population above the
age of 60 is growing at a rapid rate and is estimated to
double its growth in 2030. This change in the demo-
graphic proﬁle is taking place along with change in fam-
ily structures (from extended to nuclear type), and ur-
banization. The family support system is also changing
in Bangladesh, due to the changes in social and cultural
values [14], whose deterioration leads to a large escala-
tion of social, health and economic insecurity3. Social
networking sites are used by less than 3% of the whole
population [26]; however the number of mobile and In-
ternet subscribers as well as Internet users are rapidly
growing since the last few years due to mobile Internet4.
People are now rapidly switching from feature phones to
smartphones, which are no longer perceived as unaﬀord-
able devices5.
1Bangladesh Population and Housing Census 2011
2The World Factbook, 2012
3United Nations, 2007, Country Statement of Bangladesh
4Ministry of Science and Information & Communication
Technology, People’s Republic of Bangladesh
5CyberMedia Research (CMR), 2013

Background and motivations for TAS
Social media have been widely deﬁned and character-
ized [16], tracked in their adoption trajectories [11], and
their technological, political and socio-economic impact
for developing countries has been carefully considered [3,
15, 25, 10, 34]. Some studies narrow the analysis of per-
ception, adoption, use and appropriation of ICT focusing
more on age [18, 35], gender issues [22], and the pecu-
liarities of local communities [9].

The occurring of an unprecedented economic fault and
the general civic push to overcome social exclusion have
recently led to reconsider alternative or complementary
systems to the leading monetary-based system, like time
banking and accounting [30, 29, 21, 5]. The TAS are de-
ﬁned as “community-based volunteer schemas whereby
participants give and receive services in exchange of time
credits” [30] and they are claimed to foster “personal de-
velopment, conﬁdence-building, forging social networks
and gaining skills for aiding job-readiness”, as well as
“building community capacity and self-help, as well as
social inclusion” (ibid.). According to [21], TAS is based
on the notion of co-production, as means to “value the
work of everyone and to let people help others as well
as themselves, in order to ameliorate the condition of
each participant”. Like any collaborative work practice,
also these time-based work exchange schemas need to be
properly supported and coordinated.

Western experiences with TAS suggests some social [29,
31] challenges to be aware of, as well as technological [5]
lessons learnt to retain for the actual sustainability of
prospective computational TAS systems. Among the so-
cial challenges, for instance, the importance to keep a
clear distinction between the concept of volunteering and
that of TAS is considered critical [29], as well as the need
to “diﬀerentiate across diﬀerent service categories” so as
to possibly smooth the perception of unequal value in
incomparable services provision [31], to foster the com-
mitment of full-time leaders and to conceive “help desk”
services on a constant basis. Among the technological
challenges, relevant requirements include the provision
of intelligent and context-aware services [5] to allow for
the matching between real-time requests and oﬀers, such
as for example services of localization, online proﬁling
updates, and the automatic recording of time balances
just after the provision of a service, that is without the
need to log into the system and manually adjust the pro-
vision or consumption of time. With the aim to assess
the readiness of the Bengali society for the inception of
a TAS in their urban context, and in light of these high-
level recommendations and design requirements, we con-
ceived and carried out the qualitative research described
in the following sections.

TWO EXPLORATORY STUDIES
In the next two sections we will report the main ﬁndings
of the preliminary survey that we accomplished and of
the subsequent focus groups that shed light on the poten-

1767

tial for the adoption of a TAS system in the Bangladesh
urban domain.

The questionnaire-based telephone interviews
The lack of any speciﬁc study of the adoption of a TAS
in developing countries led us to look for an original
and contextualized picture of the potential of TAS in
Bangladesh. The only exception was a questionnaire-
based survey [32] that involved a random and represen-
tative sample of the urban Bangladesh population.
In
that study the authors detected both facilitating factors
and potential obstacles for the adoption of a TAS in ur-
ban contexts. In regard to the facilitating factor we can
consider the diﬀusion of ICT: a very high proportion of
respondents (90%) claimed to use at least one digital
device connected to the Internet for personal purposes;
notably, exactly 2 respondent out of 3 (66%) declared
to possess a smart-phone and more than 83% respon-
dents claimed to have an Internet connection, which
is considered fast and reliable enough for their needs,
and almost half of them have a ﬂat connection. Con-
sequently, familiarity with ICTs and services accessible
through the Internet was found to be high: 72% of the
respondents declared a good familiarity and this percep-
tion was not dependent on age or gender, partly counter-
intuitively. Furthermore, a high percentage of people
(75%) expressed a strong feeling to belong to their com-
munity of place (be it the city block or neighborhood),
and a clear tendency in the responses was found about a
positive attitude in giving help to neighbors or strangers,
if they needed or asked for it. To this regard, it is note-
worthy that the survey participants having a higher ICT
familiarity expressed a stronger willingness to help. This
can be read in terms of a general and positive attitude
of Bangladeshi urban communities toward espousing the
TAS principles and mechanisms. However, also poten-
tial obstacles were found in the analysis of the telephone
interviews: very few people knew of initiatives of time
accounting and complementary currencies (4%), and a
negative (weak yet) correlation was found between the
attitude to become a TAS member and the feeling of
belonging to a religious community established in their
city, which nevertheless was a very much diﬀused feeling
among the respondents (85%). Moreover, the respon-
dents expressed a signiﬁcant wariness towards asking for
help to strangers for the typical services provided within
a TAS, e.g., small errands. For this reason, the survey
results allowed us to extract some themes, both from
the negative and the positive sides of the TAS concept,
to focus on with the more context-and culture-sensitive
technique of the focus group, which we will describe in
what follows.

The focus groups
Our focus groups were organized and moderated by
one of the authors in Bangladesh in Summer 2014.
The group discussions were conducted by adopting the
methodology proposed in [33] to evaluate the percep-
tion of the concept of TAS, and to extract ideas upon

1768

SESSION: HOME AND FAMILY

which to ground our understanding of how the tech-
nology could support the “contingent, processual and
dynamic materialization” of everyday life practices like
the ones of a TAS adopted by the urban population of
Bangladesh [24]. The focus groups involved thirty-two
participants, lasting seven hours altogether. The 32 par-
ticipants were divided in 4 focus groups of 8 participants
each, so that the groups were all homogeneous with re-
spect to gender, age, employment condition, and use vs.
no use of mobile phones, as illustrated in Table 1.

The eight participants in each focus group were selected
partly on a convenience basis and, in order to minimize
the biases inherent in relying on convenience sampling
alone [27], also by using snowball sampling, that is mem-
bers invited to a focus group helped to enroll participants
for another. However, we eventually chose the members
also to maximize variance in regard to education and
income: to this aim, the focus groups were animated
by government and non-government service holders, re-
tired service holders, businessmen, bankers, profession-
als, educated unemployed, uneducated unemployed, ed-
ucated housewives, less-educated housewives, and stu-
dents. During these discussions, we had the opportunity
to interact with potential users of a TAS application in
a more informal manner than that of traditional inter-
views, and pursuing relaxed sessions was a priority of
ours to get frank opinions without hesitation or plain
compliance [17].

The discussions were recorded with the permissions of
participants, and then two authors carried out aﬃnity
clustering with paper copies of their transcripts. We ap-
plied a hybrid approach [12], which combines inductive
analysis to yield preliminary themes with deductive the-
matic analysis to reﬂect on the detected themes with
respect to prior ﬁndings.

THEMES FROM THE EXPLORATORY STUDIES
Table 2 summarizes the main themes and their topics as
they emerged from the analysis of the group conversa-
tions. The detailed analysis and description of all the
identiﬁed themes is reported in the next paragraphs.

Local culture and tradition. The socio-economic sit-
uation described in the Introduction Section shows that
Bangladesh is undergoing an evolution that is driven by
a mix of internal and external factors as a consequence
of the so called globalization. This deep socio-economic
change is recognized by the participants with a sad feel-
ing about what has been lost, and with a wariness for its
consequences, especially on the frailest part of the pop-
ulation, that is the people that need assistance like the
elderly, the children and the sick: this feeling generated
a positive attitude toward TAS.

Nevertheless, solidarity is still part of the background of
the Bengali people: the term volunteering occurred very
often in the talks of the participants as something that
resists despite the individualistic trend mentioned above

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Group Part. M F <25

25-44

Age

Smartph.Apps
45-64 >64 Empl. Unempl. User Non-usr

Gender
•

Employment
•
•

•
•

1

2

3

4

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

•
•
•
•

•
•
•

•

•

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•

•
•
•

•

•

•
•

•
•

•
•

•

•

•

•
•

•

•
•

•

•

•
•

•

•

•

•

•
•
•
•

•
•

•

•

•
•

•
•
•

•
•
•

•
•
•

•

•
•
•

•
•
•

•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•

•

•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•

•
•

•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•

•
•
•

Table 1. The complete proﬁle for each of the eight participants in the four focus groups

and that is found compatible with, if not reinforcing, the
TAS rationale.

“The [TAS ]concept is new to me, but these kinds of
exchange activities are not at all new in Bangladesh.
When people need any help from the community,
they just get it. This is reciprocal. There is no
monetary transaction in this.”

On the other hand, TAS is perceived as something that
“formalizes” habits that already exist or were common
practice in the near past: at several points in the discus-
sion, the need to “change mentality” toward a formaliza-
tion of spontaneous acts was mentioned as a potential
risk of failure. This risk notwithstanding, participants
agreed that this is not a suﬃcient reason to refuse the
whole TAS mechanism, included the positive counter-
parts it can bring: among the others, TAS was perceived
as a means to keep alive a progressively fading habit of
mutual support.

Relation with time. The loss of a condition where
the relatively low pace of life allowed for more intense
social relationships with relatives and neighbors brings
with itself an uneasy relation with time that is increas-
ingly deemed as a scarce resource. Indeed, working time
is prolonged to earn more money and build a career, and
commuting time is prolonged as well, since work is often
found very far from home and traﬃc jams are habitual in

heavily urbanized areas. All of the participants acknowl-
edged that there is less and less time for themselves and
for the family: they referred to several cases in which
women had to quit their job to care for their family and
parents.

“A lady left her job because she could not manage
the opening time of a care center [. . . ] you will ﬁnd
thousands of women like me, who are depending on
others for their job. This might also happen abroad
[. . . ] here many women leave their jobs for that.”

As for any scarce resources, the value of time is ines-
timable and in some circumstances it can surpass that
of money:

“People who have money do have less time, as they
spend more time to earn more money, the unit here
is time. So, people who are ‘poor in time’, they will
be more interested in a system as you described. ”

Issues about Time Accounting. As the participants
did not know anything about the TAS concept, the pre-
liminaries of the focus groups were aimed at explain-
ing its essentials and at collecting the related concerns.
However, these concerns were expressed to better under-
stand the characteristics of TAS and not as a kind way to
assert a negative preconception toward the TAS mecha-
nism. The issue of reciprocity and of negative balances
were the ﬁrst worries raised in all of the focus groups.

1769

The reluctance of people to make explicit their needs for
help in a context outside their family or their neighbor-
hood (e.g., as raised in [5] and [29]) was also conﬁrmed
by our focus groups, but the basic tenet of TAS, that
of reciprocity, seemed to alleviate this reluctance.
In
fact, TAS oﬀers a space where needs and supports can
be considered on the equal foot:

like two-way-exchange makes

“Mechanisms
the
thing interesting to me. I may hesitate to ask for
help from any person even if I know him personally,
but here I have the option to give as well. So, I will
not hesitate to take help from others.”

A perceived diﬀerence with voluntarism is that, in this
latter, the exchange between the two parties is uneven
and cannot in general be balanced, as the receiving party
is always the “weaker” one. In the case of TAS instead,
there is a strong feeling that it might be useful not only
for the marginalized people, but also for the integrated
ones (as described below): this makes a real sense of
reciprocity more likely to happen.

The fact that people could get some services from the
network without giving back anything was faced but eas-
ily minimized when some of the participants proposed
some simple rules to reduce this risk:

“As in an association, if a member only takes, you
need to motivate him to give in his turn, or you can
set a rule to block him from receiving help [. . . ] this
problem could be minimized or controlled.”

Furthermore, the fact that money is not involved in the
mechanism instilled a reasonable conﬁdence in the par-
ticipants that antisocial behaviors would not occur that
often, just as in other no-proﬁt initiatives of which they
were aware of.

“In our country not all social organizations are
working well, some of them are making money un-
der the name of social work [. . . ] I think [for TAS]
it is better as there is no money put at stake”

Another concern regarded the “one hour equals one
hour” idea: this was generally appreciated by the par-
ticipants but some of them were also wary that it could
become universally accepted, especially for highly skilled
people and services. In case of the involvement of these
professionals, the relation between the two parties would
be perceived to be more stable and recurrent and hence
to require the mediation of real money.

“It seems interesting to me [. . . ] I don’t think that
it will be easy to evaluate all services equally. Pro-
fessional people like layers may not be willing to join
for that. This could be a problem. ”

On the contrary, the time-based exchange of services
was perceived as more appropriate for occasional nego-
tiations of services that would ﬁt a sporadic and non
continuous need of the requester.

1770

SESSION: HOME AND FAMILY

“Only services that are needed occasionally can be
brought into this system.”

Here again, the issue of money was a primary concern
for most of the participants (both the employed and un-
employed ones, although for opposite reasons) and was
thought to aﬀect the perception of the TAS scope and
adoption.

“The unemployed people who have some skills could
not want to join in, simply because they are look-
ing for a permanent job. When they see something
new, they try to know whether their basic needs are
fulﬁlled or not [. . . ]
In any case it is a matter of
money.”

As also devised by [5], a TAS has to deﬁne policies that
guarantee an adequate correspondence between the ser-
vices that are requested and those that can be provided
to avoid the frustration that is generated by the lack of
support when those services are (urgently) needed.

An additional concern regarded whether TAS should be
available online only or also with other means (i.e., of-
ﬂine). Apart from the digital divide we hinted at in the
social section, the two modes were perceived as equally
important for diﬀerent purposes.

“If you start online, many people may assume that
TAS is not for them [. . . ]If the system gets accept-
ability oﬄine, then you can go online, not before.”

It was clear that an online TAS would oﬀer more possibil-
ities to ﬁnd either requests and oﬀers of solutions since it
would naturally support distributed interactions within
and across local communities: an online TAS could in-
crease the number and types of the available services and
make them accessible also to people who are (occasion-
ally) outside their own neighborhood.

“It is more convenient for me to see online what
people are asking for and if I am able to give my
help. [. . . ] It worked at the individual level before,
with TAS it will take place in an aggregated way.”

Conﬂicting views on usefulness. The fourth theme
that emerged, just after that the TAS mechanism had
been thoroughly discussed, regarded its usefulness: a
necessary precondition for its adoption. Three couplings
of people have been spontaneously taken into account:
the young vs. the elderly; the employed vs. the unem-
ployed; the members of a community vs. the isolated
persons. None of these was excluded from the potential
beneﬁts of a TAS, rather some pros and cons have been
found for each of them. The themes of the digital divide
and e-literacy were mentioned when considering the age-
related coupling as (an online) TAS is likely to require a
basic familiarity with ICT.

“The online system could be a problem for the el-
derly [but ] also an opportunity, specially for the
young [who] want to be always connected [. . . ] they

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Issues about

Time Accounting
- negative time balances
- one hour equals one hour?
- occasional vs routine work
- people may opt for a
paid job
- frustration for lack of
service when needed
- oﬄine vs online

Conﬂicting Views

on Usefulness

- digital divide & e-literacy
- social network
for younger
- less dependency
for elder
- security issues
- asking favors
in urban isolation

Potential

Positive Impacts

- real sense of reciprocity
- value to “humble” activities
- engagement of skilled people
- a better use of free time
- redemption for bad people

Organization and

Design Issues

- reward the staﬀ with
time credits
- time credit card
across communities
- integration of oﬀ-
and on-line TAS
- integration of money
for direct costs

Table 2. The main themes with sub-topics emerging from the focus groups

could exploit it for the same reasons, although TAS
is a diﬀerent thing.”

However, the problem of e-literacy was shortly dealt with
by mentioning the increasing diﬀusion and usability of
current smartphones as a vehicle for an aﬀordable use of
the services available through the Internet.

“Our social environment is changing rapidly. In the
urban areas every family owns a smartphone. Now
my maid [and] street vendors have mobile phones
[. . . ] because they are aﬀordable6.
[. . . ] Now we
use Skype for international calling [. . . ] now having
SIM means having the Internet.”

An interesting way to overcome the e-literacy problem
was associated to the TAS itself: younger people could
help and train the older ones who are motivated enough,
because this makes the younger earn time and the elderly
feel “useful” again as they can make their competence
and experience available.

On the positive side, it was observed that for whom (es-
pecially the young unemployed people) is familiar with
the practices that create and sustain the relationships
among people through the technology, a TAS can be
just another means that enhances their social network
and facilitates the opportunity to get new acquaintances
and ﬁnd an employment.

“ TAS helps to know people’s skills in a neighbor-
hood [. . . ] this may create a job opportunity even if
it is not the objective of TAS. I think TAS will help
to develop our relationships, which is important to
become employed. This is good for the community
as well.”

Moreover, the young of today will be the employed adults
of tomorrow: they will appreciate a TAS when it will be-
come more diﬃcult for them to keep these relationships
(for the reasons illustrated in the Introduction Section)
and the TAS mechanism will be there to support them
in this sense.

“For those who are now 20 or 25, when they will
be 40 or 50 [. . . ] and their social ties will be looser
[. . . ] an infrastructure will be already there.”

6Samsung smartphones cost 10,000 about 100 euros, but Chi-
nese smartphones cost half of that price.

On the other hand, a TAS can help the elderly who is
in need to get help or to have a work done, but also to
avoid asking always the same people (their relatives or
close neighbors) so that he can then feel less dependent
on them.

“Asking repeatedly for the same small errands I can-
not aﬀord doing doesn’t make me feel comfortable.
So, if I get help through the TAS, I will have the
opportunity to help others in my turn. I will feel
better to ask for help, and I will do it!”

As the participants live in the urban areas, personal
security was another concern but not a suﬃcient one
for a neat rejection: on the one hand, it is already the
case that strangers enter the houses of people to provide
paid services; on the other hand, in the case of a TAS,
strangers belong to a closer community and their reli-
ability can be checked within the system through their
online proﬁle or through the word-of-mouth within the
oﬄine community.

“Ain’t we already allowing an unknown plumber in
our apartment to ﬁx a problem? [With TAS ] you
can get information about that person that others
whom you know may know. You can choose some-
one according to her proﬁle as in social media.”

A surprising argument was linked to the issue of secu-
rity: the space of a TAS can also be used as a shelter for
“bad people” who may exploit assumed trust to commit
crimes, or simply have deplorable behaviors, like acquir-
ing debts and then quit before giving back in his turn.
The deﬁnition of ways to “ﬁlter those out” was compared
with the possibility within a TAS to allow “giving any-
one a second chance”, in order for bad people to pursue
a more correct behavior within the community, thus giv-
ing to the TAS an unintended yet positive educational
role.

“You do not need to prevent him. If we mix with
him, do counseling, he may give up his bad habit,
being under this system he is getting a scope to
express his skills. A bad man is not always bad.”

The diﬀusion of mobile banking, e.g., for money transfer,
suggests that actual practices can help to overcome the
diﬃculties related to connectivity and e-literacy:

“I think that they will also join gradually.
consider ‘mobile banking’ [. . . ]

If we
it is a matter of

1771

promotion, training and inclusion [. . . ] I think that
in case of TAS it is just the same.”

The usefulness of a TAS was questioned in regard to the
employment condition: unemployed people, usually the
younger, are focused on earning money and have usually
free time, while employed people have more money to
spend but they lack time (as already discussed in the
theme “Relation with time”). The issue of money in
either conditions is likely to reduce the usefulness and
then the adoption of a TAS: in one case, the system
could be not attractive, in the other case potentially ir-
relevant. This negative perspective was balanced by a
more positive view: a TAS can be perceived as useful
by the young people to ﬁnd a job (as hinted above); but
more surprisingly, a TAS could be useful for employed
people as well, as it would allow them to acquire services
for which paying money is not the main issue.

“Here the big issue will be to get those who can ﬁx a
small but important problem because he can charge
only few Taka. In this case TAS may work: people
will not be interested in it for saving money; but
rather, because it can avoid them some hassle.”

An additional concern was related to whether a TAS
would be more suitable for people belonging to a com-
munity than for more isolated people. In the ﬁrst case,
the adoption of a TAS would be facilitated by a mu-
tual acquaintance and trust, but it could become less
relevant as solidarity is a typical habit within tight com-
munities. However, the common feeling was that people
become more and more isolated in urban areas; they lose
contact with their community when they move to accept
new jobs or when they are old and their family is not able
to help them any longer. Knowing about possible skills
and services that are available within a neighborhood
and being able to tap them in perceived to be useful,
especially when one own community is not oﬀering what
is needed and the help has to be searched outside of it.

The potential positive impacts of Time Account-
ing. A TAS is seen as a mechanism that allows people
to make a better use of their free time: employed people
can use weekends and holidays to reciprocate the ser-
vices that they have received, while unemployed people,
who may have more time available, can use it for their
advantage or simply to avoid to lose time in totally un-
productive (or counterproductive) ways.

“Unemployed people often waste their time. If they
can spend their unused time for a constructive work,
it is better [. . . ] also these people may have some
sorts of skills. The system seems very constructive.
[. . . ] a person who remains very busy during the
weekdays will try to give time to others to earn some
time in his account, for example on holidays.”

Last but not least, a TAS was seen to leverage not only a
generic sense of community but especially collaboration
and social capital. The former involves the task coor-

1772

SESSION: HOME AND FAMILY

dination and the value co-production among peers that
are necessary to organize the request of a service and
the negotiation for its provision. Again, voluntarism
was mentioned as a more individualistic and unidirec-
tional activity with respect to TAS exchange. On the
other hand, the belief that a TAS can help increase the
social capital and enhance the chances for unemployed
people to ﬁnd a job is more related to the possibility
of giving value to activities that are usually considered
humble and of making hidden skills visible, rather than
to the possibility of increasing the number of relations
that raise the probability to meet the “right person”.

“There are many educated housewives [. . . ]
they
have many skills [. . . ] they do not have any job to
show their skills [. . . ] they do not have any way to
ﬁnd a job [. . . ] but this initiative will help them to
get at least satisfaction, if not a job.”

In other words, a TAS is viewed as a means to regain
dignity for those people who have acquired an experience
that can be “exploited” (for the better) by others, and
for those people that simply refuse the (capitalistic) rules
governing regular and institutional workplace relations.

The adoption strategy. The rich and articulated
discussion illustrated in the previous points raised an-
other unexpected theme regarding the need for an ef-
fective strategy to promote the adoption of a TAS in
Bangladesh. The participants identiﬁed a number of
strategic steps that could be proﬁtably put to work in
a synergistic way. It was found important to tap in the
curiosity of the Bengali people, especially the younger
part, for novel initiatives. However, this interest should
be kept alive as the process could take time:
it should
be necessary to immediately activate a sort of “snow-
ball eﬀect” by targeting the potential champions, that
is leaders of existing communities and no-proﬁt associ-
ations, which could also oﬀer a concrete support dur-
ing the start-up phase. In seemingly slight contradiction
with a ﬁnding of the survey of [32], the sense of belong-
ing to a religious community, and hence being a devout
follower, was mentioned as a facilitator for the involve-
ment in a TAS: this is then an aspect that should be
further investigated.

The dissemination activities should clarify and explain
the tenets of the proposed exchange mechanism and
its diﬀerences with regular “banks” and accounting sys-
tems [6], possibly by using narratives (like demos) that
are widely used in Bangladesh to promote awareness
about new “things” (be they tools or social initiatives).
Furthermore, pilot testing was proposed as a fruitful ap-
proach together with the indication of possible areas in
the capital city Dhaka, where the experimentation of a
TAS mechanism could start. It is interesting to notice
that the experiences of the western countries have been
mentioned as a possible source of information as lessons
learned and inspiration sources to develop new eﬀective
solutions. Of course, the participants were aware of the
deep diﬀerences between the two contexts, but they all

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

shared the feeling that the contextual conditions would
become closer in the future.

“If we know how developed countries are getting
beneﬁts, then we can understand whether TAS is
ﬁne for Bangladesh or not [. . . ]
it is better to get
an opportunity for the early tuning [of the system].”

“You can go for a pilot project within a very short
time with the busy people of your apartment and
check if it works. You have to ﬁnd out the right
area for this [. . . ] you have to start with wealthier
areas not with slums.”

Organizational and design issues. Some of the par-
ticipants were concerned with the management of the
TAS mechanism once it were started. Although this
was not their primary concern, this discourse highlighted
three issues that could have an impact on the design of
a supportive technology. The ﬁrst issue was about the
sustainability of the management costs: the envisioned
solution was to put this management as one of the pos-
sible action that the TAS staﬀ could oﬀer in exchange of
some services available within the TAS network.

“There must be a coordinator or administrator: who
is gonna pay him? [. . . ] This can be done under
time exchange, [this holds also for] the members who
work voluntarily for the organizational activities. ”

A second issue was related to the need to manage real
currency to support the “direct costs” (or the out-of-
pocket costs, like for buying a bus ticket) possibly en-
tailed in a service provision. The issue was about how
(and if) to mix both the complementary (i.e., time) cur-
rency and the regular one (i.e., money) without disrupt-
ing the idea that a TAS is money-less and at the same
time accepting that those costs should not be paid in
advance by the service provider: this was acknowledged
as a mix of technical and conceptual problems to be ad-
dressed in the future.

The last issue concerned the possibility to extend the
scope of a TAS so that also exchanges outside of the origi-
nal community could occur with members of other TASs:
a sort of card was described as a convenient means to al-
low the TAS mechanism to “travel” with people across
network boundaries. This opportunity was valued by the
participants irrespective of the technical diﬃculties that
this would entail, as mobility in vast urban areas is part
of the daily experience and diﬃculty of the Bangladesh
people.

“ [TAS] could [provide] a sort of membership card.
When one needs an instant service outside his com-
munity he can use this card to show his balance,
get it updated and allow for the due payment in the
other community.”

The participants acknowledged that online TASs could
potentially solve this problem, once the necessary inter-
operability infrastructure were implemented, but some of

them raised the point that the issue could persist across
hybrid or oﬄine TAS instances, unless some additional
work were accomplished by the TAS administrators to
keep from time to time the records of the communities
involved aligned with each other.

DISCUSSION
The research reported in this paper aimed to investi-
gate the degree of acceptance of the principles underpin-
ning a TAS mechanism as the preliminary step to decide
whether it does make any sense to continue a research
trajectory toward the potential adoption of such a mech-
anism in a developing country like Bangladesh. This re-
search oﬀers a preliminary set of discussion themes that
can open a speciﬁc research line and can be put in re-
lation with the outcomes of future studies in other de-
veloping countries.
In the following, we discuss all of
them.

Limitation of the investigation
First, we have to acknowledge a limitation of our inves-
tigation. Being aware of the diﬀerences that character-
ize the population of developing countries (and then also
Bangladesh), we only focused our attention on the urban
context. This was due to two main reasons: i) the high
density of population in the urban areas is a more realis-
tic opportunity for adopting a TAS, since it makes it eas-
ier for people to interact within these areas and to pro-
vide the services required; ii) this condition allows for a
more direct comparison with other studies undertaken in
the western countries [19], [8]. However, one has to bear
in mind that the urbanization in the developing countries
exacerbates the related problems as it happens almost
exclusively with the uprooting of people from their na-
tive villages. In western countries (especially in Europe)
the phenomenon of urbanization is slightly diﬀerent: the
big cities usually expand to include the smaller nearby
towns that, in this way, maintain their own identity in
some way, often in the form of becoming characteristic
districts: this conurbation mitigates the negative side of
any heavy and rapid urbanization. A diﬀerent ﬁeld of in-
vestigation could regard the rural areas, which yet have
been mentioned by the participants of the focus groups
as a place where a TAS could ﬁll the gap of the endemic
lack of cash ﬂow: this destitution makes the payment of
collaborators problematic, especially when the workload
seasonality makes additional help more needed.

The value of hybridization
Traditionally, authors in the Information Systems re-
search for Developing Countries (ISDC) unfold their dis-
courses on ICT innovation and its implications for soci-
etal change [4] along various viewpoints and especially,
for our aims, the following one:
the process of more
or less uncritical emulation of the western settings and
technology transfer to steer IS innovation towards the
same organizational objectives. Whatever assumption
we made at the beginning, [4] maintains, the opportu-
nity to assess the readiness of a social local context such

1773

as that of a developing country for the inception of a TAS
oﬀers a privileged point of view: that of observing the
interaction between social actors, organizational paths,
and possibly technology adoption, appropriation and de-
velopment since its outset. Furthermore, in the light of
an interpretation of the results from a postcolonial per-
spective [24], this study on the potential of adoption of
a TAS in Bangladesh has raised new questions and per-
spectives, instead of simply addressing our initial ques-
tion, and has also contributed to make us aware of a
peculiar hybridization between the concepts of western
and eastern neighborliness.

The analysis of the collected contributions shows a cau-
tious but overall positive reaction to the TAS principles.
The participants raised many issues that can be found in
previous investigations but also highlighted peculiarities
that corroborate the basic tenet mentioned above, that is
every situation has to be dealt with a special attention to
the local socio- cultural- and economic conditions, thus
avoiding to be made blind by (western) preconceptions.
The use and goals of the introduction of a collaborative
technology (in this case a TAS) remain open to unan-
ticipated conditions for its applicability. This implies
that the design of the related technology has to take
these conditions into account to identify the best strat-
egy, even if this means that it is preferable to avoid the
design and development of any technology [7]. In what
follows, we comment on three aspects that relate to gen-
eral themes that might be of interest also beyond the
speciﬁc case of a TAS.

Integration with local practices
The ﬁrst aspect concerns the balance between the po-
tential innovation conveyed by a collaborative technol-
ogy and the change of mentality that this could imply.
The strong feeling of belonging to a religious community
and the diﬀused volunteering that is culturally and reli-
giously ingrained in the people of Bangladesh [13] play
a double role for the acceptance of a TAS. On the one
hand, a TAS can leverage the common positive attitude
to give help to needy people; on the other hand, as re-
ported also by [6], transforming the spontaneous volun-
teering in a structured service might be the cause of a
wary or skeptical attitude towards a TAS if it is not
understood for what it is intended. As for any transfor-
mation of this kind, the required change of mentality can
occur only in presence of well recognized advantages as-
sociated with the proposed novel (computational) mech-
anism. The compatibility and potential integration of
this mechanism with the local practices and the per-
ception that the technology could be supportive are a
preliminary and necessary condition for its positive in-
troduction.

An unexpected users target
Second, the theme of the value of time against the value
of money that the participants continuously mentioned
is one of the key elements to interpret many of the points
raised in the discussions. Money is surely a leading issue

1774

SESSION: HOME AND FAMILY

for people behavior, especially in presence of a high un-
employment rate. On the one hand, unemployed or un-
deremployed people will get involved by a TAS in virtue
of the available services that will not require cash. On
the other hand, time is an increasingly scarce resource
whose value is incommensurable when needs can be sat-
isﬁed by small errands or cannot be anticipated, and
then cannot be managed by a regular money transac-
tion. This makes a TAS interesting beyond the more
usual target of poor or unemployed people, as already ob-
served [29, 5, 6, 31], towards the uncommon population
of busy and wealthy people, who have time constraints of
several nature connected to their job. Moreover, in this
case the reciprocity, which is essential to make a com-
munity adopting a collaborative technology like a TAS
supportive and close, is more likely to occur as the tar-
get population is potentially larger and more diversiﬁed
and everyone can share the feeling to be productive and
active in her own area or ﬁeld. This new target has not
been explicitly uncovered by previous studies in west-
ern countries and we submit should deserve a speciﬁc
attention also in those areas. This is an example of the
hybridization mentioned in [24], that is learning from
the studies about developing countries and improve our
sensitivity and capability to understand western settings
accordingly.

Hitting situated needs
Third, the fact that TAS does not involve money makes
this mechanism of a diﬀerent nature with respect to
other initiatives, like e.g. micro-credit, that are closer
to the western capitalistic culture and then more prone
to cause typical negative eﬀects [1], such as the perni-
cious spiral of increasing debt when people cannot ful-
ﬁll their commitments. Apart from the religious point
mentioned above, a TAS is to some extent closer to pre-
capitalistic economies where need, and not the intrinsic
value of the goods, governs the exchanges. In the case of
TAS, all people have the same absolute amount of time
to exchange and a proﬁtable use of this “commodity”
is almost completely depending on their individual en-
gagement and not on exogenous (capitalistic but also no
proﬁt NGO-like) policies. A TAS can add on the already
practiced voluntarism the possibility of making the coop-
eration among people easier in that it sustains coordina-
tion and service provision according to lightweight but,
at the same time, suﬃciently well established rules that
can be easily understood and retained. In so doing, like
other collaborative applications, a TAS can promote the
emergence and/or maintenance of the target community
and increase its social capital, on the concrete basis of a
cooperation rooted in well perceived needs, rather than
on a generic idea of socialization that often characterize
less focused social media applications.

A genuine probe of interest
Finally, the constructive attitude shown by the partici-
pants in front of the potentially negative issues of adopt-
ing a new technology clearly proves (perhaps more than

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

other factors) a genuine interest in the new challenges
that a technology and its experimental adoption may
raise. In the case of the TAS, we witnessed a particu-
lar attention on its sustainability and detection of ways
to promote any future initiative: these issues have to
be interpreted in this light, irrespective of the speciﬁc
envisioned solutions. These solutions, however, oﬀer in-
teresting hints on how to overcome the hindering of com-
munities with limited resources [5], [29].

On the other hand, the introduction of collaboration
technologies like a TAS should not immediately and nec-
essarily be a mass phenomenon: the local dimension of
the communities characterizing the increasingly urban-
ized society allows for their modular and incremental
dissemination; in so doing, a failure in a context can be
counter-balanced by a more successful experience in an-
other context.
In the opinion of the participants this
is likely to happen in Bangladesh, as they mentioned
the clear advantages for some communities in adopting
a TAS that could play a pioneering role and generate a
diﬀusion by imitation trend.

CONCLUSIONS
The goal of this paper was to address the question men-
tioned in the Introduction, whether a TAS could be ac-
cepted by the people of Bangladesh, taken as a case of
a highly dynamic changing country, especially in the ur-
ban context. The focus groups we undertook are not in-
tended to support a full-ﬂedged research of sociological
scope; rather we aimed to explore the attitude of poten-
tial prospective users of a TAS who live in a diﬀerent
cultural context than western cities, which nevertheless
is somehow comparable to the western context, so as to
focus on people that can make value out of such a system.
Consequently, our aim was to extract implications for the
design of such a system from this experience and detect
themes to be considered in the next phases of this ﬁeld
study. These phases will encompass the co-design of pro-
totypical solutions that one of the authors will validate
when she will be back in Bangladesh; moreover this expe-
rience will contribute to a better understanding of other
contexts where we are currently investigating the poten-
tial adoption of highly tailored and community-speciﬁc
TAS.

The ﬁndings from our focus groups showed that this class
of socio-technical systems could not be straightly repli-
cated, but rather appropriated, as the sample of people
we interviewed oﬀered a diﬀerent way of looking at this
kind of systems [24]. More precisely, discussing about
these systems raised a cautious but overall positive re-
action, especially if they are seen not as a technology
for the needy or the down-and-out, but rather for those
who wish a greater neighborliness and better social ties
in their environment, with all the related advantages.

Although the idea behind TAS was totally new to the
sample of participants (and likely to the reference popu-
lation), it apparently hit on a problematic issue that is of
a great relevance for them: it was as if people living in a

society in the middle of a “development” process towards
a (western?) maturity, would feel the need to maintain a
strong liaison with the “good old times”, while still living
the present and preparing for their “best of all possible
worlds” to come. The social, organizational and tech-
nological solutions characterizing a TAS were perceived
and discussed as a possible means toward this goal.

Thus, the interaction with Bangladesh people shed light
on a novel and unexpected “fourth way” with respect to
the three possibilities we borrow from the work of [4] on
IS innovation in developing countries: a full imposition of
“developed” ways of life; a progressive and deterministic
assimilation to them; a rewind to the local social con-
text to envisage a new empirical solution. This fourth
and postcolonial [24] way emerged from the narratives of
the participants involved, where it was clear the inclina-
tion to tap in the third approach to create a new form of
gentle hybridization and way to trans-late [24] the am-
bivalent lessons learned from the western countries soci-
eties where the TAS mechanism has been adopted [6]: in
short, to tap in the potential of TAS to increase social-
ization, mutual acquaintances and neighborliness within
a population of strangers.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is partially supported by Fondazione
CARIPLO-ALIAS project.

REFERENCES
1. Muhammad Adeel, Bernhard Nett, Turkan

Gurbanova, Volker Wulf, and David Randall. 2013.
The Challenges of Microﬁnance Innovation:
Understanding Private Services. In Procs of
ECSCW 2013, pp. 269–286, Springer.

2. Theresa J. Aldridge and Alan Patterson. 2002.

LETS get real: constraints on the development of
Local Exchange Trading Schemes. Area 34, 4,
370–381.

3. Amir H. Ali. 2011. Power of Social Media in

Developing Nations: New Tools for Closing the
Global Digital Divide and Beyond. Harv. Hum.
Rts. J. 24, 185.

4. Chrisanthi Avgerou. 2008. Information systems in

developing countries: a critical research review. JIT
23, 3, 133–146.

5. Victoria Bellotti, John M. Carroll, and Kyungsik

Han. 2013. Random acts of kindness: The
intelligent and context-aware future of reciprocal
altruism and community collaboration. In Procs of
CTS 2013, 1–12. IEEE.

6. Victoria Bellotti, Sara Cambridge, Karen Hoy,

Patrick C. Shih, Lisa Renery Handalian, Kyungsik
Han, and John M. Carroll. 2014. Towards
community-centered support for peer-to-peer
service exchange: rethinking the timebanking
metaphor. In Procs of CHI 2014, 2975–2984. ACM.

1775

SESSION: HOME AND FAMILY

7. Federico Cabitza. 2014. De-designing the IT

22. Ezmieralda Melissa, Anis Hamidati, Muninggar S.

artifact. Drafting small narratives for the coming of
the Socio-Technical Artifact In Procs of ItAIS 2014.

8. Barney Cohen. 2006. Urbanization in developing
countries: Current trends, future projections, and
key challenges for sustainability. Technology in
society, 28, 1, 63–80.

9. Bidit L. Dey. 2013. A qualitative enquiry into

technology acceptance and appropriation: A case
study of Bangladeshi farmers’ use of mobile
telephony. JCB 12, 2-3, 261–280.

10. Jonathan Donner. 2009. Blurring livelihoods and

lives: The social uses of mobile phones and
socioeconomic development. Innovations 4, 1,
91–101.

11. Nicole B. Ellison. 2007. Social network sites:

Deﬁnition, history, and scholarship. JCMC 13, 1,
210–230.

12. Jennifer Fereday and Eimear Muir-Cochrane. 2008.

Demonstrating rigor using thematic analysis: A
hybrid approach of inductive and deductive coding
and theme development. IJQM, 5, 1, 80–92.

13. Samiul Hasan, George Mulamoottil, and John E.

Kersell. 1992. Voluntary organizations in
Bangladesh: A proﬁle. Environment and
Urbanization, 4, 2, 196–206.

14. Syeda S. Jesmin and Stanley R. Ingman. 2011.

Social Supports for Older Adults in Bangladesh.
JAEE , 69–797.

15. Sarah Joseph. 2012. Social media, political change,

and human rights. BC Int’l & Comp. L. Rev. 35,
145.

16. Andreas M. Kaplan and Michael Haenlein. 2010.

Users of the world, unite! The challenges and
opportunities of Social Media. Bus Horizons 53, 1,
59–68.

17. Jenny Kitzinger. 1995. Qualitative research:

introducing focus groups. Bmj 311, 7000, 299–302.

18. Neha Kumar. 2014. Facebook for

self-empowerment? A study of Facebook adoption
in urban India. new media & society.

19. Klaus R. Kunzmann and Michael Wegener. 1991.
The pattern of urbanization in Western Europe.
Ekistics, 350, 351, 282–29

20. Serge Latouche. 2007. De-growth: an electoral

stake? IJID 3, 1, 14–18.

21. Michael B. Marks. 2012. Time banking service

exchange systems: A review of the research and
policy and practice implications in support of youth
in transition. Child Youth Serv Rev 34, 7,
1230–1236.

Saraswati, and Alexander G. Flor. 2013.
Investigating the potentials of social media to
support women entrepreneurship in Indonesian
urban areas. In Procs of ICDT 2013, 92–95. ACM

23. Michael Pacione. 1997. Local Exchange Trading

Systems as a Response to the Globalisation of
Capitalism. Urban Studies 34, 8, 1179–1199.

24. Kavita Philip, Lilly Irani, and Paul Dourish. 2012.

Postcolonial Computing A Tactical Survey. Science,
Technology & Human Values, 37, 1, 3–29.

25. Sajda Qureshi. 2013. In the Age of Popular
Uprisings, what is the Role of Public Access
Computing and Social Media on Development?
IT4D 19, 4, 267–270.

26. Mahabubur Rahman. 2014. Uses of Social

Networking Sites by Public University Students of
Bangladesh. GMJ-Pakistan Edition 7, 1.

27. Jane Ritchie, Jane Lewis, Carol McNaughton

Nicholls, and Rachel Ormston. 2013. Qualitative
research practice. Sage.

28. Gill Seyfang. 2002. Tackling social exclusion with

community currencies: learning from LETS to
Time Banks. IJCCR 6, 1, 1–11.

29. Gill Seyfang. 2004. Time banks: rewarding

community self-help in the inner city? CDJ 39, 1,
62–71.

30. Gill Seyfang and Karen Smith. 2002. The Time of
Our Lives: Using Time Banking for Neighbourhood
Renewal and Community Capacity Building. New
Economics Foundation.

31. Patrick C. Shih, Victoria Bellotti, Kyungsik Han,

and John M. Carroll. 2015. Unequal Time for
Unequal Value: Implications of Diﬀering
Motivations for Participation in Timebanking. In
Procs of CHI, 1075–1084. ACM.

32. Tunazzina Sultana, Angela Locoro and Federico

Cabitza. 2015. Investigating opportunities and
obstacles for a community-oriented time accounting
social media in Bangladesh. In Procs of C&T 2015,
15–23.

33. Monica Chiarini Tremblay, Alan R. Hevner, and
Donald J. Berndt. 2010. Focus groups for artifact
reﬁnement and evaluation in design research. Focus
6, 1.

34. Volker Wulf, Konstantin Aal, Ibrahim A. Kteish,

Meryem Atam, Kai Schubert, Markus Rohde,
George P. Yerousis, and David Randall. 2013.
Fighting against the wall: Social media use by
political activists in a Palestinian village. In Procs
of CHI, 1979–1988. ACM

35. Susan P. Wyche, Andrea Forte, and Sarita Yardi

Schoenebeck. 2013. Hustling online: understanding
consolidated facebook use in an informal settlement
in Nairobi. In Procs of CHI, 2823–2832. ACM

1776

