CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Keeping Up with the Tweet-dashians:  

The Impact of ‘Official’ Accounts on Online Rumoring 

Cynthia Andrews, Elodie Fichet, Yuwei Ding+, Emma S. Spiro*^, Kate Starbird+ 
Department of Communication, HCDE+, Information School*, Department of Sociology^

University of Washington, Seattle, WA 

{caandrew, efichet, yuweid, espiro, kstarbi} @uw.edu 

ABSTRACT 
This paper examines how “official” accounts participate in 
the  propagation  and  correction  of  online  rumors  in  the 
context  of  crisis  events.  Using  an  emerging  method  for 
interpretive analysis of “big” social data, we investigate the 
spread of online rumors through digital traces—in this case, 
tweets. Our study suggests that official accounts can help to 
slow  the  spread  of  a  rumor  by  posting  a  denial,  and—
supported by reflections from an organization that recently 
dealt  with  a  rumor-crisis—offers  best  practices  for 
organizations around social media strategies and protocols. 
Based on tweet data and connections to existing literature, 
we  also  demonstrate  and  discuss  how  mainstream  media 
participate in rumoring, and note the role of a new breed of 
online  media,  “breaking  news”  accounts.  This  analysis 
offers a complementary perspective to existing studies that 
use surveys and interviews to characterize the role official 
accounts play in online rumoring. 
Author Keywords 
Social  computing;  social  medial;  rumoring;  information 
diffusion; crisis informatics; reputation management 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.3  Information  Interfaces  &  Presentation:  Groups  & 
Organization 
computing, 
Computer-supported cooperative work 
INTRODUCTION 
In  recent  years,  social  media  have  become  a  common 
channel  for  receiving  and  sharing  news.  Indeed,  a 
significant portion of American adults now sees the Internet 
as a go-to source for reliable news [5,46]. Notably, because 
of its reach and instantaneity, Twitter has increasingly been 
used to find, share, and disseminate time-sensitive content 
such  as  breaking  news  [28]  and 
information  about 
unfolding crisis events [e.g. 8,18,19,22,23,37].  

Collaborative 

Interfaces: 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for 
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee.  
Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819986 

452

it 

into 

flow  of 

incorporated 

it  accelerates 

Due  to  its  reach—with  302  million monthly  active  users, 
500  million  Tweets  sent  per  day  and  77%  of  accounts 
outside  the  U.S.  [1]—many  organizations,  journalists  and 
other  interests  groups  have  adopted  Twitter  for  “official” 
use. Companies include this specific tool in their marketing 
and crisis plans; journalists and newsrooms largely adopt it, 
as 
the  news  cycle  by  affecting  how 
information  is  “sourced,  broken  and  distributed”  [29]. 
Emergency  managers,  although  slow  to  adopt  [44],  have 
increasingly 
their  preparedness, 
response and recovery plans as well—according to a 2012 
NEMA report [34], 8% of county emergency managers and 
85% of local response use social media.  
Twitter  can  be  viewed  as  a  competitor  to  mainstream 
media,  “putting  it  out  of  business”  [29]  or  as  a  necessary 
adaptation  to  the  audience’s  informational  habits  and 
changing 
landscape  [e.g.  2,13,18,17,20,24,43].  Others 
suggest that the unreliability of information shared on social 
media  contribute  to  the  rapid  spread  of  misinformation 
[18,26]  and  validate  the  necessity  of  dependable  news 
media  or  “official”  [29]  channels  to  regulate  and  manage 
the 
information.  Although  organizations, 
emergency  management  agencies  and  mainstream  media 
might not be the first to publish content about a given event, 
“their  agendas  and  discussions  continue 
to 
shape 
conversation around major news stories” [29, p.6]. 
To understand how these “official” channels can impact the 
propagation  and  correction  of  crisis-related  rumors  on 
Twitter, this research examines two false rumors from two 
distinct crisis events. These events are notable in that both 
were addressed by the “official” accounts belonging to the 
organizations 
the  event:  a 
government  response  organization  that  was  rumored  to  be 
carrying  out  “raids”  of  Muslim  neighborhoods  during  a 
hostage  situation  in  Sydney,  Australia,  and  an  airline  that 
was the subject of a hijacking rumor. 
BACKGROUND 
Informal Communication during Crisis Events 
The  speed  of  information  sharing  enabled  by  Twitter 
becomes  particularly  relevant  in  times  of  crisis.  Many 
scholars have highlighted Twitter as a particularly effective 
tool 
for  multidimensional  communication—top-down, 
bottom-up, and lateral—during a crisis event [8,19,23].   

that  were 

implicated 

in 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

In 

Through  their  ability  to  facilitate  collective  sensemaking, 
social  media  serve  the  purpose  of  filling  in  the  possible 
information vacuum left by mainstream media [37] or other 
official  channels  who  may  be  more  closely  bound  to 
veracity  and  accuracy,  such  as  local  authorities  and 
emergency  management  agencies. 
their  absence, 
informal  information  around  a  given  crisis  might  be 
appointed more trust [11]. Additionally, some users’ pursuit 
of ‘being first’ surpasses commitments to fact-checking and 
accuracy  [15],  which  in  turn  can  generate  dubious,  if  not 
bluntly inaccurate, information.  
Rumoring as Collective Sensemaking during Disasters 
The  term  rumor  is  often  equated  with  the  spread  of 
misinformation,  but  these  two  concepts  are  actually  quite 
distinct—rumors  can  be  true  or  false,  but  can  also  exist 
somewhere  in  between.  In  examining  online  rumoring 
behavior  during  times  of  crisis,  our  research  utilizes  a 
perspective  developed  in  the  social  psychology  literature 
[10,14,30,33,36]  that  views  rumoring  as  a  collective 
sensemaking  process  that  occurs  during  situations  that  are 
uncertain  and  ambiguous.  In  this  view,  rumoring  can  be 
seen as a natural reaction to the anxiety and uncertainty of 
crisis  events,  as  community  members  work  together  to 
provide meaning [36]. Though this perspective accounts for 
misinformation that is intentionally introduced and spread, 
it  focuses  more  broadly  on  the  downstream,  collective 
activity  to  process  into  a  coherent  narrative  the  often 
incomplete  and/or  inaccurate  information  characteristic  of 
crisis  events.  This  context  is  similar  to  “fog  of  war” 
situations  where  fear,  uncertainty,  and  limited  situational 
awareness shape information sharing practices [12,25]; and 
indeed,  much  of  the  early  social  pyschology  literature  on 
rumoring drew from studies within the war context [3,10]. 
Viewing rumoring in this way highlights the complexity of 
official  crisis  communications.  In  this  context,  imperfect 
information  is  often  preferable  to  no  information  at  all—
e.g. Shklovski et al. [38] found that when people do not or 
cannot  get  access  to  official  information  and  answers  to 
their  questions  quickly  enough,  they  find  back  channels 
where they can gather improvised news to fill the void.  
Alexander [2] anecdotally illustrated this situation with the 
freight  trail  derailment  that  occurred  at  Wetteren  near 
Ghent,  Belgium,  in  the  night  of  May  4,  2013.  In  the 
explosion that followed, the affected train released a toxic 
cloud of acrylonitrile gas. At that time, the authorities did 
not possess information that they deemed certain enough to 
be  disclosed  to  the  public.  In  turn,  a  sense  of  uncertainty 
and fear developed in the public space and people gathered 
online 
the 
consequences  of  the  event.  Rumors  arose  and  a  large 
amount  of  inaccurate  information  was  shared,  yielding  a 
“distorted,  inaccurate  and  alarmist”  depiction  of  the  event 
[2]. Research studies have thus suggested that when official 
sources fail to provide answers in timely manner, audiences 

to  discuss  and  explain 

in  an  attempt 

453

to 

strengthen 

and 

reiterate 

information 

the  message, 

they  can  communicate  with  a 

will  attempt  to  fill  those  information  gaps,  and  rumors, 
including false rumors, will propagate [30]. 
The Role of Official Sources in Social Media  
Official  channels  face  an  “urgency  of  providing  reliable 
information to the many” [16, p. 416]. The speed at which 
information is shared is an affordance for official channels 
large  number  of 
as 
constituents  at  once  and  shape 
thus 
influencing 
input  and  audiences’  disaster 
“knowledge,  attitudes,  and  behaviors”    [20,45].  Though 
many  breaking  news  stories  now  emerge  first  on  social 
media  sites  like  Twitter,  it  appears  that  official  sources, 
to  authenticate, 
including  mainstream  media,  work 
propagate  and  eventually  correct 
these  stories  [29]. 
Alexander  [2]  suggests  that  “knowledgeable  people”  can 
quickly correct misinformation. Bird et al. [7] explain that 
‘moderators’ 
(read:  officials  managing  social  media 
channels)  are  usually  highly  responsive  in  validating 
information and orienting users to official information and 
sources  as  they  become  available.  Taylor  et  al.  [41] 
describe  that  social  media  tools  should  act  as  a  medium 
guiding  audiences  to  official,  verified  information,  and  in 
turn  be  used 
these 
communications to a greater network. 
This  suggests  that  social  media  intensify  the  pressure  on 
official  sources  to  keep  up  with  information  propagation 
[22]  and  manage  the  divulgated  messages.  Indeed,  the 
survival of an organization in a crisis may be directly linked 
to  the  speed  of  its  response.  Jin  et  al.  [23]  argue  that 
organizations  should  be  proactive  in  their  response  by 
leveraging  official  accounts  to  maintain  their  ethos  as 
authoritative and accessible sources, especially if the crisis 
was not generated by the organization itself; in other words, 
if  the  organization  is  not  directly  responsible  for  creating 
the situation. However, other studies have suggested that it 
is possible that official communication may be drowned in 
“the  noise  of  the  many-to-many  communication  model 
made possible by social media” [16, p. 416]. 
Examining the Role of Official Sources in “Correcting” 
Rumors using Trace Data of Actual Rumor Propagation 
This research seeks to understand the role that mainstream 
media, new media and other “official” channels play in the 
propagation  and  correction  of  crisis-related  rumors  on 
Twitter. Since the traditional media is often put in contrast 
to social media channels in how they treat and affect a crisis 
event,  the  impact  of  official  channels  on  the  spread  of 
rumors  on  Twitter  has  not  been  extensively  discussed. 
Furthermore,  existing 
interplay  of 
mainstream  news  and  Twitter—e.g.  Newman’s  influential 
study  [29]—relies  primarily  on  market  research,  Internet 
surveys,  mainstream  media  log  files,  and  interviews.  Our 
research attempts to add empirical evidence to support (or 
challenge)  these  insights,  using  an  emerging  method  for 
integrating qualitative, quantitative and visual analysis [27] 
to  examine 
trace  data  of  actual  rumors 
propagating on Twitter.  

research  on 

the  digital 

the 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

METHOD 
This  study  is  part  of  a  large  project  examining  the  online 
spread of rumors. Though the primary focus of that work is 
to  develop  automated  strategies  for  detecting  rumors,  the 
meta-work  of  that  project  includes  the  production  of  a 
valuable  collection  of  event-related  rumors  that  are  coded 
for  specific  behaviors  and  can  be  examined  for  other 
research questions. In our preliminary analysis, we examine 
two  rumors  from  two  different  crisis  events  to  better 
understand  the  effects  of  official  accounts  on  rumor 
propagation. 
Data Collection for Crisis Events 
Our  analysis  examines  the  spread  of  rumors  on  Twitter 
during  crisis  events,  primarily  using  a  digital  record  of 
tweets  related  to  a  specific  crisis  event,  collected  in  real-
time using the Twitter Streaming API. The crisis events we 
study  are  largely  unpredictable  and  emergent.  Relying  on 
routine monitoring of media and social media, our team of 
researchers  detects  events  as  they  are  occurring  and  then 
selects search terms for a forward-in-time collection. As the 
event  progresses  and  new  features  become  prominent,  we 
adjust  search  terms  to  ensure  comprehensive  coverage. 
Inherent  limitations  in  this  process  can  result  in  an  event 
collection that lags several minutes to a few hours after the 
initial  event  impact.  Collecting  at  the  event  level  allows 
researchers to catch tweets about rumors within that event 
that emerge later in its lifecycle (as we did for the rumor in 
Case 1). For other rumors (like the one in Case 2) we may 
miss the initial rumor-related tweets. In the latter case, we 
use additional sources to understand the full rumor timeline 
and are careful to shape our analysis and claims around the 
limitations  of  our  data.  Though  these  collection  methods 
have limitations, they are consistent with best practices for 
collecting crisis event-related Twitter data [4,9].  
Identifying Rumors within an Event Collection 
We  identify  rumors  from  within  these  event  collections 
using  two  complementary  approaches.  The  first  requires 
researchers  to  follow  the  live  Twitter  stream  during  an 
event  and  record  rumors  they  notice  as  the  event  evolves. 
The  second  approach  involves  a  post-hoc  analysis  of  the 
tweets  in  the  event  collection,  where  we  employ  a 
combination of quantitative, qualitative and visual analysis 
to identify rumors that meet the following criteria: A) our 
event  collection  includes  the  entirety  or  the  majority  and 
major features of the rumor; B) the rumor or some specific 
variant  of  the  rumor  can  be  reduced  to  a  single  definition 
for  which  our  coding  scheme  can  be  consistently  applied; 
C)  there  exist  a  set  of  search  terms  that  will  allow  us  to 
identify  a  low-noise,  comprehensive  sample  of  the  rumor 
that  will  be  appropriate 
for  manual  coding.  After 
determining that a rumor is appropriate for our analysis, we 
craft  an  effective  search  string  and  identify  the  subset  of 
event  tweets  related  to  that  rumor.  We  then  send  these 
tweets to a team of trained coders for manual classification. 

second-level  codes 

Tweet Manual Coding 
We manually “code” or “classify” every tweet in the subset 
of tweets related to that rumor. Our coding scheme consists 
of  two  levels  of  classifications.  There  are  five  first-level 
codes (affirm, deny, neutral, uncodable, and unrelated) and 
(implicit,  ambiguity,  and 
three 
uncertainty). The first-level codes are mutually exclusive—
i.e. if a tweet is marked as “affirm”, it cannot be marked as 
“deny”.  Second-level  codes  can  be  applied 
in  any 
combination with first-level codes and one another. 
This research is focused on behaviors that act to spread or, 
conversely, correct a rumor. Therefore, the classification of 
the tweets is based on the rumoring behavior of the tweet. 
We label tweets that support or function to pass along the 
rumor as Affirm, and label tweets that function to correct or 
deny a rumor as Deny. Neutral tweets did not take a stance 
on  either  affirming  or  denying  the  rumor.  Some  of  those 
tweets tend to simply provide information or ask for more 
information.  Uncodable  tweets  contain  any  non-English 
words or other words that many English speakers would not 
recognize.  Unrelated  tweets  are  unrelated  to  the  rumor, 
typically  “noise”  picked  up  due  to  our  search  terms.  For 
rumors with many permutations, we will choose to exclude 
certain permutations to focus on one variant of the rumor. 
In those situations, we will mark one selected permutation 
of the rumor as “unrelated”.  
Table  1  provides  examples  for  each  first-level  code  using 
tweets from the WestJet hijacking rumor (described below 
in the Findings). 

Codes 
Affirm 

Deny 

Example Tweet 
Breaking: West Jet Flight WA2154 sends 
“hijack signal” in-flight over Mexico; 
flight departed Vancouver for Puerto 
Vallarta 

lol exasperation after news of a 
hijacked plane … that turned out to be 
wrong 

Neutral 

Uncodable 

Unrelated 

@Aviator pls advise. Which means 
hijack? 00000 or 7500? 

Compagnia West Jet volo #WS2154 nega 
che abbia mandato segnale di 
dirottamento 

Wow @WestJet I almost thought you 
would not get a flight delayed 

Table 1. Example Tweets for Each Code 

Additional Data Collection 
For  research  related  to  the  rumored  hijacking  of  WestJet 
flight 2514, we include two additional data sources in this 
analysis:  1)  information  gathered  through  a  one-hour 
interview with an operator of the WestJet Twitter account; 
and  2)  event-summary  documents  created  by  WestJet 
employees that include a timeline of tweets during the early 
period of the event. The latter is important because it allows 
us  to  fill  in  the  record  for  a  period  of  time  that  our 
collection missed. 

454

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

“Signature” Method of Analysis 
Using  the  process  described  above,  we  have  captured, 
identified, and coded fifteen rumors from six crisis events. 
During  exploratory  analysis  of  a  subset  of  these  rumors, 
using  a  method  outlined  in  Maddock  et  al.  [27]  where 
researchers  iteratively  develop  and  interpret  a  rumor’s 
“signature”  or  pattern  of  information  flow  across  multiple 
dimensions, we identified two false rumors that had similar 
properties:  1)  domination  of  the  overall  rumor  signal  by 
retweets  of  a  small  number  of  accounts;  and  2)  a  fast-
moving and strong correction, initiated or catalyzed by an 
“official”  account.  In  interpreting  these  signatures,  we 
identified  new  questions 
about  how  media—both 
mainstream  and  new—are  participating  in  both  the  spread 
and correction of online rumors, and how official accounts 
of  emergency  responders  and  other  organizations  can 
reduce the spread of false rumors.  
In this paper, we examine these questions by looking at two 
rumors  from  two  separate  crisis  events  in  particular.  The 
first  involves  claims  that  the  Australian  Police  Force  was 
carrying  out  raids  of  a  Muslim-dominated  neighborhood 
during  the  Sydney  Siege  (a  hostage  crisis  in  December 
2014).  The  second  involves  the  rumored  hijacking  of  a 
WestJet flight in January 2015. 
Analyzing Retweet Signatures 
Following the method outlined in Maddock et al., [27], our 
analysis  utilizes  visual  and  qualitative  methods  to  unpack 
the progression of each rumor across its lifetime (Figure 1 
and Figure 4), identifying key moments in its diffusion and 
analyzing specific tweets propagating at that moment.  
The temporal signature or overall volume of a rumor is a 
measure of the number of people who actively participate in 
spreading  the  rumor  [27].  In  terms  of  rumor  propagation 
behaviors, there are two types that can be identified simply 
from the structure of the tweet. The first is the creation of 
“original” or “unique” content—which can include starting 
a new rumor, restating an existing rumor in new terms, or 
building on to an existing rumor. The second is the creation 
of  a  retweet—which  simply  passes  along  something 
someone  else  has 
tweeted  verbatim  or  with  added 
comments,  which  are  often  distinguishable  from  original 
content  due  to  their  placement  in  the  structure  of  tweets. 
The  volume  of  retweets  that  an  account  receives  is  a 
measure  of  the  impact  a  given  account  has  on  the 
propagation  of  a  rumor.  To  address  the  role  played  by 
the  most-retweeted 
specific  accounts,  we 
accounts  using 
retweet 
information 
embedded  in  tweet  meta-data.  Once  those  accounts  were 
identified we were able to use a specified search string to 
collect  all  tweets  that  were  created  by  retweeting  those 
accounts. We were then able to visualize the retweet-impact 
of  each  of  those  accounts—their retweet  signatures—over 
time and across codes (Affirms and Denies). These analyses 
help us see how individual accounts can impact the overall 
spread and correction of a rumor. 

identified 
the  standardized 

455

CASE  1:  RUMORED  RAIDS  OF  THE  LAKEMBA 
NEIGHBORHOOD DURING THE SYDNEY SIEGE 
This  case  highlights  the  role  of  media  accounts  in  rumor 
propagation  as  well  as  the  ability  of  an  “official”  Twitter 
account to invigorate correctional conversation after a false 
rumor has run its course.  
Event Background and Rumor Identification 
On Monday, December 15, 2014 at 9:44am AEDT, a lone 
gunman took ten customers and eight employees hostage at 
a chocolate café in Sydney, Australia. The “Sydney Siege”, 
as it became known on social media, lasted about 16 hours, 
when  upon  hearing  gunshots,  police  officers  stormed  the 
café. The hostage-taker and two hostages were killed. 
The  information  space  that  surrounded  the  standoff  was 
chaotic,  as  police,  media  and  both  the  Australian  and 
international  audience  tried  to  make  sense  of  incomplete 
and changing information. Even the number and identity of 
the  gunmen/gunman  were  uncertain  prior  to  the  police 
entering the café. The fact that the Sydney central business 
district  was  closed  aroused  a  substantial  amount  of  public 
attention, and this broad attention resulted in a great deal of 
rumoring on Twitter. 
Event Collection 
We  initiated  our  collection  for  the  Sydney  Siege  on 
Monday,  December  15,  2014  at  11:07am1,  approximately 
an  hour  and  a  half  after  the  event  began,  and  ended  it  on 
December  28  at  9:41am.  We  tracked  a  large  number  of 
including:  siege,  sydneysiege, 
search 
Sydney,  and  martinplace.  This  collection  resulted  in 
5,429,345  tweets.  From  this  collection  we  identified  and 
coded several rumors, including the Lakemba Raids rumor 
that we focus on in this paper. Significantly, this rumor did 
not begin propagating on Twitter until after our collection 
began, which means we can look at its entire life cycle and 
analyze the whole of its retweet signature. 
Rumor Description 
Due to specific demands made by the hostage-taker during 
the event, including a request for an ISIS flag, it was largely 
assumed  that  the  siege  was  related  to  Islamic  terrorism. 
Likely  emerging  from  the  sensemaking  process  around 
some  of  these  assumptions,  and  catalyzed  by  its  mention 
during  a  radio  broadcast  by  shock-jock  radio  host  Ray 
Hadley, the Lakemba Raids rumor claimed that, in parallel 
with  and  response  to  the  Sydney  Siege,  the  Australian 
Federal  Police  (AFP)  were  carrying  out  home  raids  in 
Lakemba,  a  neighborhood  with  a  large  percentage  of 
Muslims.  However,  this  rumor  was  eventually  denied  by 
the AFP. It was later explained that 20 police officers had 
taken a previously scheduled tour of the Lakemba Mosque 
as part of a police induction day, which may have been the 
rumor’s source. 

terms, 

                                                             
1 Times for this rumor are in AEDT, local time at the site of 
the event. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

For  this  rumor,  we  selected  all  tweets  from  our  Sydney 
Siege event collection that included the word “Lakemba.” 
Tweet Analysis of the Lakemba Raids Rumor 
The  first  tweet  referencing  raids  in  Lakemba  appeared  at 
11:30  a.m.  and  directly  attributed  the  rumor  to  comments 
made on Ray Hadley’s radio show: 

tim_dunlap (11:29am AEDT): Ray Hadley 
reporting on @2GB873 homes in Lakemba are 
being raided by police at present 
#sydneysiege 
During  the  next  few  minutes,  four  other  tweets  made  a 
similar claim. One was a retweet of the above tweet and the 
other  three  were  original  tweets.  Two  cited  Ray  Hadley, 
through  his  show’s  Twitter  handle,  as  the  origin  of  the 
rumor.  The  rumor  then  went  dormant  for  roughly  10 
minutes before spiking at just after 11:45 a.m. 

(cid:20)
(cid:24)
(cid:29)
(cid:26)
(cid:19)

(cid:23)

(cid:1)
(cid:28)

(cid:20)
(cid:20)
(cid:30)
(cid:18)

(cid:14)(cid:20)(cid:25)(cid:31)
(cid:13)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:22)(cid:27)(cid:24)

(cid:11)(cid:4)

(cid:10)(cid:4)

(cid:9)(cid:4)

(cid:8)(cid:4)

(cid:7)(cid:4)

(cid:6)(cid:4)

(cid:5)(cid:4)

(cid:4)

(cid:4)

(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:12)(cid:7)(cid:4)(cid:1)(cid:13)(cid:16)

(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:12)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:16)

(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:12)(cid:7)(cid:4)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:16)

(cid:5)(cid:12)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:16)

(cid:5)(cid:12)(cid:7)(cid:4)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:16)

(cid:18)(cid:22)(cid:24)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:15)(cid:14)(cid:18)(cid:3)

 

Figure 1. Tweet Volume over Time by Code: Affirm, Deny 

Lakemba Raids Rumors 

Over  the  next  two  and  a  half  hours,  Twitter  users  posted 
1,279  tweets  related  to  this  rumor.  Of  these,  493  (38%) 
affirmed  the  rumor  and  736  (57%)  denied  it.  Figure  1 
shows the volume of tweets for each code over time. 
After  the  initial  peak  at  11:45  a.m.,  affirmations  stayed 
consistently  dominant  with  several  significant  peaks 
between then and 12:20 p.m. At 12:21 p.m. volume for both 
affirmations  and  denials  were  at  13  tweets  per  minute 
(TPM) after which, affirmations declined. 
For  roughly  15  minutes,  between  12:30  p.m.  and  12:45 
p.m., the rumor seemed to have all but died out again, with 
affirmations and denials consistently below four tweets per 
minute. Then, at 12:50 p.m., the Australian Federal Police 
posted the following tweet: 

456

in 

the 

retweets 

tweet  volume  denying 

@AFPmedia (12:50pm AEDT): Reports that the 
AFP is conducting search warrants in the 
Sydney suburb of Lakemba are incorrect. 
One minute later, rumor-related tweet volume increased to 
62  tweets  per  minute,  and  all  were  denials.  Of  these,  56 
(90%)  were  retweets  of  @AFPmedia’s  post.  Although 
affirmation  levels  had  already  significantly  decreased,  the 
@AFPmedia account’s tweet re-invigorated the discussion, 
with denials dominating the overall signal. 
After  the  initial  peak  of  denials,  there  were  a  few  smaller 
(also 
spikes 
predominantly 
before 
conversation  began  to  peter  out.  In  our  larger  dataset  of 
rumors,  many  have  downstream  echo  effects  where  the 
rumor  re-surfaces,  although  typically  at  a  lower  rate. 
Though causation is impossible to establish with trace data, 
the  fact  that  affirmations  of  the  rumor  never  again  rose 
above  2  TPM,  suggests  that  the  @AFPmedia’s  “official” 
correction may have had a dampening effect—preventing a 
resurgence of the rumor. 
Impact of Highly Retweeted Accounts on Rumor Affirmation  
Of the 493 tweets affirming this rumor, 323 were retweets 
of  only  five  sources,  of  which  three  (@SkyNewsAust, 
@9NewsSyd and @7NewsSydney) were local affiliates of 
media  conglomerates  that  would  be  considered  “trusted” 
accounts.  

of  @AFPmedia) 

rumor 

(cid:26)
(cid:31)
(cid:37)
(cid:33)
(cid:24)

(cid:30)

(cid:1)
(cid:36)

(cid:26)
(cid:26)
(cid:38)
(cid:23)

(cid:20)(cid:36)(cid:27)(cid:26)(cid:34)(cid:1)(cid:15)(cid:33)(cid:32)(cid:36)(cid:26)(cid:32)(cid:36)
(cid:22)(cid:29)(cid:39)(cid:19)(cid:26)(cid:38)(cid:35)(cid:14)(cid:37)(cid:35)(cid:36)
(cid:12)(cid:19)(cid:26)(cid:38)(cid:35)(cid:22)(cid:39)(cid:25)
(cid:21)(cid:18)(cid:20)(cid:32)(cid:14)(cid:28)(cid:34)
(cid:19)(cid:26)(cid:38)(cid:35)(cid:20)(cid:32)(cid:23)(cid:27)(cid:26)(cid:18)(cid:28)(cid:32)
(cid:11)(cid:19)(cid:26)(cid:38)(cid:35)(cid:22)(cid:39)(cid:25)(cid:32)(cid:26)(cid:39)

(cid:11)(cid:4)

(cid:10)(cid:4)

(cid:9)(cid:4)

(cid:8)(cid:4)

(cid:7)(cid:4)

(cid:6)(cid:4)

(cid:5)(cid:4)

(cid:4)

(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:13)(cid:7)(cid:4)(cid:1)(cid:14)(cid:18)

(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:18)

(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:7)(cid:4)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:18)
(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:31)(cid:26)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:14)(cid:17)(cid:16)(cid:23)(cid:3)

(cid:5)(cid:13)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:18)

(cid:5)(cid:13)(cid:7)(cid:4)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:18)

 

Figure 2. Affirm Volume over Time by Retweeted Account 

Lakemba Raid Rumor 

Figure  2  shows  the  volume  of  retweets  for  each  of  these 
accounts.  When  the  rumor  began  to  gain  steam  just  after 
11:45 a.m., @SkyNewsAust and @PMOnAir a broadcaster 
for  @SkyNewsAust  were  the  dominant  accounts  being 
retweeted. In the first large  spike,  25 of the 26 tweets are 
retweets of those two accounts. At this time, both accounts 
tweeted affirmations of the rumor, referencing one-another 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

in their tweets. @PMOnAir’s tweet has since been deleted 
but was similar to the following tweet by @SkyNewsAust:   

An  early  denial  of  this  rumor  appeared  in  a  tweet  by  a 
reporter for ABC News (@Mo_Taha1) who tweeted: 

[11:48am AEDT]: NSW Police + AFP are raiding 
several homes in Lakemba right now. More 
#martinplacesiege #sydneysiege  
These two accounts stayed dominant in the first two peaks, 
but began to lose momentum shortly after 11:54 a.m., 
permanently dropping below 5 TPM by 12:03 p.m. Just 
before that final decrease, @7NewsSydney sent the 
following tweet: 

[12:01pm AEDT]: Reports of police raids at 
Lakemba, south-west of Sydney. Rolling 
coverage on #siege situation 
This tweet became dominant for a short period of time, 
before a new peak emerged, initiated by a tweet from 
@9NewsSyd: 

[12:02pm AEDT]: JUST IN: Raids occurring at 
Lakemba homes in south west Sydney. It's 
unknown if raids are related to siege 
underway in Sydney's CBD. #9News 
Shortly  after  this  point  retweets  of  @7NewsSydney  and 
@SkyNewsAust drop to zero and retweets of @9NewsSyd 
become dominant. 

Account 

Description 

SkyNewsAust 

9NewsSyd 

Sky  News  is  Australia's  24/7  news 
channel, bringing you the latest news 
as it happens. 
Sydney's 
with 
@PeterOverton,  nightly  at  6pm  on 
@Channel9. 

News 

No.1 

Broadcaster - Sky News Aust 
PMOnAir 
NewsOnTheMin  Breaking News. Wherever it 

7NewsSydney 

happens. Whenever it happens. Its 
here. 
First  For  News  in  Sydney  with 
@MarkFerguson_7  @ChrisBath7 
@jim_wilson7  @_SarahCumming 
Nightly at 6pm. 

Times 
RTed 
138

62

54
37

32

Table 2. Number of Retweets for Highly Retweeted, 

Affirming Accounts, Lakemba Raids Rumor 

Each of the tweets listed above are responsible for 100% of 
their  corresponding  account’s  affirming  retweet  volume 
(Table  2).  In  other  words,  these  were  the  only  affirming 
tweets  from  these  accounts.  In  addition,  the  total  retweet 
volumes  for  @PMOnAir  and  @NewsOnTheMin  were 
initiated by one tweet from each account. This means that 
65% of affirmation volume is not only derived solely from 
five accounts, but solely five tweets. 
Impact of Highly Retweeted Accounts on Rumor Denial. 
Of  the  736  tweets  coded  as  denials,  522  (70%)  originated 
from five accounts belonging to media and official sources. 

457

[12:19pm AEDT] Police & local community 
sources have told me there are no raids 
taking place in Lakemba. #siege 
@abcnewsSydney @702sydney 
This tweet accounts for 69% of denials of the rumor from 
12:19  p.m.  to  12:49  p.m.,  up  until  official  account  of  The 
Australian  Federal  Police 
its  denial.  The 
@AFPMedia tweet set off a rapid spike in denials, almost 
all  direct  retweets.  Of  all  tweets  denying  the  rumor,  412 
(64%) were retweets of this status. 

tweeted 

(cid:30)
(cid:36)
(cid:42)
(cid:38)
(cid:25)

(cid:35)

(cid:1)
(cid:41)

(cid:30)
(cid:30)
(cid:43)
(cid:24)

(cid:21)(cid:41)(cid:31)(cid:30)(cid:39)(cid:1)(cid:15)(cid:38)(cid:37)(cid:41)(cid:30)(cid:37)(cid:41)
(cid:14)(cid:18)(cid:22)(cid:36)(cid:30)(cid:29)(cid:32)(cid:27)
(cid:19)(cid:38)(cid:26)(cid:24)(cid:27)(cid:31)(cid:27)(cid:5)
(cid:12)(cid:20)(cid:30)(cid:43)(cid:40)(cid:23)(cid:44)(cid:29)
(cid:28)(cid:34)(cid:33)(cid:27)(cid:28)(cid:38)(cid:42)(cid:39)

(cid:11)(cid:4)

(cid:10)(cid:4)

(cid:9)(cid:4)

(cid:8)(cid:4)

(cid:7)(cid:4)

(cid:6)(cid:4)

(cid:5)(cid:4)

(cid:4)

(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:13)(cid:7)(cid:4)(cid:1)(cid:14)(cid:19)

(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:1)(cid:22)(cid:19)

(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:7)(cid:4)(cid:1)(cid:22)(cid:19)
(cid:24)(cid:32)(cid:36)(cid:30)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:14)(cid:17)(cid:16)(cid:24)(cid:3)

(cid:5)(cid:13)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:1)(cid:22)(cid:19)

(cid:5)(cid:13)(cid:7)(cid:4)(cid:1)(cid:22)(cid:19)

Figure 3. Deny Volume over Time by Retweeted Account 

Lakemba Raid Rumor 

Account 

Description 

AFPmedia

Mo_Taha1

9NewsSyd

bkjabour

Latest news updates from the Australian 
Federal Police. This is an official AFP 
account. DO NOT REPORT CRIME 
HERE.
Reporter & producer for @abcnews in 
western Sydney. Global affairs, politics 
& human interest. Tweets are mine. 
1  News  with 
Sydney’s  No. 
@PeterOverton  nightly  at  6pm  on 
@Channel9 

Guardian Australia reporter. Views not 
the Guardian's, unless its view is curly 
hair is cool.

Times 
RTed 
412

51

32

27

Table 3. Number of Retweets for Highly Retweeted, 

Denying Accounts, Lakemba Raids Rumor 

Following  the  “official”  declaration  that  the  rumor  was 
untrue, @9NewsSyd (who was also a top affirmer) denied 
the rumor as well. Their denial retweet volume was half the 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

volume  of  retweets  of  their  earlier  affirmation,  suggesting 
that the crowd was more likely to retweet their affirmation 
than their denial. 
All of the denial retweet volume for each of these accounts 
(Table  3)  comes  from  one  tweet  from  each  account.  This 
means 70% of denial volume came from four tweets. 
In the “Lakemba Raids” example, the majority of rumoring 
can be attributed to just nine original tweets. This implies 
that it is possible for just a handful of accounts to drive both 
the propagation and correction of a given rumor. 
CASE  2:  RUMORED  HIJACKING  OF  WESTJET  FLIGHT 
2514 
The  following  description  again  highlights  the  role  of 
media, breaking news, and the “official” Twitter account of 
an implicated organization on the spread and correction of a 
fast-paced rumor. In this case, actions taken by the official 
account appear to have helped to stop the propagation of the 
rumor. Here, we draw from the tweet record of the rumor as 
well  as  an  interview  with  one  of  the  employees  operating 
the organization’s official Twitter account during the event. 
Event Background and Rumor Identification 
On  Saturday  January  10,  2015,  a  flight-tracking  website 
reported that WestJet flight 2514—a flight bound for Puerto 
Vallarta,  Mexico 
from  Vancouver,  Canada—was 
“squawking” via its transponders the standardized code for 
hijacking, 7500. Soon after, a Twitter user shared a screen 
shot of the flight-tracker site with the following message: 

in 

ground-based 

the  website’s 

[4:13pm MT]: BREAKING: West Jet #WA2154 is 
squawking #7500 
Shortly  after  that  tweet  was  posted,  another  Twitter  user 
replied, “Isn’t that a hijacking?” Soon, several Twitter users 
began to engage in conversation and speculation about what 
this information might mean. At its peak, a large number of 
tweets  (~400  per  minute)  referred  to  a  possible  hijacking. 
The airline (WestJet) has no evidence that such a code was 
ever transmitted from the plane itself. However, instrument 
errors 
equipment 
occasionally  do  alter  the  content  of  codes,  which  is  likely 
what  happened  here.  And,  though  there  is  not  100% 
certainty about how the hijack code ended up in the flight-
tracking system, it is now clear that there was no hijacking 
situation on that flight. 
Event Collection 
We  began  collecting  tweets  for  this  event  at  4:33  p.m. 
MST2 on January 10, 2015, approximately 20 minutes after 
the first tweet, and stopped at 2 p.m. on January 11, 2015. 
We  tracked  the  following  terms:  westjet,  #WS2154, 
hijack, hijacked, and hijacking. There are 27,143 
tweets in this event collection. 

                                                             
2  All  times  for  this  rumor  are  in  MST,  the  local  time  for 
WestJet employees at the time of the event. 

458

Due to the lag in initiating our collection, we do not have 
all of the Twitter data for the first 20 minutes of this rumor. 
However,  we  were  able  to  back-fill  some  of  this  data  and 
gain  an  understanding  of  the  rumor’s  origin  and  early 
spread by using Twitter Advanced Search functionality and 
through  data  shared  directly  with  us  by  WestJet. 
Additionally,  we  did  capture  100%  of  the  tweets  (and 
downstream tweet volume) of the “official” account in this 
rumor, @WestJet. 
Rumor Description 
This rumor had several distinct  permutations  with  varying 
qualities  of  veracity.  For  this  analysis,  we  selected  and 
coded  for  one  major  variant—that  the  plane  had  been 
hijacked.  We  used  a  search  string  to  identify  a  subset  of 
event  terms  related  to  this  rumor  (eliminating  noise  from 
the  initial  search  terms),  and  then  utilized  manual  coding 
(i.e.  the  “unrelated”  code)  to  remove  tweets  that  did  not 
refer directly or indirectly to a hijacking.  

Affirm

Deny

l

e
m
u
o
V
 
t
e
e
w
T

500

400

300

200

100

0

Jan 10  4:45 PM

Jan 10  5:15 PM

Jan 10  5:45 PM

Time (MT)

 

Figure 4. Tweet Volume over Time by Code: Affirm, Deny 

WestJet Hijacking Rumor 

Early Rumor Propagation 
About five minutes after the initial tweet, a flight-tracking 
website called Flightradar24 picked up the story, tweeting: 

to 

[4:18pm MT] Westjet flight #WS2154 is 
squawking 7500 = hijack. Not confirmed and 
can just be a mistake! 
flightradar24.com/WJA2154/53e61e7 
representatives  of  WestJet  who  were 
According 
following  this  story,  Flightradar24’s  Twitter  account  had 
approximately 180,000 followers at the time of this tweet, 
Though  this  tweet  conveys  some  uncertainty  about  an 
actual  hijacking,  it  affirms  the  rumor.  WestJet’s  records 
claim  this  tweet  received  850  retweets  and  sparked 
conversation  about  the  signal  code  and  the  hijacking.  A 
growing  crowd—consisting  of  breaking  news  accounts, 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

aviation enthusiasts, members of the media, and eventually 
a  broader  Twitter  audience—began  to  participate  in  the 
rumoring surrounding this event.  
Tweet Analysis of the WestJet Hijacking Rumor 
Our  analysis  focused  on  the  period  of  peak  tweet  volume 
from  4:30  p.m.  on  January  10  to  6  p.m.  on  January  11, 
during which 17,576 tweets were sent. Of that total, 7,875 
were coded as affirming the rumor and 7,176 were coded as 
denying it. As aforementioned, due to limitations with our 
event  collection,  the  initial  20  minutes  of  the  rumor’s 
propagation  are  missing.  However,  Figure  4  shows  that 
rumor affirmations were at 400 tweets per minute and rising 
at  about  4:45  p.m.  Three  tweets  that  were  propagating  at 
high rates during this time demonstrate the rumor’s nature: 

[4:45pm MT] RT @PzFeed: ALERT: WestJet 
Flight WA2154 sends hijack signal in-flight 
over Mexico; flight departed Vancouver for 
Puerto Vallarta <link> 

[4:45pm MT] RT @airlivenet: UPDATE: West Jet 
#WA2154 is now squawking #7500 again - 
possible Hijack situation  
http://t.co/5KdwkvoO5Q - @NikPhillips666 

[4:45pm MT] RT @rConflictNews: BREAKING: 
West Jet #WA2154 sents out Hijack signal - 3 
people inside cockpit, Mexican Air Force 
Handling w/ NORAD <link> 
Shortly after this peak, the rate of affirms began a slow, but 
steady  descent.  At  about  that  same  time,  denials  began  to 
spike,  going  from  less  than  10  TPM  at  4:45  p.m.  to  over 
500  tweets  per  minute  at  4:55  p.m.  Though  the  overall 
number of affirming tweets is greater than denying tweets, 
the latter spiked more quickly and achieved a significantly 
higher rate (per minute). This spike is mostly constituted by 
retweets  of  two  tweets,  both  originally  authored  by  the 
official Twitter account of WestJet airlines: 

[4:55pm MT] RT @WestJet: Contrary to 
internet rumour, air traffic control has 
confirmed #WS2154 is “squawking” standard 
transponder code, not 7500. 

[4:55pm MT] RT @WestJet: There is no 
abnormal behavior from WestJet flight #2154. 
We expect it to land shortly in Puerto 
Vallarta. 
The intersection of these signals (Figure 4)—especially the 
rapid rise of the denial signal at the same time as the affirm 
signal  begins  to  fall,  permanently—suggests  that  denial 
tweets  may  have  had  direct  impact  on  the  rate  of  affirm 
tweets being sent. In other words, Twitter users may have 
stopped  spreading  the  rumor  when  they  saw  the  above 
tweets (and retweets of those tweets) denying it. 
Impact of Highly Retweeted Accounts on Rumor Affirmation  
Of the 7,875 tweets in our data affirming the rumor, 4,374 
(55%)  were  retweets  of  just  five  accounts.  Table  4  lists 
those accounts and the number of retweets they received for 
their  affirming  tweets.  Interestingly,  all  of  these  accounts 

can  be  classified  as  either  “breaking  news”  or  flight 
tracking accounts. 

Account 

Description 

PzFeed 

A global news channel bringing you 
breaking news as it happens and the 
most talked about stories, pictures and 
videos from around the world. 

rConflictNews  We strive to bring you breaking news 

airlivenet 

flightradar24 

on conflicts around the world. 
Aviation News, Realtime Alerts, 
Reports, Booking #avgeek 
Track air traffic in real time from all 
around the world! 

IsraelHatzolah  Leader in breaking & exclusive news 

from Israel & surroundings • Real-
Time news feed worth sharing 

Times 
RTed 
1906 

1081 

686 

554 

147 

Table 4. Number of Retweets for Highly Retweeted, 

Affirming Accounts, WestJet Rumor 

the 
@rConflictNews, 

Figure  5  shows  the  impact  of  each  account  on  the  total 
volume of the affirm signal for that rumor. At the start of 
our  collection 
top  four  most-retweeted  accounts 
(@PzFeed, 
and 
@flightradar24) were already actively tweeting—and being 
this  event.  Though  @airlivenet  was 
retweeted—for 
retweets  of  @PzFeed 
influential 
and 
@rConflictNews  become  more  prominent  over 
time, 
constituting 52% of the affirmation signal at its peak. 

@airlivenet 

early  on, 

Other C ontent

P zF eed

rC onflictNews

airlivenet

flightradar24

IsraelHatzolah

l

e
m
u
o
V
 
t
e
e
w
T

500

400

300

200

100

0

Jan 10  4:45 PM

Jan 10  5:15 PM

Jan 10  5:45 PM

Time (MT)

 

Figure 5. Affirm Volume over Time by Retweeted Account 

Impact of Highly Retweeted Accounts on Rumor Denial 
Of the 7,176 tweets that were coded as denying the rumor, 
3,906  (54%)  were  retweets  that  originated  from  five 
accounts.  Three  of  these  (@PzFeed,  @airlivenet,  and 
@flightradar24)  were  also  among  the  top  most  retweeted 

459

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

accounts  for  affirming  tweets.  This  shows  that  their  self-
corrections  were  visible  and  propagated  in  the  space. 
Interestingly, rumor denials sent by these accounts were not 
retweeted  as  often  as  their  rumor  affirmations  had  been, 
which suggests that once an official source has entered the 
conversation, these accounts garner less attention.  
These  findings  support  the  implication  found  in  the 
Lakemba  case  study,  that  a  small  handful  of  accounts  are 
capable of driving the majority of a rumor’s volume. 

Account 

Description 

WestJet 

PzFeed 

airlivenet 

flightradar24 

Welcome to the official WestJet 
Twitter account! We're online from 9 
a.m. to 5 p.m. MT on business days 
and from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. MT on 
weekends. 
A global news channel bringing you 
breaking news as it happens and the 
most talked about stories, pictures 
and videos from around the world. 
Aviation News, Realtime Alerts, 
Reports, Booking #avgeek 
Track air traffic in real time from all 
around the world! 

NewsOnTheMin  Breaking News. Wherever it 

happens. Whenever it happens. Its 
here. 

Times 
RTed 
2802 

385 

316 

207 

196 

Table 5. Number of Retweets for Highly Retweeted, 

Denying Accounts 

Table  5  indicates  that  retweets  of  the  official  @WestJet 
account  constituted  a  large  portion  of  the  overall  denial 
signal, and Figure 6 shows that retweets of @WestJet were 
responsible  for  the  initial  spike  in  denial  tweets.  The  two 
tweets that make up that spike are listed above. Both were 
posted at 4:53 p.m., within one minute of each other. 
Corrections by the other influential accounts came after the 
@WestJet  tweets,  suggesting  that  those  “official”  tweets 
induced other prominent accounts (including those that had 
sent  affirmations  of  the  rumor)  to  make  their  own 
corrections, which were then propagated by others. 
Action and Reflection from WestJet  
Approximately five months after the rumored crisis—or the 
“rumor crisis” from their point of view—we interviewed a 
representative of WestJet (Darren, personal communication, 
May  2015),  who  was  among  the  group  of  communication 
employees  monitoring  the  situation  and  operating  their 
Twitter account that day. 
WestJet’s Social Media Strategy 
The company has a team of two employees and a manager 
assigned  to  social  media  who  generate  promotional  and 
informational content, and another team of employees who 
routinely  monitor  conversations  for  mentions  of  their 
company and respond to direct inquiries from customers. 

Other C ontent

WestJ et

P zF eed

airlivenet

flightradar24

NewsOnTheMin

l

e
m
u
o
V
 
t
 
e
e
w
T

500

400

300

200

100

0

 

Jan 10  4:45 PM

Jan 10  5:1   PM5

Jan 10  5:45 PM

Time (MT)

Figure 6. Deny Volume over Time by Retweeted Account 

Though WestJet had an active social media presence and a 
set of protocols in place as part of a crisis plan, at the time 
of  the  event,  they  did  not  have  a  plan  for  dealing  with  a 
rumor of this kind: 
This  event  was  not  part  of  our  crisis  plan.  We  had  policy 
procedure  and  language  written  for  hijacking  but  we  had 
NOTHING about rumors. 
WestJet’s Response from Their Own Point of View 
The  rumored  hijacking  occurred  on  a  Saturday  evening, 
when there was no employee officially on duty. However, a 
member  of  their  social  media  team,  Darren,  managed  to 
catch  the  rumor  while  online  at  home  about  20  minutes 
after  it  started.  He  quickly  contacted  other  team  members 
and  logged  on  to  the  WestJet  account,  noting  that  the 
number  of  tweets  about  the  company  was  escalating 
quickly.  WestJet’s  timeline  of  the  event  indicates  that 
within 30 minutes of the initial rumor tweet, news networks 
began  to  tweet  at  them  and  to  contact  them  directly  via 
email  to  inquire  about  the  rumor.  At  that  time,  some 
ambiguity  remained  in  the  information  space—i.e.  though 
they were close to being certain that the signal was an error, 
they did not yet know for sure, and because the plane was 
in its final descent, direct communication was not allowed 
at that time. 
The biggest question for us was “do we respond now with 
almost  confirmed  information  or  wait  five  minutes  to  get 
confirmed info?” We chose, let’s get it out now and then 5 
minutes later confirmed.  
In other words, they recognized that they needed to get the 
best information out as fast as they could, and in this case, 
that decision appears to have been a a good one. Using two 
social media monitoring tools (SparkCentral and Sysomos), 
WestJet  employees  monitored  the  impact  of  their  tweets, 
noting  that  their  denial  corresponded  with  a  rapid  drop  in 

460

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

rumor  activity,  and  that  everything  was  “back  to  normal” 
after about two hours. 
Updating a Social Media Strategy after a Crisis Response 
Our analysis of tweets related to the WestJet rumor shows 
that the @WestJet account was quite effective in its attempt 
to stop the spread of the rumor. On their side, the WestJet 
social  media  team  has  used  this  event  as  a  learning 
opportunity.  Indeed,  by  the  time  we  spoke  to  company 
representative,  they  had  already  spent  a  considerable 
amount of time reflecting upon their response to this rumor 
crisis and had updated their protocols for future events.  
WestJet  explained  that,  due  to  the  speed  with  which 
information travels on Twitter, the amount of time afforded 
to issue an official statement before the situation escalates 
is  small;  and  stopping  rumors  quickly 
is  extremely 
important. Thus, although they knew conceptually that with 
social  media  they  had  to  move  quickly,  this  rumor  crisis 
illustrated  it.  Though  WestJet  already  had  some  tweet 
templates prepared for certain types of crises, they realized 
that  they  needed  to  expand  that  inventory  to  include 
statements  that  would  not  require  managerial  approval  in 
the  moment  and  therefore  speed  up  the  response  process. 
They now have 100 pre-crafted “stock” tweets, approved by 
their executive team, designed for various events. Although 
these are essentially ready to be sent, Darren explained that 
he would still eventually seek out input, if available, before 
posting. For Twitter responses specifically, they have also 
established  different  sets  of  rules  to  adapt  the  message  to 
the specificity of each situations: 
If a Twitter account tweeting about WestJet with more than 
100k followers tweets this, then we can say this. If we are 
the  number  one  trending  topic  in  Twitter  in  Canada,  then 
we can say that. 
WestJet  views  this  event  as  a  positive  experience,  an 
opportunity  to  test  their  existing  protocols  and  improve 
them for future events. 
The  event  was  a  good  test  of  our  emergency  response 
procedures.  […]  This  would  never  have  been  a  mock 
because we couldn’t have imagined it. It was good, because 
everyone was safe and it didn’t affect our business. And we 
made  changes  to  the  emergency  response  procedure 
because of it. 
DISCUSSION 
Impact of the “Official” Accounts on Rumor Correction 
Through the analysis of Twitter data related to two rumors 
spreading  in  two  different  crisis  situations,  this  paper 
illustrates  the  impact  that  “official”  sources—such  as 
emergency responders and organizations—can have on the 
information being propagated around an event.  
Not only does our analysis show that an official source can 
revitalize  conversation  and  correct  misinformation  after 
rumoring  has  slowed,  as  was  the  case  with  the  Sydney 
Siege  “Lakemba”  rumor,  it  also  shows  that  they  can 

461

is  vulnerable 

to 

the 

is  non-existent  or  absent 

from 

influence  rumoring  as  it  is  occurring,  as  evidenced  in  the 
WestJet potential hijacking rumor. 
The  Twitter  record  of  both  events  shows  that  official 
corrections encourage some of those who were involved in 
rumoring  to  correct  themselves.  However,  for  accounts 
participating  in  both  affirming  and  denying  behavior, 
denials  received  about  half  the  retweets  that  their  affirms 
had—suggesting that some members of the crowd are more 
likely  to  pass  along  affirmations  (perpetuating  the  rumor) 
than  corrections.  Conversely,  we  also  see  evidence, 
especially in the WestJet case, that the official denial may 
have  influenced  some  Twitter  users  to  stop  spreading  the 
rumor.  In  other  words,  though  an  official  denial  may  not 
induce a rumor-spreading account to publicly correct itself, 
it  may  still  reduce  the  likelihood  of  that  account  further 
spreading the rumor, thus producing a dampening effect. 
Our  findings  support  previous  arguments  that  having  a 
dependable  source  for  information  during  a  crisis  is 
important to shape the flow of information [29]. Though the 
Twitter  platform 
spread  of 
misinformation [18,23], official sources have the capability 
to  harness  the  virality  of  online  information  to  correct 
rumoring.  However,  when  the  account  affiliated  with  the 
official  source 
the 
conversation,  the  people  of  the  Twittersphere  may  look 
elsewhere  for  information,  such  as  mainstream  media  and 
“breaking news” sources. 
Role of Mainstream Media in Rumor Propagation 
The traditional media is often put in contrast to social media 
channels  in  how  they  treat  and  affect  a  crisis  event.  This 
study  provides  insight  into  how  traditional  and  trusted 
media  online  affect  the  conversation  in  an  information 
sphere  that  is  recognized  to  be  imperfect.  Evidence  that 
mainstream media can play a significant role in the spread 
of  rumors  on  Twitter  is  seen  in  both  case  studies.  In  the 
Lakemba  rumor,  47%  of  all  tweets  affirming  the  rumor 
were  retweets  of  posts  from  local  affiliates  of  media 
conglomerates  that  may  have  been  considered  trusted 
accounts. Of these accounts, only one (@9NewsSyd) came 
back and corrected the false rumor after the official source 
issued 
their  statement.  For  other  participating  media 
accounts,  there  is  no  evidence  that  they  corrected  their 
initial  misinformation  once  the  truth  was  revealed.  Some 
media  sources  who  were  not  part  of  the  rumoring  (two 
reporters  and  one  official  news  account)  did  join  the 
conversation to tweet denials of the rumor after the official 
account  (the  Australian  Federal  Police)  had  tweeted  its 
denial.  These  accounts  made  up  a  significant  volume  of 
denials, accounting for 15% of them. 
though 
In 
professional 
the  event 
(according to Darren), mainstream media sources accounted 
for a relatively small amount of the affirming volume. On 
the  other  hand,  they  did  influence  denials,  accounting  for 
approximately 10% of all tweets denying the rumor.  

the  WestJet  potential  hijacking 

journalists  were  monitoring 

rumor, 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

that 

Effects of “Breaking News” Sites on Rumor Propagation 
One notable feature of both rumors is the participation and 
impact  of  “breaking  news”  accounts—i.e.  accounts  with 
those  words  in  the  profile—on  the  spread  of  the  rumor 
itself.  The  five  most  influential  accounts  in  the  WestJet 
hijacking rumor were all either flight tracking or “breaking 
news” accounts. The former’s presence is certainly related 
to the nature of this particular rumor, though it may be apt 
to  characterize  them  as  a  domain-specific  subset  of  the 
latter. Regarding the latter, these accounts gain the trust of 
Twitter  users  by  mimicking  the  appearance  of  legitimate 
sources of information, often mirroring the look of a trusted 
media or official account. They may also appeal to the fast-
moving  landscape  of  Twitter  by  appearing  to  have  their 
fingers  on  the  pulse  of  a  given  event  and,  because  of  this 
facade,  garner  large  audiences  to  which  they  broadcast 
information  with  a  tone  of  factuality  and  immediacy.  For 
example, according to representatives of WestJet who were 
following  this  story,  Flightradar24’s  Twitter  account  had 
approximately 180,000 followers at the time of this event, 
and  even  though  their  tweet  conveyed  some  uncertainty 
about  an  actual  hijacking,  it  functioned  to  spread  what 
turned out to be a false rumor. 
That  these  “breaking  news”  accounts  are  highly  retweeted 
is  in  line  with  existing  research  showing  Twitter  users 
to  certain  kinds  of  user  names, 
attribute  credibility 
“assuming 
topically-relevant  user  names  were 
associated with credible information” [28, p. 445]. In other 
words,  according  to  the  Twittersphere,  if  an  account  says 
they  are  official  and  they  look  official  they  must  be  so. 
Recent research shows that these accounts might actually be 
more trusted than mainstream media sources [35].  
Emerging  Best  Practices 
Communication during Crisis 
Our data demonstrate that WestJet’s response was relatively 
fast—their official denial was posted within 45 minutes of 
the  first  rumor  tweet.  Of  the  thirteen  crisis-related  rumors 
we  have  studied,  this  was  by  far  the  fastest  and  most 
effective correction. However, the company still strives to 
do better and saw this event as a learning opportunity.  
Our results validate existing research [2], showing that the 
presence of an official source indeed affects the propagation 
and/or  resolution  of  online  rumors.  Contrary  to  other 
findings  suggesting  that  official  sources  are  buried  in  the 
noise of the many [11], this study shows that messages of 
official  communicators  can  rise  above  the  noise  of  the 
many. In fact, the many adopt the official information. This 
should  provide  further  rationale  to  organizations  and 
emergency  management  agencies,  which  have  expressed 
fear  of  misinformation  and  lack  of  trustworthiness  [18]  to 
join the social media conversation. Their (active) presence 
can  be  effective  in  shaping  the  flow  of  information  and 
controlling potential rumors.  
These findings also provide empirical evidence supporting 
a  growing  argument  that  emergency  responders  and  other 

for  Managing  Online 

462

important  crisis-related 

official  actors  in  safety-critical  domains  should  include 
specific protocols for identifying and addressing rumors in 
their  social  media  strategies  and  crisis  plans.  The  WestJet 
case shows the value of real-time social media monitoring, 
and  suggests  that  one  tractable  method  of  doing  this 
consistently (24 hours a day, seven days a week) involves 
empowering multiple employees to follow the social media 
conversations  to  detect  rumors  or  other  issues.  WestJet’s 
ongoing work to pre-approve a set of messages for different 
kinds  of  situations  demonstrates  one  potential  strategy  for 
dealing with the need to respond quickly in situations that 
require  careful  management  of  messaging.  Protocols  like 
these  could  result  in  shorter  response  times  to  rumors  as 
well  as  other 
information. 
Considering  the  demonstrated  value  of  the  “official” 
response to online rumors in terms of dampening rumoring 
behavior and promoting corrections, shorter response times 
and effective communication within those responses could 
reduce the overall impact of rumoring during crisis events. 
CONCLUSION 
This research uses the digital record of crisis-related rumors 
that spread on Twitter to enhance our understanding of how 
“official”  sources—such  as  news  media,  emergency 
management  agencies  and  organizations—impact  both  the 
propagation  and  correction  of  online  rumors.  This  paper 
offers  methodological  and  empirical  insights  for  social 
media  researchers  and  practical  implications  for  crisis 
communicators.  We  describe  a  mixed-method  approach 
based  on 
the  development  and  analysis  of  “retweet 
signatures”  and  show  how  this  approach  revealed  the  role 
of  official  accounts  helping  to  correct  and,  in  the  WestJet 
hijacking case, actively stop the spread of false rumors.  
Significantly,  this  research  demonstrates—using  empirical 
evidence 
record—that  emergency 
responders  and  other  crisis  communicators  can  effectively 
shape  social  media  discussions  and  dampen  the  spread  of 
rumors  by  engaging  in  the  online  conversation.  However, 
this study also suggests that to do this requires keeping pace 
with the rapid speed of social media. The actions taken by 
WestJet and the resulting changes they made to their social 
media  protocols  demonstrate  emerging  best  practices  for 
managing online communication during crisis.  
This work also shows how mainstream media play an active 
role in both rumor propagation and correction, and reveals 
the  influence  of  “breaking  news”  accounts  on  rumor 
propagation.  Our  findings  suggest  that  a  small  number  of 
accounts  are  responsible  for  driving  a  large  portion  of 
overall  volume  for  some  online  rumors.  Complementing 
existing literature, these analyses contribute to an enriched 
understanding of the role of “official” accounts in rumoring 
on social media.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This  research,  a  collaboration  between  the  emCOMP  and 
DataLab at the University of Washington, was supported by 
NSF  Grants  1420255  and  1342252.  We  thank  the  UW 

the  digital 

from 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

SoMe  Lab  for  providing  infrastructure  support.  We  also 
thank  several  students  who  provided  significant  assistance 
to  this  project,  including  John  Robinson,  Ahmer  Arif, 
Stephanie Stanek and Jim Maddock (among others). 
REFERENCES 
1. About Twitter, Inc. About. 2015. Retrieved May 20,

2015 from https://about.twitter.com/company 

2. David E. Alexander. 2014. Social media in disaster risk

reduction and crisis management. Science and 
Engineering Ethics 20, 3: 717–33. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11948-013-9502-z 

3. Gordon W. Allport and Leo Postman. 1946. An

analysis of rumor. Public Opinion Quarterly 10, 4: 
501-517. 

4. Kenneth M. Anderson, Ahmet Arif Aydin, Mario

Barrenechea, Adam Cardenas, Mazin Hakeem, and 
Sahar Jambi. 2015. Design Challenges/Solutions for 
Environments Supporting the Analysis of Social Media 
Data in Crisis Informatics Research. In Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), 
163-172. 

5. Lucinda Austin, Brooke Fisher Liu, Yan Jin. 2012.

How Audiences Seek Out Crisis Information: 
Exploring the Social-Mediated Crisis Communication 
Model. J of Applied Comm. Research 40, 2: 188–207. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00909882.2012.654498 

6. William L. Benoit. 1997. Image repair discourse and
crisis communication. Public Relations Review 23, 2: 
177–186. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0363-
8111(97)90023-0 

7. Deanne Bird, Megan Ling, Katherine Haynes. 2012.

Flooding Facebook: The use of social media during the 
Queensland and Victorian floods. Australian Journal of 
Emergency Management 27, 1: 27–33.  

8. Rowena L. Briones, Beth Kuch, Brooke Fisher Liu,

Yan Jin. 2011. Keeping up with the digital age: How 
the American Red Cross uses social media to build 
relationships. Public Relations Review 37,1: 37-43. 
http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1016/j.pubrev.2010.12.006. 
9. Axel Bruns, Yuxian Eugene Liang. 2012. Tools and

methods for capturing Twitter data during natural 
disasters. First Monday,17,4. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5210/fm.v17i4.3937  

10. Theodore Caplow. 1947. Rumors in war, Social

Forces, 298-302. 

11. Kay L. Colley, Amy Collier. 2009. An Overlooked

Social Media Tool? Making a Case for Wikis, Public 
Relations Strategist, 34–35. 

12. Carl von Clausewitz. 1976. On War. Princeton

University Press. 

13. Adam Crowe. 2011. The social media manifesto: A

comprehensive review of the impact of social media on 

463

emergency management. Journal of Business 
Continuity & Emergency Planning 5, 1: 409-420. 
14. Nicholas DiFonzo, Prashant Bordia. 2007. Rumor

psychology: Social and organizational approaches. 
American Psychological Association. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/11503-000 

15. Samantha Finn, Panagiotis Takis Metaxas, Eni

Mustafaraj, Megan O’Keefe, Lindsay Tang, Susan 
Tang, Laura Zeng. 2014. TRAILS: A system for 
monitoring the propagation of rumors on twitter. 
In Computation and Journalism Symposium, NYC, NY. 

16. Karen Freberg. 2012. Intention to comply with crisis

messages communicated via social media. Public 
Relations Review 38, 3: 416–421. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pubrev.2012.01.008 

17. Alfonso González-Herrero, Suzanne Smith. 2008.

Crisis Communications Management on the Web: How 
Internet-Based Technologies are Changing the Way 
Public Relations Professionals Handle Business Crises. 
J. of Contingencies and Crisis Management 16, 3.  

18. Starr R. Hiltz, Jane Kushma, Linda Plotnick. 2014. Use

of Social Media by U.S. Public Sector Emergency 
Managers: Barriers and Wish Lists. In Proceedings of 
Information Systems for Crisis Response and 
Management (ISCRAM ’14).  

19. J B. Houston, Joshua Hawthorne, Mildred F. Perreault,

Eun H. Park, Marlo G. Hode, Michael R. Halliwell, 
Sarah E. Turner McGowen, Rachel Davis, Shivani 
Vaid, Jonathan A. McElderry, Stanford A. Griffith. 
2012. Social media use during disasters: A review of 
the knowledge base and gaps. National Consortium for 
the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism. 

20. J. Brian Houston, Joshua Hawthorne, Mildred F.
Perreault, Eun Hae Park, Marlo Goldstein Hode, 
Michael R. Halliwell, Sarah E. Turner McGowen, 
Rachel Davis, Shivani Vaid, Jonathan A. McElderry, 
Stanford A. Griffith. 2014. Social media and disasters: 
a functional framework for social media use in disaster 
planning, response, and research. Disasters 39, 1: 1-22. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/disa.12092 

21. Linlin Huang, Kate Starbird, Mania Orand, Stephanie
Stanek, Heather Pedersen. 2015. Connected Through 
Crisis: Emotional Proximity and the Spread of 
Misinformation Online. In Proceedings of the 2015 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
& Social Computing (CSCW '15).  

22. Amanda L. Hughes, Leysia Palen. 2012. The Evolving

Role of the Public Information Officer: An 
Examination of Social Media in Emergency 
Management. Journal of Homeland Security and 
Emergency Management 9,1. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1515/1547-7355.1976 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

23. Yan Jin, Brooke F. Liu, Lucinda L. Austin. 2011.

Examining the role of social media in effective crisis
management: The effects of crisis origin, information
form, and source on publics’ crisis responses.
Communication Research, 0093650211423918.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0093650211423918

24. Andrea L. Kavanaugh, Edward A. Fox, Steven D.

Sheetz, Seungwon Ya, Lin Tzy Li, Donald J.
Shoemaker, Apostol Natsev, Lexing Xie. 2012. Social
media use by government: From the routine to the
critical. Government Information Quarterly 29, 4: 480–
491. http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1016/j.giq.2012.06.002
25. Eugenia C. Kiesling. 2001. Fog on War without the

Fog. Military Review 81, 5: 85-86.

26. Brooke Fisher Liu, Julia Daisy Fraustino, Yan Jin.

2014. How Disaster Information Form, Source, Type,
and Prior Disaster Exposure Affect Public Outcomes:
Jumping on the Social Media Bandwagon? Journal of
Applied Communication Research 43, 1: 44–65.
http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1080/00909882.2014.982685
27. Jim Maddock, Kate Starbird, Haneen J. Al-Hassani,

Daniel E. Sandoval, Mania Orand, and Robert M.
Mason. 2015. Characterizing Online Rumoring
Behavior Using Multi-Dimensional Signatures. In
Proceedings of Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work & Social Computing (CSCW '15),
228-241. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2675133.2675280

28. Meredith R. Morris, Scott Counts, Asta Roseway,

Aaron Hoff, Julia Schwarz. 2012. Tweeting is
believing? Understanding microblog credibility
perceptions. In Proc. of 2012 Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’12), 441-450.
http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1145/2145204.2145274
29. Nic Newman. 2011. Mainstream media and the

distribution of news in the age of social discovery.
Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism,
University of Oxford.

30. Onnok Oh, Manish Agrawal, H R. Rao. 2013.

Community intelligence and social media services: a
rumor theoretic analysis of tweets during social crises.
Mis Quarterly 37, 2: 407-426.

31. Onnok Oh, Kyounghee H. Kwon, H R. Rao. 2010. An
Exploration of Social Media in Extreme Events: Rumor
Theory and Twitter during the Haiti Earthquake 2010.
In Proceeding of The International Conference on
Information Systems (ICIS ’10), 231.

32. Eva-Karin Olsson. 2008. Crisis Communication in

Public Organizations : Dimensions of Dimensions of
Crisis Communication Revisited. Journal of
Contingencies and Crisis Management 22, 2:113–125.
http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1111/1468-5973.12047

464

33. Ralph L. Rosnow. 1980. Psychology of rumor

reconsidered. Psychological Bulletin 87, 3: 578-591.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.87.3.578

34. Yee San, Su Clarence, Wardell Iii, Zoë Thorkildsen,

Monica Giovachino. 2013. Social Media in the
Emergency Management Field: 2012 Survey Results.
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1
.1.357.3121 

35. Mike Schmierbach, Anne Oeldorf-Hirsch. 2012. A
Little Bird Told Me, So I Didn’t Believe It: Twitter,
Credibility, and Issue Perceptions. Communication
Quarterly 60, 3: 317–337.
http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1080/01463373.2012.688723

36. Tamotsu Shibutani. 1966. Improvised news: A

sociological study of rumor. Ardent Media.

37. Irina Shklovski, Leysia Palen, Jeannette Sutton. 2008.

Finding community through information and
communication technology in disaster response. In
Proceedings of the 2008 ACM Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’08).
127-136.
http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1145/1460563.1460584

38. Irina Shklovski, Moira Burke, Sara Kiesler, Robert

Kraut. 2010. Technology adoption and use in the
aftermath of Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans.
American Behavioral Scientist 53, 8: 1228–1246.
http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1177/0002764209356252

39. Brian G. Smith. (2010). Socially distributing public
relations: Twitter, Haiti, and interactivity in social
media. Public Relations Review, 36(4), 329–335.
doi:10.1016/j.pubrev.2010.08.005

40. Jeannette Sutton, Leysia Palen, Irina Shklovski. 2008.

Backchannels on the front lines: Emergent uses of
social media in the 2007 Southern California wildfires.
In Proceedings of Information Systems for Crisis
Response and Management (ISCRAM ’08), 624-632.
https://www.cs.colorado.edu/~palen/Papers/iscram08/B
ackchannelsISCRAM08.pdf

41. Mel Taylor, Garrett Wells, Gwyneth Howell, Beverley

Raphael. 2012. The role of social media as
psychological first aid as a support to community
resilience building. The Australian Journal of
Emergency Management 27, 1: 20–26.

42. Shari R. Veil, Tara Burhner, Michael J. Palenchar.

2011. A Work-In-Process Literature Review:
Incorporating Social Media in Risk and Crisis
Communication. Journal of contingencies and crisis
management 19, 2: 110-122.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-5973.2011.00639.x
43. Cécile Wendling, Jack Radisch, Stephane Jacobzone.

2013. The Use of Social Media in Risk and Crisis
Communication. OECD Publishing.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5k3v01fskp9s-en

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

44.  Robby Westbrook, Tammy Karlgaard, Connie White, 

Josalyn Knapic. 2012. A holistic approach to 
evaluating social media’s successful implementation 
into emergency management operations: Applied 
research in an action research study. International 
Journal of Information Systems for Crisis Response 
and Management 4, 3: 1-13. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4018/jiscrm.2012070101 

45.  Kim Witte. 1995. Generating effective risk messages: 
how scary should your risk communication be. In B.R. 
Burleson (ed.) Communication Yearbook 18: 229–254. 
46.  Zogby Interactive. 2009. Poll: Online news sources top 

all others. Retrieved June 20, 2009 from 
http://pww.org/ 

 

 

465

