CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

One LED is Enough: Catalyzing Face-to-face Interactions at

Conferences with a Gentle Nudge

Jay Chen, Azza Abouzied

New York University Abu Dhabi
jchen@cs.nyu.edu, azza@nyu.edu

ABSTRACT
Face-to-face social interactions among strangers today are be-
coming increasingly rare as people turn towards computer-
mediated networking tools. Today’s tools, however, are based
on the following assumptions: increased information encour-
ages interaction, proﬁles are good representations of users
to other users, and computer-mediated communications prior
to face-to-face meetings lead to better outcomes. This pa-
per describes CommonTies, a gentle technological nudge in
the form of a wearable accessory, that encourages immediate,
face-to-face, organic social interactions among strangers at
conferences. By not exposing any proﬁle information, Com-
monTies preserves an element of mystery and enables self-
disclosure of information through conversation. We evaluate
our system through a ﬁeld study at a three-day research con-
ference - CSCW 2014. We ﬁnd that despite our information-
scarce design, users were willing to interact with strangers
and 74% of the interactions initiated by CommonTies were
reported as novel and useful.

Author Keywords
matchmaking; wearables; nudge; computer-mediated
interactions

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.m. Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g. HCI):
Miscellaneous

INTRODUCTION
Conferences are professional gatherings that enable the shar-
ing of ideas among colleagues and peers.
Ideally, confer-
ences should be welcoming to new attendees. Striking up
a conversation with a stranger, however, can be awkward
or uncomfortable. Conferences also have additional factors
that create barriers for interaction: large rooms of strangers
with unknown group dynamics and social norms, existing
social cliques, which attendees may ﬁnd hard to leave or
join, class distinctions for example between senior and ju-
nior researchers in an academic conference, etc. This paper

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise,
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW ’16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819969

describes CommonTies, a wearable device that encourages
face-to-face interactions in networking situations like confer-
ences and receptions.
There is a potential need for networking tools that enable
face-to-face interactions. First, the increase of online interac-
tions have made face-to-face stranger interactions less prac-
ticed and potentially awkward. Second, in existing techno-
logical systems, interactions transpire ﬁrst through a mobile
device or computer medium where some information display
(e.g. names, contact info, proﬁles, photos, etc.) attempts to
convey the key characteristics of a stranger while missing im-
portant social cues that are present during a face-to-face en-
counter. Third, systems generally assume that revealing in-
formation about matches is a requisite for encouraging an in-
teraction, but it is unclear to what extent this is true.
Our design of CommonTies is inspired by results of sev-
eral psychological works by Collins and Miller [7] and
Walther [31]. Collins and Miller (and Walther) ﬁnd that the
act of information disclosure is nuanced, active, and intimate
(“hyperpersonal”) and will lead to an increase in the devel-
opment and maintenance of meaningful relationships. This
contrasts with impersonal, automatic, and computer-mediated
information disclosure to unknown strangers that can circum-
vent eventual self-disclosure in conversation. In this paper,
we attempt to reconcile these ideas by considering the pos-
sibility that information rich proﬁles may not be necessary
for achieving positive matchmaking outcomes in certain pre-
ﬁltered contexts.
Our key research contributions in this work are:
1. We put forward the following principles for the design of
social networking tools in curated contexts like confer-
ences and describe them in the Design Section:
(i) preserve privacy1 and mystery
(ii) minimize computer mediation in human-to-human

interactions

(iii) easily support context, beyond proximity
(iv) lightweight and seamless to use

2. We implement these principles in CommonTies in the form
of a small, lightweight, low-power wristband we call a
tie. Ties have an extremely limited information display
— only one LED that can glow one of six visually distinct

1In this work, the term ‘privacy’ is used strictly in terms of privacy
between users. Online privacy and mechanisms to secure private
information is beyond the scope of this work.

172

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Figure 1. CommonTies - a wearable that enables social interactions among strangers via matchmaking within interaction spaces.

colors. Each user receives a tie after a registration phase
that associates the tie with the user. Proﬁles for each user
are constructed automatically from existing online social
networking sites such as LinkedIn and only used internally
by the CommonTies matchmaker. The matchmaker is an
algorithm that ranks proﬁles of inferred strangers by simi-
larity and matches their ties (glows the ties the same color)
if they are detected by a beacon. Each beacon deﬁnes an
interaction space that organizers can create according to
desired objectives. We describe these implementation de-
tails in the Implementation Section.

3. We evaluate CommonTies with a ﬁeld experiment at a con-
ference (CSCW) in the Field Study Section to test whether
a proﬁle-free informationally-minimalistic nudge is capa-
ble of facilitating face-to-face interactions at conferences.
Our evaluation shows that our social nudges were success-
ful in that users actively engaged in locating matches when
they noticed their ties glow. Users found their subsequent
interactions novel and useful 74% of the time.

RELATED WORK
Our work touches upon a number of large research areas:
networking tools, online dating, wearable devices, and “in-
the-wild” evaluation. We outline the closely related works in
these areas in order to contextualize our work.

Networking Tools
In the academic research space, several works use wireless
devices to enable social interactions [9, 5, 4, 14]. Common-
Ties differs from these systems in that it is a wearable acces-
sory that provides no information beyond a simple visual cue
to initiate interactions. Unlike computationally augmented
name tags by Borovoy et. al. [4] and proximity-aware mobile
contact exchange applications like Serendipity [9], Common-
Ties preserves privacy between users by not revealing any in-
formation on match reason, match quality, or match proﬁle.
Other works have studied the use of context-based technolo-
gies to enhance social interactions: Trainroulette [6] uses the
context of a train and Mirkovic [22] utilizes technologies in
a clinic to enhance patient-physician interactions. Paulos and

Goodman [25] use technology to detect the presence of “fa-
miliar strangers” [12] in public spaces. Unlike these works,
our system is designed for conference-like events where at-
tendees are pre-ﬁltered. Also, our technology generalizes
across multiple organizer designed contexts — user proﬁles
and matchmaking criteria can be easily modiﬁed for different
situations without any change to the ties themselves.
With respect to conference networking, speciﬁcally, Confer
meetups [8] is most closely related to our work.
In fact,
we used Confer as a data source for our CSCW deployment.
Confer lets users select papers they like from a conference
program. Confer meetups (a special feature of Confer) sug-
gests a list of matches to a user — other researchers who liked
the same papers that the user did. The user is then given
the opportunity to send an email message inviting a match
to ‘meetup’ during the conference. CommonTies is differ-
ent from Confer meetups in several aspects: proﬁle sharing,
interaction mechanism, and form factor. Confer meetups pro-
vides an especially interesting comparison point in the design
space of conference networking tools due to these polarized
differences.

Online Dating
CommonTies is different from online dating in at least three
important ways. First, in a professional setting, disclosing in-
timate and private information is considered off limits. Our
system does not solicit, use, or display such information. Sec-
ond, at conferences, attendees generally seek to increase their
professional networks and to discuss their thoughts on and
interests in the conference’s themes. Therefore, the similar-
ity threshold for a match can be lower than for online dat-
ing matches and attendees do not have explicit match criteria.
Third, attendees at conferences may already be engaged in
a conversation during a match, thus CommonTies needs to
balance introducing many new interactions with avoiding un-
wanted interruptions. Despite these differences, the systems
behind online dating and CommonTies are similar in that both
provide computer mediated matchmaking with strangers.
Many mainstream and niche matchmaking services exist to-
day to help people eventually meet each other in the real

173

RedBearLab Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) Mini

40 mm

Lightweight plastic encasing 
with light diffusion

m
m
0
2

 

Depth: 13mm

Coin Cell Battery

(Backside)

Flora Pixel RGB Light

a tie

suggested 

match

beacon

e

10-15 meters

All ties within this area can 
be matched by the beacon

(a) Electronic components of a tie

(b) The wearable tie

(c) Operational view of CommonTies

Elastic wristbands come in 

three sizes: 5", 6", 7"

Undetected Ties: The spatial area scanned 
by the beacon limits the interaction space.

world.2 Most online dating sites enable users to create and
search for proﬁles, view matches, and provide means for
computer-mediated, virtual communication through messag-
ing, chatting, winking, liking, rating, etc., with the hopes of
eventually transitioning from an online to a real-world inter-
action among users.
The matchmaking motivation of CommonTies is similar to
online dating sites, but this is where the similarities end.
Users give their email address to register with CommonTies,
but do not explicitly create a proﬁle for consumption by po-
tential matches. Instead, a hidden proﬁle for each user is auto-
matically generated from online data and if the user chooses,
the user’s online social network is mined to bootstrap for prior
acquaintances. These proﬁles are used internally by Com-
monTies and are never revealed to any user. When a match
occurs, zero information about the match is given other than
that they are physically nearby and glowing the same color.
There is no online interaction; the only interaction possible
between matches is an immediate face-to-face meeting.
Certain dating tools do allow for immediate, face-to-face in-
teractions through smartphone integration. GPS-enabled apps
notify users of potential matches in their vicinity (zoosk,
badoo, grindr). However, the lack of context-awareness in
such apps can leave users open to awkward encounters at in-
convenient times or locations. Other dating tools attempt to
minimize the amount of asynchronous, computer-mediated
interaction between strangers through organized group dates
or parties (meetcha, grubwithus, ignighter). Our work is thus
situated within this space of physical and temporo-spatially
immediate systems rather than conventional online systems.
Unlike these systems, our system is not only proximity-
aware, but also context aware and only functions within des-
ignated interaction spaces.

Wearable Devices
There are many projects that investigate the unique challenges
and opportunities of different form factors and wearable de-
vices for matchmaking [4, 11, 14, 18, 17]. We do not claim
form factor as a contribution. However, as a result of our
information-minimalistic design principle, our work is differ-
ent from previous wristband matchmaking devices such as
iBand [14] and Lovegety [17], which both suffered from user
privacy concerns. CommonTies avoids many privacy issues
by not requesting or revealing information.

In-the-Wild Evaluation
The signiﬁcant differences between laboratory settings and
ﬁeld settings constrain the types of questions one can ask and
answer. Because “laboratory studies can fail to capture many
of the complexities of the situations in which the application
will ultimately be placed” [27, 20], in-the-wild studies have
become an accepted approach by the CHI, CSCW, and Ubi-
comp communities [27, 21, 13].
Field studies also constrain the types of data collection instru-
ments that may be used. Several works have investigated sen-
sor networks in the form of body sensors or wearable badge
2eHarmony, match, okcupid, shaadi, zoosk, badoo, grindr, tinder,
twoo

174

SESSION: TOWARDS PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL WELLNESS

for measuring in-situ data on social gatherings [16, 24]. We
originally intended to use a similar, but less obtrusive ap-
proach to gather data on interactions. However, adding sen-
sors to people or the ties themselves increased power, size,
and other requirements beyond that of the system itself.3

DESIGN
A matchmaking system has fairly straightforward compo-
nents: a proﬁle building component, a matching algorithm
that determines quality of a match between two proﬁles based
on some metrics, and a notiﬁcation mechanism. This func-
tional description allows for many design possibilities. The
most conventional of these designs is oriented toward maxi-
mizing information gathering and sharing: web or mobile ap-
plications that collect proﬁles and share proﬁles that match.
From our review of the literature, we distilled the following
design principles:
1. Preserve privacy, mystery, and sense of serendipity.
This design principle is a sharp contrast to the design of exist-
ing commercial matchmaking services and research projects
that present a detailed proﬁle about a person’s match and the
reasons for the match. Gaver et. al.
introduced the notion
of mystery or ambiguity as a resource for design to encour-
age closer personal engagement with systems [10]. By not
revealing much information, we encourage a closer personal
engagement with the device, maintain the suspenseful nature
of meeting someone for the ﬁrst time, and also allow more
private individuals to decide when and how much informa-
tion they wish to reveal about themselves during face-to-face
interactions.
A matchmaking system should be designed to have very few,
if any, predeﬁned notions of speciﬁc interaction outcomes.
Sengers et al. argue “enchanting experiences may be de-
signed only by approaching enchantment obliquely: not by
engineering it in, but by providing opportunities where it may
emerge,” [28]. Our users are never told why they are matched
with someone else, what they should talk about, how they
should interact, or whether they must interact at all. This
open-design philosophy allows interactions to be dictated by
the desires of the users themselves as argued by Sengers and
Gaver [29].
Finally, we do not expressly design for serendipity, but un-
known elements can contribute to a feeling of serendipity.
When users do not know how they are being matched, the
better the match is in relation to the perceived sophistication
of the algorithm, the greater the likelihood that they will feel
that the match is serendipitous. For example, if the algorithm
were considered purely random (as some of our participants
hypothesized), then users would likely consider the match to
serendipitous rather than a result of deliberate design. Con-
versely, if the algorithm were thought to be highly sophisti-
cated, then even a deeply satisfying match might be attributed
to the algorithm. By withholding this information from our
users, we allow users to provide their own interpretation.
3 We did attempt to deploy a passive sniffer based positioning sys-
tem, but indoor positioning is still an active research area [15] and
ours failed in the conference venue’s open and crowded space.

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

2. Minimize computer mediation in human-to-human inter-
actions.
Sociologists such as Goffman and Altman describe social
interactions and the development of interpersonal relation-
ships as complex, nuanced, ritualistic, and reliant upon self-
disclosure [19, 1]. We attempt to preserve these properties
by minimizing the interactions that take place through a com-
puter screen or mobile phone. This design principle has im-
plications for all aspects of the system from registration to
notiﬁcation.
At registration, the information gathering interface should not
force users to exhaustively specify what their proﬁle is, their
criteria for prospective matches, or the spatio-temporal con-
ditions where matches can occur.
Instead, proﬁles can be
largely automated by relying on existing information sources
or context-speciﬁc information.
Match notiﬁcation should not orient users toward a screen,
instead notiﬁcation should occur through subtle cues in the
physical world that nudge a user to ﬁnd and interact with their
match only when a face-to-face meeting is feasible.
Subtle nudges can also serve the dual purpose of saving face
in social situations where one user is more interested in so-
cial contact than another as suggested in previous works [2,
3]. Since a subtle nudge can be easily missed, the user has a
ready interpretation that the other matched person simply did
not notice the match. This interpretation and the anonymity
of the matched person can allow the user to maintain harmony
with themselves and the match. In contrast, interactions in-
volving asynchronous, computer-mediated communications
such as messaging or email, can leave users frustrated as they
wait for a response or embarrassed when their overtures are
unreciprocated.
3. Support multiple contexts, beyond proximity.
Space and time collectively deﬁne the proximity where
matching occurs, but context is often dependent on other fac-
tors like speciﬁc locations, situations, or conditions. Existing
proximity aware systems match users based on proximity, but
generally do not consider differences in context — they work
the same way everywhere.
In contrast, we think interaction spaces and times should be
limited to where and when matching is expected and is con-
venient. At a conference, for example, users may welcome
matching during breaks and receptions, but would be both-
ered by matching during talks or at spaces designated for
business. Furthermore, organizers who control a space should
be allowed to deﬁne contexts that form the basis for a match-
ing algorithm. At a research conference, research interests
and career goals may make sense for a matching algorithm.
However, at a student orientation event, hobbies and selected
majors may form the basis for a more appropriate matching
algorithm. Other examples include: at a sports lounge, teams
cheered; at a job fair, skills and qualiﬁcations; etc.
Finally, the context should also include the user’s internal
context, i.e. the user’s sociability or interaction history. For

example, matching should occur at a rate that does not over-
whelm users or interrupt interactions currently in progress.
4. Lightweight and seamless to use.
Connected to the goal of minimizing computer mediation, but
more as a matter of practical interaction design is the require-
ment that the device itself should be lightweight and seamless
to use. The user should not be burdened with an extensive
user interface.

IMPLEMENTATION
CommonTies consists of two physical components: a wear-
able wristband called the ‘tie’ and a ‘beacon’ that suggests
matches using a proﬁle-matching system called the ‘match-
maker’. In this section, we brieﬂy describe the functionality
of each component and gloss over the engineering details.

The Tie
We wanted our ties to have a comfortable clothing “acces-
sory” rather than a “gadget” look and feel. Therefore, we
built the tie as a limited-display lightweight wearable device
to avoid screen-based, computer-like, form factors such as
smartphones. We considered several different form factors
including wristbands, necklaces, and conference tag acces-
sories. We chose wristbands due to their generalizability,
comfort, and style.
Each tie consists of BLE Mini chip [30] by RedBearLab [26]
connected to a Flora RGB Neopixel LED v2 [23] (See Fig-
ure 1(a). The tie is completely stateless: no system state or
personal information is stored on it. We implemented our tie
functionality in 500 lines of ﬁrmware code. We then designed
a simple 3D printed enclosure for each tie and attached elas-
tic straps to create wristbands of three different sizes (5”, 6”,
7”) to account for differences in wrist size. We notify users
of their matches by diffusely lighting the LED with one of six
distinct colors. Figure 1(b) shows an assembled tie.

The Beacon
Interaction spaces are deﬁned as the radial area around a blue-
tooth base station we call the ‘beacon’. Depending on prop-
agation characteristics of the environment, a typical beacon
covers an area of roughly 300m2 (3229.17 ft2). This means
two matched ties are at most 20m apart in an interaction space
(See Figure 1(c)). Larger interaction spaces can be equipped
with multiple beacons for coverage.
The beacon asks the matchmaker for any matches within
its interaction space.
If a match exists, the beacon lights
the pair of ties the same color. This is recorded in the
matchmaker database and the match is not suggested again.
We implemented our beacon code in approximately 800 lines
of python code and wrapper functions.

The Matchmaker
The matchmaker is a proﬁle-matching system that builds and
stores user proﬁles, maps users to ties, and suggests matches
to the beacon. User proﬁles are completely private and only
used internally by the matchmaker. Proﬁles are constructed

175

depending on the context. For example, at a conference, the
organizers may decide to construct user proﬁles based on con-
ference proceedings, registration information, and talks that
users attend. A user at the conference will be matched based
on this criteria. Later, at a reception the same user wearing
the same tie may be matched based on a different user proﬁle
constructed and different matching criteria that are speciﬁed
by the reception’s organizers.
For the purposes of evaluating CommonTies at the CSCW
conference, we implemented a single context for the confer-
ence hall. As a part of our consent form, we implemented an
online registration form where users had the option to give
CommonTies access to their Facebook, LinkedIn, and Con-
fer contact lists and papers of interest through the respective
APIs. Our matchmaker automatically generated each user
proﬁle from these information sources and publicly available
data (like DBLP) to determine a user’s friends, contacts and
co-authors as well as research interests. These proﬁles were
used by the matchmaker, but never shared with the users or
their matches.
For CSCW, we chose not to attempt to engineer an ‘optimal’
matchmaking algorithm because we wanted to leave room for
serendipitous matches of people who appear to have relatively
little in common. After eliminating all friends, contacts and
co-authors, each user had a list of strangers to match with.
These pairs were ranked by a scoring function that favored in-
teractions between strangers who (i) had higher set-similarity
measures of papers liked on Confer, (ii) came from different
segments of research (e.g. academia and industry), and (iii)
were at different career levels (e.g. student and professor).
To avoid user fatigue from too many matches, the match-
maker only matches a person at most once every ten minutes.
At any given time, at most six matches can occur as each
match gets a distinct color from the set of six possible colors:
red, green, blue, yellow, orange, and violet. Each tie is con-
ﬁgured to turn off its LED after 3 minutes and we can reuse
colors for another match after each interval.

FIELD STUDY
We evaluated CommonTies through a ﬁeld study at CSCW in
Baltimore, Maryland in February, 2014.
We decided on our eventual evaluation methodology based
on several practical considerations. First, despite our ad-
vertising efforts, the attendees did not register early and we
were unsure whether we would gather enough participants
to give enough statistical power for deﬁnitive results; split-
ting our control and experimental groups apart and halving
the group size would reduce the number of possible matches
within each group by 75%. Second, our participants gener-
ously volunteered to commit their limited conference time
to participate in our experiment. We did not wish to give a
control group an artifact that could waste their valuable time,
attempt to conduct extensive interviews, or ask for lengthy
survey responses. Third, the focus of our work was not the
efﬁcacy of our matchmaking algorithm, but whether a sub-
tle nudge could catalyze interactions with strangers. Finally,

SESSION: TOWARDS PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL WELLNESS

we were not aware of any system evaluations in conference
matchmaking that had been subject to control conditions.
One week before the conference, we elicited the participation
of conference attendees through Twitter and email invitations.
Participants were also recruited via passing out ﬂyers the day
prior and day of the conference. Participants could register
online or at our registration booth. Ties were then distributed
at our booth on a ﬁrst come ﬁrst serve basis.
After registration, participants were given only basic instruc-
tion on the functionality of CommonTies before being given
a tie: “A glow indicates that someone is matched nearby. Go
talk to the person with the same color. It will work only at
social events.” If participants asked why their social media
information was being requested, we informed them that we
only use their friends list to avoid spurious matches. Partici-
pants were asked to return the ties at the end of the conference
or when they needed to leave and to ﬁll out a survey at that
time. We did not conduct any interviews with participants
during or after the conference. For the duration of the study,
one or both of the two researchers manned the registration
desk, wrote ﬁeld notes, took photos, and made observations
on how people responded to CommonTies.
We recognize the potential biases with our study, especially
given that our subjects were researchers themselves, but we
took several measures to minimize these issues where possi-
ble. We mention these measures here to help frame the pre-
sentation of our results. First, we had no familiarity with the
CSCW community: we had neither published at nor attended
CSCW before. A handful of attendees were acquaintances
who did not participate in the study. Second, CSCW orga-
nizers did not help promote registration to avoid bias. Third,
we refrained from discussions with participants about the ties
both in terms of instruction and suggested use beyond that
CommonTies was a matchmaking tool in order to avoid de-
mand characteristics as much as possible. Throughout the
study several participants asked us about the matchmaking
algorithm, but they were politely told that the algorithm was
a secret.
While we did collect various social network information from
our participants, including demographic information, we did
not attempt to store or analyze this data past the purpose of
matchmaking so as not to infringe on our participants’ pri-
vacy or deter participation. We instead present results from
our surveys and where appropriate we corroborate our data
with our server logs and discreet observations. We observed
by walking through the crowd and watching matches to see
how they responded (or did not respond) to the nudge. We
also followed interactions through their conversations, but did
not listen in on conversations. We took ﬁeld notes on our ob-
servations and also some photographs.
After collection and transcription of survey data and obser-
vational notes, we collectively looked for predetermined and
emergent themes. We then discussed these major themes and
organized them for presentation.

Deployment

176

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Figure 2 illustrates the registration of participants over the
course of the recruitment process. Only eight attendees regis-
tered prior to the conference online. We recruited additional
participants during CSCW’s workshop days prior to the con-
ference by setting up a registration booth and distributing in-
formation pamphlets on CommonTies. Before our ﬁrst event,
the welcome reception, we had a total of 23 registered partic-
ipants. By the end of the reception, this number increased to
50 participants. By the second day of the conference, we had
a total of 81 registered participants. We noticed another surge
in registration during the coffee-break and poster reception
on the ﬁrst day of the conference. Participants at registration
often commented on how they saw the ties light up and so
decided to participate.
Registration stopped after we ran out of functional ties. Of
the 95 ties we manufactured successfully, 73 survived the trip
to Baltimore. Therefore, only 73 of the 81 registered par-
ticipants received ties. We continued to get requests to par-
ticipate throughout the conference even after shutting down
registration.

Figure 2. CommonTies Participation. Participation did not rise at all
breaks, the two workshop days before the conference had no increase in
participation despite our booth and pamphlets distributed.

The conference venue ﬂoor plans are shown in Figure 3. Our
system was setup in the West Foyer (top, blue shaded area)
where the Welcome Reception (120 minutes the evening be-
fore the 3-day conference), and six Coffee Breaks (30 minutes
each) took place over a period of three days. We also setup
in the Grand Ballroom (center, orange shaded area) during
the Poster and Demo (45 minutes) and Interaction Reception
(120 minutes). According to our conference context deﬁni-
tion, CommonTies suggested matches only during the recep-
tions, coffee breaks, and poster/demo sessions to avoid inter-
fering with any talks.

Information Disclosure
One immediately interesting observation is how willing users
were to provide access to personal and professional infor-
mation to enable better matchmaking. Each registered user
was required to only provide their full name and email. This
allowed us to mine public information such as a user’s co-
authors.4 In addition to public information users can option-
4Since co-authors are not strangers, we do not match them.

177

Figure 3. The ﬂoor plans and capacities of two CommonTies interaction
spaces at CSCW 2014. Any tie within the shaded areas was detected by
the beacon.

ally provide access to their LinkedIn proﬁle and ﬁrst-degree
professional network, their Facebook proﬁle, and ﬁrst-degree
friends network as well as access to papers liked on CSCW’s
conference scheduling application, Confer. Table 1 summa-
rizes the participant’s disclosure patterns.

Sources of personal information

Number of users (Perc.)

Confer
LinkedIn
Facebook
All three sources
Only two of the three sources
Zero sources
Table 1. Information sources that the 81 users allowed access to.

57 (70.3%)
52 (64.2%)
49 (60.5%)
27 (33.3%)
27 (33.3%)
4 (4.9%)

A surprising 60% provided access to Facebook, which holds
more private,
less professional, social network informa-
tion. The main reasons for not providing access to the ad-
ditional information sources were forgotten passwords or
users not having LinkedIn, Facebook or Confer accounts.
Many users preferred alternate professional network sites like
academia.edu to LinkedIn. This willingness of users to dis-
close personal information to a third party to enhance their
social interactions does not imply that users are willing to
give the same information to strangers.

Did CommonTies enable interactions?
CommonTies made 372 suggestions (186 matched pairs) over
a total period of seven hours. We asked users to recall the
number of times they noticed their tie glow and the number
of matches with whom they interacted. Table 2 provides inter-
action statistics across a subset of only forty users who thor-
oughly reported their interactions. Thus, we can only provide
interaction statistics on 315 of the 372 suggestions made due
to respondents providing incomplete forms or inaccurate data.
We also observed and photographed several interactions our-
selves. Figure 4 illustrates one successful match we captured
in a photograph.

Noticing the glow
Users only noticed 52% of their tie-glows. We partially at-
tribute this low noticeability to the following:

Interaction Data

Matches Suggested

Self-reported interactions data

Glows noticed
Interactions
Useful interactions

Mean Proportions

Total∗

Mean
per user

315

7.88

155
58
43

3.88
1.45
1.08

Glows noticed over matches suggested
Interactions over matches suggested
Interactions over glows noticed
Useful interactions over all interactions
Table 2. ∗Only 40 respondents provided ﬁgures for all interaction ques-
tions — we show results only for this subset. CommonTies logged a total
of 372 matches (186 pairs).

0.52
0.15
0.29
0.74

Figure 4. A successful match!

• Glows are too subtle: Some users commented: “Comfort-

able, easy to wear. However, also easy to disregard under a long
sleeved shirt,” “It’s not very intrusive, so that is nice. However,
it’d be probably more eﬀective if it’d vibrate.
I might have
missed the lighting up once or twice.”

• User fatigue: “While it was fun using it initially, I felt that it

lost some of its fascination after a little while. Thus, I stopped
using it and engaged in conversation by normal means”, “I
mostly forgot I had it.”
• Ties are always on: one user hid her tie in her backpack
because she was “busy ... at the poster session” — the tie
continued to work in such scenarios. Another commented
“I am probably a bad data point because after day 1, I did not
want to bother with it and quit wearing it. I did keep it with
me, however, in my bag. If it could have notiﬁed me from my
bag, maybe that would have helped.”

Missed interactions
The mean number of self-reported interactions per user was
1.45. Only 15% of suggested matches concluded in self-
reported successful interactions. Beyond simply not noticing
the glows, which we accounted for above, we extracted the
following reasons from user comments to explain the missed
interactions:
• Users engaged in conversations did not disrupt them to
• The crowd and the large interaction space made locating a
match challenging. We asked users to rate how easy it was

look for matches.

SESSION: TOWARDS PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL WELLNESS

to locate a match on 5-point Likert scale from one indicat-
ing hard to ﬁve indicating easy (Table 3). The mean rating
was 1.97.
• User fatigue: “I stopped looking for them after the 5th match

because it got a bit too much ... BUT when I looked for them,
I always found them at some point,”

• Users who could not locate initial matches were demoti-
vated from ﬁnding later matches. Similarly, users who did
not notice initial glows were demotivated. For example,
one user commented: “It did not really glow at all. So I
stopped using it.” This user’s tie glowed ﬁve times.
• Users who hid their ties made it impossible for their

matches to locate them.

A successful interaction requires that users: a) notice the
glow, b) willingness to meet a stranger, and c) ﬁnd their
match. It is our opinion that 15% of glows resulting in in-
teractions was reasonably high given the sequence of barriers
leading up to a successful interaction. When people notice
their glows, 29% of the time users decided to take action and
were able to ﬁnd their match. Unfortunately, we do not have
numbers for the proportion of users who intended to ﬁnd their
match to perfectly triangulate this process, but based on the
comments we believe that difﬁculties ﬁnding matches was the
limiting factor rather than willingness to be nudged.

Interactions and diminishing returns
From our data we observe that there is currently a “sweet
spot” where the number of suggested matches would max-
imize the number of interactions without inundating users
with too many glows.

Figure 5. Proportion of glows noticed by, and interactions for each Com-
monTies participant.

Figure 5 plots the proportion of glows reported by a user
against the number of times the user’s tie actually glowed (cir-
cles). Initially, as the number of suggested matches is low,
a large but highly variable proportion of glows are noticed
as we would expect. As the number of suggested matches
increases this proportion tapers off. In the same ﬁgure, we
also plot the proportion of successful interactions reported
by a user against the number of times the user’s tie glowed
(crosses). Here, when the number of suggested matches is

178

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

low, the number of successful interactions is also low, but as
the number of suggested matches increases, the proportion of
interactions increases until it tapers off (and is limited by the
dependence upon the glows ﬁrst being noticed).
We can determine a sweet spot for our deployment of around
10 to 15 matches suggested where users both notice glows
and follow through with interactions. After reaching this
point, suggesting additional matches results in diminishing
returns on the number of interactions.

Survey Responses
Table 3 provides a summary of user responses to our survey
questions. For each question in Table 3, users were given
the opportunity to elaborate on their rating in free-form text.
For the remainder of this section, we use this data to answer
several questions regarding the response to CommonTies.

Likert-Scale Survey Questions

Mean Dist.

I could locate my match in the time period that
the tie glowed.
CommonTies suggested novel & useful matches.
Getting more information about the matches
(name, proﬁle, etc.) would have been helpful.
I liked the form factor (look, feel & aesthetics)
of CommonTies.
I enjoyed using CommonTies.
I would use CommonTies again.

1.97

3.14
3.64

2.78

3.24
3.76

Table 3. 62 Respondents evaluated each of the above statements on a
5-point Likert scale from 1-Strongly Disagree to 5-Strongly Agree. Of
these respondents, CommonTies provided match suggestions to 52 re-
spondents and 23 respondents had at least one interaction as a result.

Were the interactions novel and useful?
Despite the challenges associated with noticing glows and lo-
cating matches, users reported that 43 of the 58 (74%) inter-
actions they did complete were novel and useful (Table 2).
On a 5-point Likert scale, we asked all participants to rate
the novelty and usefulness of their matches (Table 3). Of the
23 participants who interacted using CommonTies, the mean
rating was 3.14. Qualitatively, our users either reviewed their
matches positively — “[The] second match was extremely useful
- great conversation, access to diﬀerent literature/perspectives on
same topic; especially useful because this person wasn’t connected
to my existing network,” “All of [the matches were] novel, most
two of them really useful” — or somewhat
of them useful ...
neutrally — “The one person I found was pretty surprising - the
connection seemed tenuous.”
From the user comments, we found that while all users found
their connections mostly novel, they disagreed on their utility.
As one user puts it “The connections made were all novel apart
from one. Whether they were useful or not only time will tell.”

How did users feel about the lack of information?
On a 5-point Likert scale, we asked users to rate how help-
ful they would ﬁnd getting more information about suggested
matches from one indicating they strongly disagree to ﬁve in-
dicating they strongly agree. The mean rating was 3.64.
To tease apart the reasons behind requesting more informa-
tion, we examined the users’ comments on this question and

found that of the 37 people who agreed or strongly agreed to
getting more information:
• Seven users were actually looking for talking points: “what
should we talk about?”, “[the] reason for match is all I wanted.
No name or additional (possibly privacy-invading) info needed”,
“[information] for introductions - deﬁnitely!”
• Six users were looking for information that could help
them locate their matches: “[a] picture would help identify
the match,” “if we missed the match, it would be nice to know
how to contact them later,” “[I] couldn’t ﬁnd them when my
thing lit up. So may be who to look for would help.”
• Six users’ were looking for proﬁles typical of online match-
making sites. One user wanted a list of recent publications
for each match. Two users wanted a mobile app version
that showed more information. One user wanted a web-
page with a list of all matches.

The remaining participants provided no explanation for their
desire for more information.
While many users wanted more information, only six (10%)
of them were explicitly looking for proﬁle information. Many
users expressed appreciation for the limited information that
CommonTies provides: “[I] kind of liked the serendipity - getting
to know you in actual conversation [is] kind of the point!” “The
mystery is the fun!” “I prefer not to know, it would reduce the
fun, serendipity factor.” “I think people still prefer to introduce
themselves normally.”
Even amongst the participants who wanted more informa-
tion, some recognized that “it might ‘short circuit’ the dis-
cussion/social process of talking through and ﬁnding the overlap
‘manually’ with a match.” At least two users disagreed to pro-
viding more personal information to our system due to pri-
vacy concerns.

Did users like the tie’s look and feel?
On a 5-point Likert scale, we asked users to rate the look,
feel and aesthetics of the tie from one indicating they strongly
disliked the tie to ﬁve indicating they strongly liked it. The
mean rating was 2.78.
Users were also asked to elaborate on their rating. Among
the 28 users that negatively rated the tie, 23 users (82%) ex-
plained that discomfort due to a tight elastic wristband or
coarse 3D plastic was the reason behind their negative rat-
ing. Even though we had varying wristband sizes, we allowed
users to pick their own ties, which led to a poor allocation: “[I]
picked a wristband that was a little too tight”.
With respect to aesthetics, comments ranged from, “pretty
snazzy”, “[it] looked cool. When it lit up”, “Fashion statement,
anyone?” to “Kind of ugly and utilitarian at this stage.”

Did people enjoy using CommonTies?
We asked users to rate how much they enjoyed using Com-
monTies on 5-point Likert scale. The mean rating was 3.24.
We also asked users to rate how interested they would be in
using CommonTies again. The mean rating was 3.76.

179

Finally, we wish to provide you with the following collec-
tion of comments, which capture some of the responses and
intellectual discussions that CommonTies brought to CSCW:
• “I loved the excuse to talk to random people.

I’m the kind
of person that does not struggle to ﬁnd conversation with
strangers, but I often lack the excuse to do so.”

• “I had positive experiences with meeting people through this

system, but it did disrupt my usual way of navigating conference
social events.”

one conversation I wanted to escape from.”5

• “It didn’t glow. I spent a lot of time waiting in anticipation.”
• “It was fun to glow ... meet people ... it got me out of at least
• “I’m not sure that the matching was not 100% random and I
• In response to whether the user would like to adjust the
matching criteria: “Nope. Then I’d probably subconsciously
exclude certain people.”
• “We all found it really novel and started discussing about it

think it worked just ﬁne.”

and guessing if it would work. Like hacking the experiment and
building upon it.”

DISCUSSION
We found many interesting reactions to CommonTies at
CSCW. While some of our ﬁndings are broadly generaliz-
able, others are likely to be speciﬁc to our deployment. Here,
we discuss the themes and factors we observed at CSCW to
contextualize our results.
We believe that the fundamental driver of the level of engage-
ment we observed was the comfortable environment of the
conference. From our own ﬁrst-time experience at the con-
ference, the friendly and relaxed attitude of conference at-
tendees appeared to invite casual interactions with strangers.
Also, the intellectual and social curiosity of the attendees also
likely contributed to the uptake of our system and people’s
willingness to meet strangers. Moreover, when a nudge was
observed, our participants earnestly searched for and inter-
acted with their suggested matches, which may not be the
case at other conferences.
Several limiting factors were directly attributable to our de-
sign choice toward unobtrusiveness:
the inability to notice
glows, difﬁculty in ﬁnding matches, and matching already
engaged users. The missed interactions caused by these bar-
riers eventually resulted in user fatigue. Based on partici-
pant feedback, we believe that these design choices should
be shifted toward more noticeable notiﬁcations, easier match-
making, and a do not disturb mode. These changes would bet-
ter ﬁt user expectations and needs, and could be implemented
without violating our design principles.
Speciﬁc to CSCW, the 30-minute coffee breaks were too hur-
ried to get into a relaxed and playful mood. We observed the
most connections during the initial reception and at the demo
session. Furthermore, a substantial reason for fatigue was the
duration of the deployment lasting for three days. By the end
of the conference, the novelty of CommonTies wore off.

Proﬁles and Information Disclosure
5Glad to help.

180

SESSION: TOWARDS PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL WELLNESS

Interestingly, we found that most people were satisﬁed with
the informationally-minimalistic interface of CommonTies.
Furthermore, of the people who wanted more information,
only a few wanted explicit proﬁle information. This suggests
that up-front or visible proﬁle information may be unnec-
essary for networking at conference-like contexts and raises
a broader question about whether proﬁles are necessary for
meeting strangers in other contexts.
We suspect that three main components to the experiment led
to our result. First, conference attendees are speciﬁcally in-
terested in meeting new people. CSCW being such a close-
knit community (unlike a large convention or a general public
space) meant people felt more comfortable, and were willing
to be more open to new people and experiences. Second, the
conference was for a short duration. We found evidence that
engagement with the system deteriorated as the experience
grew longer. Third, CommonTies was small scale and de-
signed for immediate, synchronous, face-to-face interactions.
Large scale computer-mediated communication (CMC) sys-
tems generally enable anonymous, asynchronous communi-
cation at scale. The resultant abundance of choice online mo-
tivates the introduction of mechanisms for helping users sift
through and evaluate options (e.g. user proﬁles, sophisticated
matchmaking, searching, ﬁltering, etc.).

The Matchmaking Algorithm
The matchmaking algorithm we employed was simple. Yet,
despite this simplicity, people who interacted were happy
with the novelty and usefulness of their matches. While this is
not an argument against more sophisticated matchmaking al-
gorithms, in a small conference context where attendees self-
select based on similar interests or attitudes, it appears suf-
ﬁcient for a matchmaking algorithm to capture the notion of
strangers.
We expect that completely random matches would be accept-
able at a welcome reception of strangers, but would not work
well in the CSCW context because many attendees already
know each other. Re-matching known acquaintances would
increase user fatigue and decrease engagement with our sys-
tem. If we consider only randomly matching strangers, it is
possible that more users would guess that the algorithm is ran-
dom, leading to more serendipitous explanations. However,
disclosing the speciﬁc matchmaking algorithm would likely
reduce the sense of mystery.
Other algorithmic changes should have relatively predictable
outcomes. For example, removing the Confer data from
matching would reduce the amount of common interests, but
perhaps enough talking points would emerge spontaneously
given the common interests among CSCW participants. Re-
moving the segments and career levels would decrease the
cross connections between the respective social groups (i.e.
industry folks would meet fewer academics and students
would meet fewer faculty).

Mystery and Play
Given the lack of proﬁle and matching information, as well
as match location, the effort our participants went through to
ﬁnd their match was exceptionally high. We believe that by

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

not revealing the matchmaking algorithm, we successfully fa-
cilitated a sense of mystery and allowed participants to assign
their own explanations and interpretations to the experience.
The information-scarce design of CommonTies was not ap-
preciated by everyone, but of the people who did engage with
the system there was an overwhelmingly positive response to
the mysterious and eventual game-like elements of Common-
Ties.
The difﬁculty of
locating
matches led to unanticipated
and playful user behaviors.
Many participants raised their
hands and searched the inter-
action space for their match
creating what appeared to be a
hide-and-seek gamiﬁcation of
CommonTies (see Figure 6):
“It was often diﬃcult to ﬁnd the
‘common tie’ in a large room but
this led to funny ‘game-like’ or
playful exchanges where people
would roam around holding up
their bands to ﬁnd their ‘tie’”.
In this game, many participants took the assistive role of ﬁnd-
ing matched pairs and bringing them together: “A volunteer
tracked down my match when I couldn’t ﬁnd him.” “At no time
I could ﬁnd my match. One time some other person showed me.”
“It was fun to see wrist bands lighting up around and seeing people
match up and chat.”

Figure 6.
A participant
raises his hand while he
searches for his match.

Re-orienting Interactions
Our original inspirations for this work, Collins and Miller [7]
and Walther [31], discuss the tensions between the implicit
goal of ofﬂine face-to-face interaction and the convenience of
the online medium. Walther describes how presenting abun-
dant matches can cause “people to make lazy, ill-advised
decisions when selecting [partners to contact]” and how
computer-mediated communication via email or messaging
prior to face-to-face meetings “can produce unpleasant ex-
pectancy violations” because people have presented an ideal-
ized version of themselves online.
Some systems manage to cleverly balance these tradeoffs by
using location information (e.g. GPS) to help match people
to each other based on real-time real-world location. Unlike
these systems, CommonTies was designed to avoid these un-
desirable outcomes by obviating the need to sift through pro-
ﬁles or re-orient back to the ofﬂine. Although we did not
speciﬁcally study whether we avoided ill-advised decision
making or unpleasant expectancy violations, we did show
that in small conference settings the mechanisms that were
attributed to producing these consequences (proﬁles and on-
line interaction) were not always necessary for catalyzing in-
teractions. Moreover, we demonstrated how the removal of
these mechanisms could be leveraged as a design resource
for mystery or enchantment as argued by Gaver [10] and Sen-
gers [29].

Generalizability and Limitations
We are very cognizant of the experimental challenges demon-
strating repeatability and generalizability of some of our re-
sults. We have demonstrated that for CSCW-like contexts a
gentle nudge is sufﬁcient to turn a stranger into an acquain-
tance, but many participants were likely biased toward en-
gaging with our system out of research curiosity. Also, re-
deploying CommonTies at CSCW is problematic as people
have already used the system. Other events would inevitably
have their own nuances.
CommonTies is designed for events where a sense of play is
within acceptable social norms. In a museum, people may
want to enjoy the exhibits and be left alone. We would also
expect CommonTies to make sense in safe curated venues
compared to large unﬁltered spaces (e.g. on a public street
with complete strangers). We believe that for larger and less
relaxed contexts like job fairs, efﬁciency focused systems
would be more appropriate than mysterious designs.

FUTURE WORK
CommonTies V2.0
Based on our results and user feedback, CommonTies could
beneﬁt from a few simple improvements that remain in line
with our design principles.
First, many interaction opportunities were missed because
users missed the subtle visual cue of the tie glowing. We
plan on adding an initial, soft, vibration that may be muted
by the user or during ongoing interactions (based on proxim-
ity to other ties). Users can still choose to ignore the nudge,
but will be less likely to miss the cue.
Second, to enable users to locate their matches, while still
maintaining the playfulness of searching for a match, we plan
to have the beacons serve as gathering points glowing with
the same color as the tie and changing the steady tie glow to
a slow pulse that increases in frequency as users get closer.
Third, we plan to change the matchmaking algorithm to
avoid matching muted ties and tune the number of suggested
matches to the level of pursued interaction. This improve-
ment would also help reduce unﬁndable matches (e.g. in the
case where the tie is nearby but hidden in a bag), and also
allow CommonTies to be more sensitive to user fatigue and
temperament.

Research directions
In addition to system improvements, there are numerous in-
teresting research questions prompted by our analysis of the
large CSCW ﬁeld experiment. We wish to answer some of
these questions. First, do the ideas from CommonTies gener-
alize past the context of tight-knit conferences into other so-
cial contexts and interaction spaces: for example, could subtle
nudges enable social interactions in other contexts? Second,
we plan to study the effect of context on information disclo-
sure: how much information are users willing to provide and
to share to meet strangers in different settings? Third, how
does CommonTies compare against other networking tools?

CONCLUSION

181

In this paper, we described CommonTies, a simple techno-
logical nudge in the form of a privacy preserving wearable
accessory, that encourages immediate, face-to-face, social in-
teractions among strangers at conference-like settings. We
designed, implemented, and eventually evaluated Common-
Ties at CSCW 2014 during a three day in-situ study. We
demonstrated that without revealing proﬁles or any private in-
formation about matches, users were willing to interact with
strangers. We found that our informationally minimalistic de-
sign coupled with a simple matchmaking algorithm was sufﬁ-
cient to suggest novel and potentially useful meetings 74% of
the time. Overall, there was a positive response to the myste-
rious design and emergent game-like elements. CommonTies
represents an interesting point in the design space of confer-
ence networking tools.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Juan Felipe Beltran (for video pro-
duction), Michael Davis (for fabrication assistance), Nikolaos
Giakoumidis (for endless soldering support), Bailey Curzadd
(for 3D printing support), Divya Balaji (for software assis-
tance), Anant Bhardwaj and David Karger (for Confer sup-
port).

REFERENCES
1. Irwin Altman and Dalmas A Taylor. 1973. Social

penetration: The development of interpersonal
relationships. Holt, Rinehart & Winston.

2. Paul M. Aoki and Allison Woodruff. 2005. Making

Space for Stories: Ambiguity in the Design of Personal
Communication Systems. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’05). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 181–190. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1054972.1054998

3. Kirsten Boehner and Jeffrey T. Hancock. 2006.

Advancing Ambiguity. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’06). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 103–106. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1124772.1124789

4. R. Borovoy, M. McDonald, F. Martin, and M. Resnick.
1996. Things That Blink: Computationally Augmented
Name Tags. IBM Syst. J. 35, 3-4 (Sept. 1996), 488–495.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1147/sj.353.0488

5. C Braun and S Schifferle. 2005. Bluedating - dating

application for bluetooth enabled mobile phones.
Technical Report.

6. Tiago Camacho, Marcus Foth, and Andry

Rakotonirainy. 2013. TrainRoulette: Promoting Situated
In-train Social Interaction Between Passengers. In
Proceedings of the 2013 ACM Conference on Pervasive
and Ubiquitous Computing Adjunct Publication
(UbiComp ’13 Adjunct). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
1385–1388. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2494091.2497360

7. Nancy L Collins and Lynn Carol Miller. 1994.

Self-disclosure and liking: a meta-analytic review.
Psychological bulletin 116, 3 (1994), 457.

SESSION: TOWARDS PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL WELLNESS

8. Confer. http://confer.csail.mit.edu/. Accessed

Feb. 2016.

9. N. Eagle. 2004. Can Serendipity be Planned? MIT Sloan

Management Review 46 (2004). Issue 1.

10. William W. Gaver, Jacob Beaver, and Steve Benford.

2003. Ambiguity As a Resource for Design. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’03). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 233–240. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/642611.642653

11. F. Gemperle, C. Kasabach, J. Stivoric, M. Bauer, and R.
Martin. 1998. Design for Wearability. In Proceedings of
the 2Nd IEEE International Symposium on Wearable
Computers (ISWC ’98). IEEE Computer Society,
Washington, DC, USA, 116–.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=857199.857998
12. Jane Jacobs. 1961. The death and life of great American

cities. Vintage.

13. Rose Johnson, Yvonne Rogers, Janet van der Linden,

and Nadia Bianchi-Berthouze. 2012. Being in the Thick
of In-the-wild Studies: The Challenges and Insights of
Researcher Participation. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1135–1144.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2208561
14. Marije Kanis, Niall Winters, Stefan Agamanolis, Anna

Gavin, and Cian Cullinan. 2005. Toward Wearable
Social Networking with iBand. In CHI ’05 Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI EA ’05). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1521–1524.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1056808.1056956
15. Swarun Kumar, Ezzeldin Hamed, Dina Katabi, and Li
Erran Li. 2014. LTE Radio Analytics Made Easy and
Accessible. In Proceedings of the 6th Annual Workshop
on Wireless of the Students, by the Students, for the
Students (S3 ’14). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 29–30.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2645884.2645891
16. Mathew Laibowitz, Jonathan Gips, Ryan Aylward, Alex

Pentland, and Joseph A. Paradiso. 2006. A Sensor
Network for Social Dynamics. In Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Information Processing in
Sensor Networks (IPSN ’06). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 483–491. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1127777.1127851

17. Lovegety. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lovegety/.

Accessed Feb. 2016.

18. Kent Lyons, David Nguyen, Daniel Ashbrook, and Sean

White. 2012. Facet: A Multi-segment Wrist Worn
System. In Proceedings of the 25th Annual ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology
(UIST ’12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 123–130.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2380116.2380134

19. Philip Manning. 1992. Erving Goffman and modern

sociology. Stanford University Press.

182

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

20. Paul Marshall, Richard Morris, Yvonne Rogers, Stefan

Kreitmayer, and Matt Davies. 2011. Rethinking
’Multi-user’: An In-the-wild Study of How Groups
Approach a Walk-up-and-use Tabletop Interface. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’11). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 3033–3042. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979392

21. Donald McMillan, Alistair Morrison, Owain Brown,
Malcolm Hall, and Matthew Chalmers. 2010. Further
into the Wild: Running Worldwide Trials of Mobile
Systems. In Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Pervasive Computing (Pervasive’10).
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 210–227. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-12654-3_13
22. Jelena Mirkovic. 2013. Utilizing Emerging Technologies
to Promote More Efﬁcient Face-to-face Patient-clinician
Communication. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing
Adjunct Publication (UbiComp ’13 Adjunct). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 1393–1396. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2494091.2497362

23. Neopixel. Adafruit Flora RGB Neopixel v2.

http://www.adafruit.com/products/1260. Accessed
Feb. 2016.

24. Daniel Olgu´ın Olgu´ın, Benjamin N. Waber, Taemie
Kim, Akshay Mohan, Koji Ara, and Alex Pentland.
2009. Sensible Organizations: Technology and
Methodology for Automatically Measuring
Organizational Behavior. Trans. Sys. Man Cyber. Part B
39, 1 (Feb. 2009), 43–55. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSMCB.2008.2006638

25. Eric Paulos and Elizabeth Goodman. 2004. The Familiar

Stranger: Anxiety, Comfort, and Play in Public Places.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’04). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 223–230. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/985692.985721

26. RedBearLab. http://redbearlab.com/. Accessed Feb.

2016.

27. Y. Rogers and others. 2007. Why it’s worth the hassle:
The value of in-situ studies when designing UbiComp.
Springer.

28. Phoebe Sengers, Kirsten Boehner, Michael Mateas, and

Geri Gay. 2008. The Disenchantment of Affect.
Personal Ubiquitous Comput. 12, 5 (June 2008),
347–358. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00779-007-0161-4

29. Phoebe Sengers and Bill Gaver. 2006. Staying Open to
Interpretation: Engaging Multiple Meanings in Design
and Evaluation. In Proceedings of the 6th Conference on
Designing Interactive Systems (DIS ’06). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 99–108. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1142405.1142422

30. TI-CC2540. http://www.ti.com/product/CC2540.

Accessed Feb. 2016.

31. Joseph B Walther. 1996. Computer-mediated
communication impersonal, interpersonal, and
hyperpersonal interaction. Communication research 23,
1 (1996), 3–43.

183

