CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Social Organization of Household Finance:        
Understanding Artful Financial Systems in the Home 

Dhaval Vyas, Stephen Snow, Paul Roe and Margot Brereton

Queensland University of Technology (QUT) 

2 George Street, Brisbane 4000, Australia 

{d.vyas | steve.snow | p.roe | m.brereton}@qut.edu.au

ABSTRACT 
In this paper we discuss results of a field study focused on 
understanding  the  ways  money  and  financial  issues  are 
handled  within  family  settings.  Families  develop  ‘systems’ 
or methods through which they coordinate and manage their 
everyday  financial  activities.  Through  an  analysis  of  our 
fieldwork  data  collected  from  fifteen  families,  we  provide 
several  examples  of  such  systems,  highlighting 
their 
qualities and illustrating how such systems come to support 
the handling of financial activities in the home. Our results 
show  that  these  systems  are  developed  with  a  careful 
consideration of familial values, relationships and routines; 
and  incorporate  the  use  of  physical  and  digital  tools. 
Consequently,  we  suggest  that  design  should  consider  the 
use and non-use of technology  when supporting household 
financial  management,  taking  into  account  the  richness  of 
families’ existing organically formed practices surrounding 
financial systems. Finally, our findings point to the fact that 
financial  management  in  the  domestic  setting  is  socially 
organized  and  is  closely  connected  to  supporting  everyday 
household activities. 
Author Keywords 
Family, Finance, Ethnography, CSCW, and Design. 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g.,  HCI): 
Miscellaneous. 
INTRODUCTION 
Money  is  an  important  but  complex  part  of  our  everyday 
lives. The way we interact with money and reason about it 
has  implications on our  wellbeing. Our  financial behaviors 
and attitudes are strongly affected and continuously shaped 
by  social  aspects,  especially 
family  and  household 
dynamics.  Family  members  coordinate,  support,  contribute 
and  manage  different  issues  that  relate  to  money  and 
financial activities. Although money and financial activities 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not  made  or  distributed  for  profit  or  commercial  advantage and  that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for  components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be 
honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or 
republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific  permission  and/or  a 
from 
Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW  '16,  February  27-March  02,  2016,  San  Francisco,  CA,  USA 
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819937

fee.  Request  permissions 

have an important place in people’s everyday activities, the 
field of HCI has only recently become involved in this topic 
with some preliminary studies on personal finance [18, 45, 
46] and  recent  workshops  at  CHI  2014  [17]  and  CSCW
2015 [21] conferences exploring financial aspects alongside 
other  broader  topics  such  as  the  use  of  pseudo  currencies 
(e.g. Bit-coin, Bristol Pound) [9] and crowd-funding [10]. 
In this paper, we present findings from an ethnographic field 
study that is aimed at exploring how families come together 
in  handling  and  managing  their  household  finances.  In 
particular,  we  aim  to  explore  their  nuanced  and  situated 
practices  of  creating  and  using  household  ‘financial 
systems’: an appropriated assembly of financial instruments 
such  as  spreadsheets,  diaries,  online  banking,  bookkeeping 
as well as many other domestic tools. We carried out a set of 
qualitative,  contextual  interviews  with  fifteen  families  in 
Australia. Building on the research of Vines et al. [46] and 
Kaye  et  al.  [18],  we  found  financial  management  to  be  an 
important part of domestic life and further explored how the 
nature of domesticity shapes and defines financial activities, 
and  vise-versa.  Through  a  detailed  analysis  of  why  such 
artful financial systems are created and how they are used, 
we show that the use of domestic financial systems extends 
far  beyond  generic  finance-related  activities  such  as, 
recordkeeping,  setting  up 
reminders,  and  controlling 
spending. In fact, these systems are reflective of the family 
values,  relationships  and  routines.  Our  findings  show  a 
predominant  use  of  physical  tools  such  as  handwritten 
spreadsheets,  physical  document  organizers  and  folders, 
cash  envelopes  and  so  on.  Although  the  use  of  online 
banking was quite prevalent, families rarely used any other 
digital  tools  to  support  their  financial  activities.  Based  on 
our  findings,  we  suggest  that  design  should  utilize  the 
natural practices of families and critically question whether 
technology is a solution [3, 34] in such cases. 
In what follows, we outline the contributions of this work to 
the CSCW community, followed by a literature review from 
the  fields  of  economics,  consumer  research  and  HCI.  We 
then  describe  our  field  study  and  methods;  followed  by 
examples  of  financial  systems  we  observed  using  these 
methods. We describe these systems in terms of their design 
and use within domestic settings and showcase the value our 
participants  derived  from  them.  In  closing,  we  elicit 
important  properties  of  these  systems  to  outline  some 
implications for design in this area.  

1777

Contributions to CSCW 
The contribution of this work is threefold. 
1. Empirical findings on coordination over family finances.
Using  an  ethnographically  informed  approach,  this
research explicates some everyday ways in which family
finances  are  coordinated  and  managed.  We  provide  a
number of examples of ‘financial systems’ from our field
study  which  will illustrate how  families in their natural
environment  creatively  devise  and  cooperatively  use
such systems. We focus on both the material and social
qualities of  these systems and show  how these systems
are integrated into people’s everyday lives.

this  research  will  contribute 

2. A new perspective on domestic lives. Attending to family
finances, 
towards  an
understanding  of  domestic 
lives  from  a  financial
perspective. This understanding will add to the existing
repertoire of research within HCI and CSCW [6, 7, 14,
26, 41, 42, 43, 44]. This work will show that through the
use of financial systems, family members not only get a
better  handle  over  their  finances  but  also  over  their
domestic routines, values and social relationships.

3. Designing  for  financial  activities.  We  derive  several
important  properties  of  financial  systems  that  can
provide  directions  for  designing 
to  support
financial activities in domestic settings. Our findings do
point  to  an  over  reliance  on  non-digital  tools  when  it
comes  to  organizing  household  finances,  nevertheless
our recommendations are sensitive to the social practices
of our participants.

tools 

RELATED WORK 
Dealing  with  finances  within  the  domestic  setting  is  a 
relatively new topic for the CSCW research. To provide an 
adequate literature review and set a platform for our work, 
we begin by discussing some work from the economics and 
consumer  research  literature  and  then  move  onto  the  HCI 
and  CSCW  literature  on  domestic  settings.  We  describe 
some of the early studies in the area of family finances and 
show how our work extends this research area. 
Family Economics 
The  issue  of  how  households  organize  their  finances  has 
been  extensively  studied  in  the  field  of  economics  and 
consumer research. Some of the earlier studies [33, 11] have 
focused  on  the  roles  of  spouses  in  supporting  financial 
management. Using a sample data from 73 couples, Godwin 
and Carroll have identified the following factors that affect 
positive  financial  management  behaviors 
in  spouses: 
number  of  years  married,  completion  of  a  course  in 
consumer education by a spouse, and occupational status of 
wives.  Pahl 
[27]  has  developed  a  classification  of 
households  based  on  their  money  management  patterns: 
Female  Whole  Wage  (wife  manages  the  wages),  Male 
Whole Wage (husband manages the wages), Housekeeping 
Allowance 
for 
housekeeping 
the  partner),  Pooling  (both  partners 
contribute  to  a  common  pool  of  money)  and  Independent 

(main  earner  gives 

fixed  allowance 

to 

1778

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Management (partners independently manage specific items 
of expenditure). This classification has been influential as an 
analytical 
tool  and  has  provided  a  strong  basis  for 
understanding how couples organize their household money 
and how this may impact their wellbeing. In a collection of 
studies  by  Stocks,  Diaz  and  Hallerod  [40],  a  comparative 
analysis  is  provided  on  the  attitudes  towards  sharing 
finances  within  couples,  their  differing  approaches  to 
sharing income and expenses, and cultural aspects that are at 
play  when making financial decisions. This study contends 
that  when  people  are  talking  about  managing  their  money 
they  are  in  fact  talking  about  managing  their  personal  and 
social identities. 
Studies  in  behavioral  economics  have  focused  on  financial 
knowledge  and  practices  within  household  settings. 
Households with good financial knowledge (gained through 
social  networks  or  personal  experiences)  are  shown  to  be 
better  at  financial  practices  such  as  organization  of  cash-
flow  and  credit  management,  handling  of  savings  and 
investment  [16].  Based  on  their  qualitative  studies,  Muske 
and  Winter  [22,  23]  devised  a  framework  for  family  cash-
flow management. They showed that families have specific 
financial  processes  in  place  that  are  informed  by  aspects 
related to safety, control, comfort and routines. Gudmunson 
and  Danes  [12]  have  focused  on  family  socialization 
processes such as  family interactions and relationships and 
argued  that  family  socialization  has  an  important  role  in 
producing better financial outcomes. The role of parents is 
shown  to  be  an  important  factor  in  enhancing  financial 
literacy among children and adolescents [4]. With the rapid 
blurring  of  gender  roles  and  diversification  in  family 
composition  and  structure,  several  recent  studies  have 
focused on aspects related to independence and trust [1, 28], 
control  [31],  identity  [39]  and  gender  roles  [48]  to 
understand family finance. 
Different  from  these  studies,  our  focus  is  more  human-
centric  where  we aim  to develop a better understanding of 
the situated nature of household financial practices, focusing 
specifically on the financial systems.  
Domestic settings and HCI 
In the recent years, HCI has seen a large increase in studies 
exploring  domestic  settings  and  the  technologies  that  may 
be  situated  in  them.  Studies  have  shown  that  domestic 
routines are coordinative in nature and play a central role in 
in our understanding of domestic lives [7, 29, 41,]. Tolmie 
et al. [43] discussed how routines become an integral part of 
what  they  refer  to  as  the  ‘glue  of  domestic  life’.  By 
analyzing  specific  mundane  details  of  everyday  life,  the 
authors  make  a  case  for  the  importance  of  observing  the 
unremarkable  aspects  of 
that 
integrating awareness of these details into technology design 
presents a major challenge to HCI’s research agenda. A set 
of  studies  by  Crabtree  et  al.  [5,  7]  focused  on  the 
coordinative  aspects  of  household  routines,  where  the 
authors map the physical characteristics of homes as well as 

routines,  and  suggest 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

their  ethnographic  research  suggests 

capturing  how  mundane  activities  could  contribute  to  the 
social  organization  of  household  spaces.  The  ethnographic 
studies of Taylor and Swan [41] focused on  understanding 
the  artful  ways  families  develop  ‘organizing  systems’ 
utilizing  the  domestic  informational  artefacts  such  as 
calendars, to-do lists and paper notes. Using examples from 
the  field  they  show  that  in  addition  to  supporting  the 
organization of daily routines, these systems also shape the 
social  relationships  between  family  members.  Perry  and 
Rachovides [29] explored the different ways families create 
their entertainment through situated messaging in the home. 
HCI  and  CSCW  studies  have  also  focused  on  specific 
aspects  such  as  the  use  of  calendars  [5,  24],  photos  [42], 
mementos [30] and organizing paperwork such as bills and 
letters [14] within domestic settings.  
Money in HCI 
Despite  its  importance,  interacting  with  money  has  been 
subject  to  little  HCI  research.  In  light  of  the  recent  ‘credit 
crunch’, government agencies in the UK have funded a set 
of  projects  within  the  theme  of  Digital  Economy  [8].  A 
qualitative study by Vines et al. [46] of 38 individuals living 
on  a  low  income  in  the  North  East  of  England  elicited 
several  practices  related  to  delaying,  prioritizing,  planning, 
watching and hiding monetary transactions. Kaye et al. [18] 
in 
that  financial 
practices are influenced by personal history and upbringing; 
that  people  are  creative  in  the  ways  they  budget  and  save 
money  and  that  many  people  do  not  closely  monitor  the 
overall state of their finances. These authors also showed a 
strong emotional link between people and their finances and 
how  sometimes  emotions  may  take  over  the  economically 
rational  decisions.  Other 
focused  on 
investigating  the  ‘acceptability’  of  modern  technologies  to 
support  monetary  activities.  For  example,  a  study  by 
Mainwaring  et  al.  [20]  showed  that  cultural  and  social 
aspects are strongly attached to the acceptability of a ‘smart’ 
payment  system  using  Near  Field  Communication  (NFC). 
Another qualitative study by Vines et al. [45] on households 
of  people aged  over  80  showed  that  there  is  a  strong  trust 
issue associated  with paper cheques that  may  stay in place 
even though financial reforms suggest  new technologies to 
replace  cheques.  Applications  and  tools  such  as  mint.com, 
Manilla and Quicken have been found to be poorly aligned 
with  broader  cultural,  social  and  societal  issues  related  to 
money and people’s existing  money  management practices 
[37].  Kerber  et  al.  [19]  developed  a  concept  of  a  digital 
household  account  book,  which  allows  automatic  receipt 
scanning  instead  of  manually  entering  them.  Consideration 
of the literature above however suggests the development of 
such systems runs the risk of bypassing due consideration of 
people’s  existing  practices  and  routines  related  to  their 
financial management. 
Building on this solid starting point of literature in this area 
(especially  [18,  46])  and  connecting  our  work  to  the 
economics  and  consumer  research  literature,  we  provide  a 

studies  have 

detailed account of domestic financial systems focusing on 
the nuanced and situated practices of family members. 
THE STUDY 
Participants 
Following the approval of our institute’s ethics committee, 
we  started  our  recruitment  process  in  Brisbane,  Australia. 
We advertised on Gumtree (similar to Craigslist) and social 
media websites and posted flyers in large shopping centers. 
We  aimed  at  recruiting  families  within  a  reasonable 
proximity  to  the  average  Australian  household  income  [2] 
and participants were screened accordingly.  
We  recruited  15  families  in  total.  Our  recruited  families 
included:  11  married  or  de  facto  couples  with  at  least  one 
dependent  child;  1  single  parent  with  children  living  at 
home;  1  young  couple  without  any  children;  and  two 
married couple with grown up children who had left home. 
On  average  the  household  income  of  these  participating 
families was $110K, which brings them into the category of 
above  average  income  within  the  Australian  standards.  In 
terms of employment, only one family had both the partners 
retired,  with  at  least  one  earning  member  in  the  remaining 
families.  Table  1  provides  detailed  description  of  our 
participants.  
Methods and Setting 
Our  interviews  took  place  in  the  participants’  homes.  The 
interview  process  began  with  questions  related  to  family 
demography,  income  and  occupation(s).  Adapted  from  
Pahl’s  methodology [28],  we introduced an exercise called 
‘flow of money’ – where we asked our participants to draw 
a  flow  chart  detailing  the  avenues  through  which  their 
money  was  earned,  spent  and  saved,  and  the  processes 
through  which 
i.e.  which 
expenditures  were  paid  from  which  accounts.  As  most  of 
our  participants  (14  out  of  15)  were  married  or  had  a  de-
facto  partner,  this  activity  allowed  us  to  see  the  social 
organization  of 
for  example  which 
accounts/loans  were  joint/separate  and  which  partner  paid 
for which expenses. This provided us with a comprehensive 
picture  of  their  financial  management  and  also  helped  us 
gain  knowledge  about  specific  arrangements  they  had  in 
terms  of  their  finances.  For  some  it  was  a  simple  exercise 
where they had only a single joint account into which their 
income was deposited and from which all the expenses were 
paid out. For others, this turned out to be a complex web of 
multiple  bank  accounts,  credit  cards,  loan  offset  accounts, 
salary  sacrifice  and  voluntary  contributions  to  savings  and 
superannuation accounts. 
Following  this  exercise,  we  asked  participants  questions 
about  their  financial  philosophy,  their  use  of  financial 
instruments  such  as  spreadsheets,  online  banking  and  the 
different methods and systems they have in place to manage 
their finances. Our focus was to understand the assemblies, 
use and experiences related to the financial systems that our 
participants had in place. As our work was in-situ, we were 

took  place- 

finances; 

these 

things 

their 

1779

Pseudonym (age) and dependent 
children (age) (G=Girl, B=Boy) 
Nicky+(34), Albert+(32), B(4), B(4) 

Total 
Income 
$125K 

Details affecting family income 

Home loan; tax benefits due to their 
employment in non-profits. 
Home loan; Investments in stocks. 

Jenny+(35), Nathan+(36), B(1)  

Joan+(43), B(10), B(9) 
Dani(34), Richard+(36), B(5) 

    Tina(48), Ben+(49), B(18), B(16),      

G(11), B(8) 
Jenny+(42), Frank+(43), G(16), G(13) 
Nancy(67), Ron(69) 
Sonia+(32), Jack+(33), G(1) 
Jo (35), Jim+(38), B(12), B(10), B(3) 

Nina+(58), Mike+(57) 

Jacky(25), Geoff+(26), G(2), B(1) 

Kim+(29), Sam+(27) 
Carla+(39), Jason+(49), G(8), G(4) 
Jane+(45), Barry+(57), B(9), B(6) 

$140K 

$74K 
$115K 
$80K 

Renting; Child support from former partner. 
Renting; Savings in foreign banks. 
Housing and related expenses are included in 
Ben’s employment with a church. 
Home loan; large savings in the off-set account. 

$120K 
$42K*  Mortgage paid off; war veteran benefits. 
$100K 
$85K 

Home loan; extra cash from a trading business. 
Renting. 

$70K 

$150K 

Home loan; Mike lost his superannuation as his 
company went under; Nina doesn’t have super. 
Home loan; lost $40K on the house due to 
floods. 
Home loan; Investments in stocks. 
$160K 
$70K 
Home loan; tax benefits due to non-profit work. 
$200K  Mortgage paid off; income varies drastically due 

# 

1 

2 

3 
4 
5 

6 
7 
8 
9 

10 

11 

12 
13 
14 

15 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Financial systems discussed in the study 
 
Online banking; receipt/invoice folders; 
payment reminders on fridge.  
Online banking; digital spreadsheets; 
receipt/invoice folders. 
Online banking; payment reminders.  
Online banking; digital spreadsheets. 
Online banking; coin jars; invoices stored in 
a wall organizer; digital spreadsheets. 
Online banking; diary; payment reminders. 
Hand-written spreadsheets; bills collection. 
Online banking; coupon collection; diary. 
Online banking; handwritten spreadsheets; 
cash envelopes. 
Online banking; digital spreadsheets; cash 
envelopes; Invoice/bills calendar.  
Online banking; payment reminders; cash 
envelopes. 
Online banking; coin jars; invoice folders. 
Online banking; invoice folders. 
Online banking; payment reminders on a 
physical notice board; folders.  
Online banking; folder; payment reminders. 

Beth+(35), Dan+(45), G(3) 

$120K 

to Barry’s business. 
Renting. 

Table 1: Description of participants. + denotes income earner. * denotes pension amount.  

 

able to view these systems, their placements in the home and 
how  they  constituted  a  part  of  the  social  fabric  of  the 
household  lives.  The  interviews  were  audio  recorded  and 
later  transcribed.  In  our  analysis  we  used  the  interview 
transcripts,  ‘flow  of  money’  diagrams  and  the  images  we 
took in the homes of our participants.  
RESULTS 
We  found  that  our  participants  used  a  varied  set  of 
instruments and tools in order to create domestic ‘financial 
systems’  that  suited  their  specific  needs.  Figure  1  shows  a 
few  examples  from  our  study.  As  one  can  see,  these 
examples varied from the use of simple coin jars by family 
12  for  buying  fruits  from  a  local  market  (figure  1a),  to 
archiving important bills and receipts in a physical folder by 
family 2 (figure 1b), to attaching bills on a fridge surface for 
due date reminders by family 11 (figure 1c), to the use of re-
usable  digital  spreadsheets  for  comparing  product  options 
and  making  important  financial  decisions  by  family  4 
(figure  1d).  Although  the  use  of  online  banking  sites  was 
quite  prevalent  in  our  participants,  the  use  of  physical 
instruments  such  as  paper  diaries,  folders  of  invoices  and 
bills,  handwritten  spreadsheets  were  quite  dominant. 
Interestingly,  none  of  the  15  families  were  using  any 
financial applications at the time of our study. 
We  carried  out  thematic  analysis  [13]  on  the  participants’ 

A 

B 

C 

D 

Figure 1. Examples of household financial systems. 

1780

are 

financial 

arrangements 

data,  where  we  inductively  identified  patterns  and  themes 
within  the  data.  From  our  analysis,  we  developed  three 
themes  of  domestic 
systems:  Macro-level 
arrangements,  Locale-based  systems,  and  Goal-oriented 
systems.  Macro-level 
global 
representations  of  a  family’s  finances,  where  a  complete 
lifecycle of money-flow is represented: starting from  when 
it is earned to when it is spent. Locale-based systems utilize 
physical and spatial resources of homes to support activities 
related  to  everyday  finances.  Goal-oriented  systems  are 
purposefully  designed  for  achieving  short  or  long  term 
family-specific goals, e.g. saving money for a holiday trip or 
buying a house. These themes are derived from the data that 
we collected and are not mutually exclusive. In several cases 
we found that financial systems belonged to more than one 
theme. Based on these themes, we discuss some examples of 
the financial systems devised and used by our participants.  
Macro-level arrangements 
Our  ‘flow  of  money’  exercise  provided  some  useful 
information  about  the  macro-level  organization  of  our 
participants’  household  financial  management.  The  flow 
charts developed through this exercise incorporated a wide 
range of financial activities and showcased how these were 
connected  to  their  everyday  lives.  We  will  discuss  two 
examples of such arrangements in this section. 

Nicky and Albert (family 1) are married and 
live in their new home with 4 year old twin 
boys.  Nicky  as  the  principal  organizer  of 
their  finances  drew  a  flow  chart  (figure  2) 
and  described  how  the  couple  is  currently 
managing  their  family  income.  They  both 
work 
for  non-profit  organizations  and 
manage  their  collective  incomes  through 

 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

seven different accounts. Essentially, their current situation 
is  heavily  influenced  by  their  recent  purchase  of  a  house. 
Their  home  loan  is  divided  into  two  accounts,  one  has  a 
variable interest rate (1) and another has a fixed interest rate 
(3). They have a joint account (2) where they pool together a 
major part of their salaries. These three accounts (1-3) are in 
one bank and they connected to their home loan. The joint 
account  (2)  is  connected  to  a  credit  card  account  (5)  that 
they share and two high interest personal accounts, one for 
Albert  (6)  and  one  for  Nicky  (7).  Because  she  works  in  a 
non-profit  organization,  Nicky  is  able  to  utilize  a  salary 
sacrifice scheme where she can bring in 30% of her income 
to a salary sacrifice account (4). Albert also uses his salary 
sacrifice opportunity to pay  for the home  loan. The family 
pays for all their main expenses from their joint account (2) 
and  Nicky’s  salary  sacrifice  account  (4).  Some  specific 
expenses such as telephone, internet and the daycare charges 
are paid through direct debits from the credit card account.  

 
Figure 2. Financial organization of Nicky and Albert. (The 7 

boxes represent different accounts) 

Connecting  to  this  to  behavioral  economics  of  Hilgert  and 
Hogarth  [16],  this  arrangement  is  a  good  example  of  good 
financial  literacy  put  into  practice,  where  both  Nicky  and 
Albert have been active towards paying off their home loan 
and at the same time maximizing their savings. Both of them 
have  utilized  their  salary  sacrifice  opportunities  to  the 
maximum. All of Albert’s salary sacrifice goes into the bank 
loan  whereas  Nicky  uses  her  salary  sacrifice  for  handling 
household  activities  and  paying  bills.  According  to  Nicky, 
they are very careful about their spending and would rather 
keep their money in high interest savings accounts (6 and 7) 
rather  than  in  the  everyday  joint  account.  When  we  asked 
why this was the case, she commented: 
"All  our  money  goes  in  together.  He  has  an  automatic  transfer 
coming  out  of  the  joint  account  every  fortnight  into  his  Suncorp 
account. It's just to keep things separate. If the money is just sitting 
in there, then you feel like 'spend it'. Whereas if you separate the 
money  from  the  beginning  then  you  kind  of  put  the  money 
somewhere you cannot easily touch. I don't know how he does with 
his Suncorp account, but mine is with ING. It used to be hard to 
access  that  account,  so  you  wouldn't  do  impulse  purchases  with 
that money." 
Another  interesting  aspect  of  this  family’s  macro-level 
financial  organization  was  the  combination  of  trust  and 
independence.  Even  when  they  both  were  contributing 

toward  the  joint  account  to  pay  off  their  home  loan,  they 
used the remaining balance of this account to support their 
personal needs and  goals.  Albert uses his personal account 
towards saving enough to buy land in Africa (in his native 
Ghana),  where  he  and  Nicky  eventually  plan  to  build  a 
house. Similarly, Nicky uses her personal account for saving 
money that she earns from occasional foster care assessment 
service that she performs. She aims to save for an overseas 
holidays with the family. In a way, this system shows both 
Nicky and Albert’s short and long term aspirations and their 
mutual  respect  of  their  individual  aspirations.  When  we 
asked  about  how  they  came  up  with  this  system,  Nicky 
answered,  “it  just  kinda  happened!”  As  the  family’s 
situation  and  needs  change  their  financial  systems  are  also 
adapted to suit those.  
In  the  second  example,  we  show  a  more  simplistic  macro-
level arrangement (figure 3). Dan and Beth (family 15) work 
full time and have a 3 year old daughter. They both pool in 
their  salaries  into  one  joint  account,  which  is  then  used  to 
pay  of  the  rent,  groceries,  childcare,  fuel  and  credit  card 
bills. Beth has kept a savings account where she pools in at 
least  a  certain  amount  per  month.  During  the  interview 
session, she gave the following account: 
“The goal is to not be too complicated, especially for my partner. 
He has been a spender in the past and this way I want to have a 
proper control over our savings.” 

Figure 3. Financial organization of Beth and Dan.  

 

From our interview, we found out that Beth and Dan has had 
some  relationship  problems  due  to  Dan’s  careless  attitude. 
Beth has been instrumental in making sure that she takes the 
lead on their finances. Each month Beth would transfer $500 
to her savings account so make sure that there is a “buffer” 
in  case  either  of  them  needed  some  money.  The  family’s 
larger  aim  is  to  save  enough  money  to  apply  for  a  home 
loan. On Dan’s attitude, she commented: 
“We used to have two credit cards, one used to belong to him and 
then  I  took  it over  when  I  realized  that he  was putting  things on 
there  and  forgetting  about  them.  Just  forgetting.  Money  is  not 
something  he’s  had  at  the  forefront  of  his  mind  till  the  last  few 
years. He’s always had a good job and never had to worry about 
making sure that there’s enough to cover bills. The last couple of 
years the company he was working for went under and so it’s been 

1781

a  bit  difficult  for  him  since.  And  yeah  money  is  definitely  the 
biggest issue in our relationship… full stop.” 
Beth  and  Dan’s 
financial  arrangement  shows  how 
relationships are  maintained  and negotiated through such a 
system.  
Locale-based Systems 
This theme highlights the placement and the situated nature 
of  some  of  the  financial  systems  that  were  studied  in  our 
fieldwork. Specific locations in homes such as study rooms, 
kitchen  desks  and  other  common  areas  were  used  by 
families as placeholders for their financial instruments such 
as invoices, handwritten spreadsheets, and so on in order to 
support  coordination  between  family  members.  In  some 
cases,  bills  were  strategically  placed  on  kitchen  desks  and 
fridge surfaces (figure 1c) as reminders. In the following, we 
will discuss two such examples from our study.  
The wall organizer 
Tina  and  Ben  (family  5)  are  in  their  late-forties  and  have 
four children of age 18, 16, 11 and 8. Ben is a minister at a 
church  and  lives  in  a  house  provided  by  the  church;  and 
Tina  is  a  home  maker.  The  family  has  a  wall  organizer 
(figure 4) in their family room (close to a computer desk), 
where they keep all the documents related to their everyday 
finances. 

 

 

Figure 4. The ‘orange’ wall organizer. 

The wall organizer is a transparent document organizer with 
six sections. Tina labeled these sections as 1) high-school, 2) 
primary  school,  3)  health,  4) receipts,  5)  household  and  6) 
church. Tina described her rational for devising it: 
“It  was  something  that  I  thought  could  be  useful.  I  divided  our 
lives into six categories - the different things that should be done - 
mostly financial. So, I divided them into the receipts that need to be 
filed,  things  that  needs  to  be  dealt  with  like  the  invoices  and 
information  from  high  school  and  primary  school.  This  is 
especially, because I pay them from different accounts than a lot of 
other things.” 
Tina occasionally did paid jobs and even rented out the extra 
room  of  her  house  to  international  students  whenever  she 
could.  She  had  a  separate  account  where  she  would  keep 
money earned from such activities. She was very conscious 
that she used that account for funding her children’s extra-
curricular  activities  such  as  camps  or  trips.  As  the  couple 

1782

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

had 4 kids all going to schools, Tina intentionally kept two 
sections of the organizer for the two schools her children go 
to.  She  said:  “This  just  minimizes  the  information  that  I 
should look through. ‘Cos once it’s out of sight, it’s out of 
mind.” 
The  use  of  the  wall  organizer  was  a  collaborative  effort 
among  the  family.  Tina  would  take  the  responsibility  of 
placing  and  sorting  all  the  important  documents  and 
invoices in the right section and would make a list of all the 
things to be paid in a word file on the computer. During the 
evening  time,  Ben  would  look  at  the  word  file  and  would 
make payments if required. He would also update the word 
file so that Tina could also keep track of their finances. The 
situated-ness  of  the  wall  organizer  in  a  close  proximity  of 
the  computer  and  printer  allowed  the  couple  to  coordinate 
their  finances  efficiently.  As  Ben  commented,  “once  they 
are paid, they go into the filing cabinet. These are just the 
things under my eyes to remind me”. 
Depending  on  their  needs  and  everyday  activities,  Tina 
would  actively  change  the  labels  of  some  sections  if  they 
were  not  frequently  used.  The  section  with  the  label 
“church” was related to Ben’s work. As he was the minister 
of the church, he would compile all the relevant documents 
and  invoices  related  to  the  church,  which  he  would  either 
deal with himself or pass onto others. The couple would also 
need to keep receipts of any expenses in the house since the 
house was provided by the church, they would claim some 
expenses related to this house. 
“The  most  active  things  there  are  the  high  school  and  primary 
school ones. Things will generally get paid relatively quickly from 
those  two,  because  there  isn't  a  lot  of  time  between  the  invoices 
when  come  from  schools  and  when  they  are  due.    ...  There  are 
things  in  there  that  will  stay  for  a  day  or  two,  and  some  things 
might be in there for a number of months. Things related to camps 
for example.”  
The financial hub 
Nancy  and  Ron  (family  7)  are  in  their  late  sixties  and  are 
retired. Ron is a war veteran and receives a higher level of 
pension and additional health support from the government. 
The  couple  has  completely  paid  off  their  home  loan  and 
their financial management is mainly related to their pension 
money and interest earned from term deposits. 
Nancy  and  Ron  have  developed  a  financial  hub  that 
combines a set of smaller financial instruments on corner of 
their  kitchen  bench  (figure  5).  The  hub  combines  a  notice 
board  full  of  financial  artefacts  such  as  handwritten 
spreadsheets, invoices, and other financial documents; with 
other artefacts (medicine box, radio, telephone, etc.) placed 
on  the  horizontal  surface  (figure  5a).  Ron  is  dedicated 
towards organizing their finances and has setup a particular 
process. Whenever a  new bill arrives, it is entered into  his 
account book (figure 5b) with dates by which they need to 
be paid and bills are stored in a zip-lock bag. He hangs his 
book  and  zip-lock  bag  on  the  notice  board  so  that  he  can 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

easily access them. He would highlight the entries once he 
has paid those bills. Referring to his financial hub, Ron said:  
“I keep everything in one spot and I know what’s going on. I’ve got 
a fan being installed in my bedroom so I have to ring up one of the 
electricians to install it...It’s sort of the running of the household!” 

A 

B 

 

 

 

 
Figure 5. The financial hub (a), a hand-written spreadsheet 

C 

 

(b) and a ‘glancable’ yearly financial sheet (c). 

Figure 5c shows a calendar page which he calls the ‘yearly 
financial sheet’. Ron had utilized this page to keep track of 
his year-long expenses. On this sheet, he had written down 
his  most  common  monthly  budgeted  expenses  such  as 
grocery shopping, phone bill, petrol expenses and so on. He 
uses  the  same  process  of  highlighting  once  an  expense  is 
paid  off.  He  has  also  written  down  the  birthdays  of  his 
family members (children and grand-children) so that he is 
able to budget for the gifts that he would buy for them. Ron 
has  kept  the  ‘yearly  financial  sheet’  visible  on  his  notice 
board.  To  Ron,  this  document  gives  him  and  Nancy  an 
overview of what’s coming. They used this to get a ‘glance’ 
over  his  overall  finances,  whereas  the  example  shown  in 
figure 5b is a much more detailed month-by-month account 
of his expenses and that is not made visible for the purposes. 
Both of these examples show that in addition to supporting 
financial activities, these financial systems incorporated and 
supported 
family 
relationship.  Some  of  the  well-known  CSCW  principles 
such  as  ‘public  availability’  [15,  32]  and  ‘coordinative 
displays’ [7] were quite visible in the organization of these 
systems. 
Goal-oriented Systems 
that  were 
This 
theme  highlights 
purposefully  built  to  achieve  specific  needs  and  goals.  We 
observed a wide range of goal-oriented systems in our field 
data. This ranged from the use of coin jars to the use of cash 
envelopes with fixed spending amounts to the use of digital 
spreadsheet.  
In  this  section,  we  will  use  two  examples  of  goal-oriented 
systems  from  family  10.  Nina  and  Mike  are  in  their  late 
fifties.  Mike  works  as  a  professional  management  training 
provider and Nina has a casual job where she works 4 hours 
a week. Mike had lost all of his superannuation savings in a 
company  that  became  insolvent  a  few  years  earlier.  Even 

financial  systems 

to  an  extent 

family 

routines  and 

though  the  family  was  financially  stable  at  present  (Mike 
earns  $150K  a  year),  Nina  was  concerned  about  their 
financial future in their retirement years. As she said, “We 
are saving money but not enough to fund our retirement and 
that worries me more so than it does to Mike. That's why I 
am personally struggling.” Nina has been looking for a full-
time  and  stable  employment  since  Mike  had  lost  his 
superannuation.  But  so  far  she  was  unsuccessful.  The 
following two examples of financial systems will showcase 
the  family’s  efforts  toward  coordinating  and  managing 
specific financial goals.  
The cash envelopes 
Nina and Mike have developed a system where they used a 
set  of  cash  envelopes  with  pre-defined  amount  of  money 
they  are  supposed  to  spend  on  activities  such  as  haircut, 
petrol,  coffee,  groceries  and  so  on  (figure  6).  These 
envelopes were kept in a tray and that tray was placed on a 
book shelf in the family room.  

 

 

 

Figure 6. The cash envelopes, a spreadsheet and its placement.  
The  cash  envelops  system  was  aimed  at  controlling  the 
family’s  spending,  especially 
the  sundry  and  small 
household  expenses.  Nina  and  Mike  have  been  using  this 
system for some years now and Nina indicated it controlled 
their  overspending  habits.  They  have  a  specific  procedure 
for  forming  this  system  every  month.  Nina  provided  the 
following account on how they developed this system:  
“We’re kind of bizarre in that once a month we go out and have a 
coffee and we discuss our finances. We use that monthly financial 
meeting to make sure that we’re on track and if there’s an expense 
coming up then we budget for it. ” 
“We  came  to  this  [the  envelopes]  from  two  different  ways.  Mike 
does  his  spreadsheet  the  computer  and  walks  me  through  the 
numbers.  I  can  see  how  they  are  progressing.  I  can  see  the 
difference  between  projected  and  actual.  But  his  logic  for  the 
spreadsheets I don’t get. I agree with the outcome, though. I use 
his spreadsheets and once a month I go and take out cash from an 
ATM to put in the envelopes.” 
The  system  of  using  cash  envelops  along  with 
the 
spreadsheet is a joint effort by both Nina and Mike. As Mike 
is the one who looks after the online finances, he has a better 
grasp  on  the  overall  picture  of  their  finances.  He  regularly 
creates  spreadsheets  of  their  sundry  and  miscellaneous 

1783

expenses.  Once  they  decide  on  their  budget,  Nina  ensures 
that  she  obtains  the  right  denominations  of  bills  in  the 
envelopes such that the money in the envelopes corresponds 
to  the  correct  money  allocated  on  the  spreadsheet.  She 
follows quite a meticulous process for this system. 
The couple would regularly review the amount they put into 
the individual envelopes or if there was a need to create or 
discard any of them. Nina said, “if we’ve got a big expense 
coming up then it’s the envelopes that are usually the first to 
get  hit.”  This  suggested  that  their  use  of  this  system  was 
quite scalable. Nina went onto say:  
“The  dry  cleaning  is  like  $20  per  month  but  then  we  don’t  dry 
clean every month. Sometimes the dry cleaning money is used for 
petrol  if  we’re  burning  more  petrol  one  week.  The  groceries 
envelop  never  comes  under.  Usually  if  it’s  the  last  week  of  the 
month  and  we’ve  got  anything  extra  we  just  have  a  nicer  than 
usual  meal.  Sometimes  we’ll  use  the  petrol  money  on  a  project 
around the house. We’re not very exciting people.” 
“There’s an example. So it [referring to the envelope titled Petrol] 
used to be $240. But then the car that we bought is a hybrid and 
the  fuel  costs  have  reduced,  so  we  went  from  $240  to  $150  per 
month.” 
The cash envelopes are devised specifically to cut down the 
miscellaneous  expenses,  which  are  typically  smaller  in 
amount but  harder to control; and allow Nina and Mike to 
increase their saving capacity to fund their retirement. 
The calendar 
Nina  and  Mike  used  a  pocket-based  calendar  (figure  7)  to 
store  their  invoices  and  receipts.  The  calendar  has  two 
pockets  on  each  side,  where  all  the  important  bills  and 
invoices are stored.  

 

Figure 7. The calendar with pockets. 

Both  Nina  and  Mike  would  use  the  front  pocket  of  the 
calendar to store bills and invoices and the back pocket  to 
store payment receipts. The goal of devising such a system 
was  to  ease  the  process  of  filing  for  tax  returns.  As  Nina 
said: 
“I keep receipts for everything then once a quarter we go through 
and put them into sheets for tax purposes and then in October we 
go through all the quarters and do our tax submission.”  
Nina  mentioned  that  at  the  time  of  tax  filing,  they  both 
would coordinate: 

1784

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

issues  around 

towards  exploration  of 

“Well we divide it up. I do a lot of the manual part of it I sort the 
dockets  into  the  spreadsheet.  Then  Mike  double  checks  and  sees 
what  needs  to  be  recorded  elsewhere.  Coz  some  of  them  are 
Halloween decorations that I find in a bargain shop. There is no 
reason  to  keep  the  receipts  for  them;  I  use  my  pocket  money  for 
that because it entertains me.” 
Although this system was mainly about storing invoices and 
receipts, its integration into a calendar was the main reason 
why  it  worked.  Nina  was  able  to  store  all  the  important 
documents  on  a  month  to  month  basis  which  is  useful  for 
her to get back to them easily whenever needed, especially 
when  filing  taxes.  Nina  also  carefully  made  sure  that 
invoices that needed to be paid are in the front pocket so that 
she  gets  reminded  about  it.  The  receipts  were  kept  on  the 
back pocket, so that if she needed to return an item then she 
knew where its receipt was.  
DISCUSSION & IMPLICATIONS 
While we would refrain from suggesting that these examples 
of  financial  systems  provide  the  complete  picture  of  the 
household  financial  management,  we  do  believe  that  they 
shed light on the artful and creative ways people incorporate 
their social lives into financial activities. Building on some 
scoping studies [18, 46] in this area, this paper has extended 
research 
the 
management  of  “family  finances”.  Using  a  bottom-up 
approach,  we  have  examined  the  systems  families  use  and 
their situated practices surrounding these systems.  
Domesticity  and  Finance:  Values,  Relationships  & 
Routines 
One of the major realizations that we have had through this 
work  is  that  all  these  examples  of  the  so  called  ‘financial 
systems’  incorporate  familial  values,  relationships  and 
routines. Money and financial issues are so intertwined with 
different aspects of family lives that these financial systems 
often  convey  as  much  about  our  everyday  routines,  social 
relationships,  values  and  aspiration,  as  they  do  about 
tracking  and  management  of  money.  We  contend  that 
practices  surrounding  these  financial  systems  are  socially 
formed and become habituated in the domestic settings. 
On the one hand, it was clear that there were strong practical 
reasons and motivations behind the design of these systems. 
For example, maximizing tax benefit and utilizing the salary 
sacrifice option to increase the saving capacity was a clear 
strategy in Nicky and Albert’s finances as depicted in figure 
2.  This  resonates  well  with  the  findings  of  Hilgert  and 
Hogarth  [16]  from  the  traditional  economics  literature. 
Nicky  and  Albert’s  financial  literacy  and  practice  allowed 
the family to achieve better financial outcomes. Self-control 
and  budgeting  for  only  the  essential  things  was  another 
practical  motivation  that  Nina  and  Mike  had.  Inherent  to 
some of these financial systems was the goal-driven nature. 
Nina  and  Mike’s  cash  envelopes  were  specifically  focused 
on  controlling  their  miscellaneous  or  sundry  expenses.  In 
Muske  and  Winter’s  work  [22]  from 
the  behavioral 
economics perspective, the issues related to safety, comfort 
and  control  are  seen  to  be  major  factors  in  household 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

to 

that  were  directly  connected 

financial  practices.  Nina  and  Mike’s  cash  envelopes  are  a 
good example of a system that encapsulates these aspects. It 
was  clear  that  major  household  expenses  such  as  rent, 
mortgage  and  loan  repayments  were  much  easier  to  track, 
compared to smaller expenses. Nina and Mike’s system had 
specific goal of managing and controlling these smaller cash 
purchases. Other practical motivations behind these systems 
were getting reminders utilizing specific locale in the house 
(by keeping the system in the visible locations of the house) 
and bookkeeping (by keeping detailed entries of expenses in 
books).  Above  examples  encapsulated  more  pragmatic 
values 
the  financial 
wellbeing of these families. 
On  the  aspect  of  maintaining  and  appropriating  family 
relationships, the macro-level banking arrangement of Beth 
and  Dan  was  a  very  good  example.  Beth  clarified  that 
finance played an important role in their marriage and their 
relationship  was  reinforced 
through  such  a  financial 
structure.  Similarly,  Nina’s  frustration  of  not  being  able  to 
get  a  job  and  help  Mike  fund  their  retirement  years  was 
quite visible in the two financial systems that we discussed 
in  figure  6  and  7.  To  Nina,  if  she  could  not  contribute 
directly, she reinforced her participation in the relationship 
through saving money. Similar to this, Tina (family 5) took 
care  of  her  4  children’s  school  activities  through  the  wall 
organizer. 
It also became visible that these financial systems were also 
taking care of the social needs and routines in the home. The 
orange organizer (figure 4) was a very good example of how 
it  combined  many  everyday  routines  related  to  children’s 
school activities, Ben’s church matters and other household 
matters.  Similar 
financial  hub  was 
summarized as “running the household”. Ron also kept a list 
of birthdays of his children and grand-children to make sure 
that he budgets for gifts that he may have to buy on a certain 
date.  The  example  of  Nicky  and  Albert’s  system  showed 
that  they  both  cared  about  each  other’s  aspirations  and 
likings.  Even  when  they  had  a  big  home  loan  to  pay  off, 
Nicky was quite supportive of Albert’s decision to buy land 
in  his  native  country.  Crabtree  [7]  and  Taylor’s  [41]  work 
showed  how  families  coordinate  their  routine  activities 
through the use of calendars, notice boards and other spatial 
resources.  Our  findings  suggest  that  financial  management 
is also organized with and through similar household objects 
such as the calendar, organizer and noticeboards. 
On the topic of financial role and responsibility, our findings 
were  closely  related  to  the  traditional  economics  literature 
[1,  11,  33,  48].  For  example,  families  where  both  the 
partners  were  earning, 
independent 
accounts  and  credit  cards,  while  still  maintaining  joint 
accounts  and  home  loans.  The  aspects  of  control  and  trust 
between  family  members  were  quite  apparent  in  our 
findings. We have provided a detailed account on the role of 
trust and control elsewhere [38], hence we have not delved 
on these issues in this paper. 

the  partners  kept 

this,  Ron’s 

to 

Properties of Domestic ‘Financial Systems’ 
Perhaps  a  straightforward  conclusion  that  can  be  drawn 
from this research is that families incorporate certain values 
and  strategies  to  in  the  way  they  created  and  used  these 
financial systems. These values and strategies differed from 
family to family but there  were certain common properties 
that  we  would  like  to  highlight  here.  An  understanding  of 
these properties can be very useful when designing tools to 
support 
financial  management  within  homes.  These 
properties are: Setup, Form and Scalability. 
Setup: The setup and placement were integral to the design 
of these financial systems. Family rooms, kitchen areas and 
study  rooms  were  frequently  used  as  placements  for  these 
systems. For Nancy and Ron, most of the organization of the 
household  finance  occurred  at  one  end  of  their  kitchen 
bench.  This  was  where  Ron  kept  the  records  of  their 
financial activities in this area, along  with other household 
items  such  as  telephone,  radio,  medicines  and  so  on.  Ron 
placed  the  highlighted  yearly  financial  sheet  on  the  notice 
board  so  that  he  and  Nancy  both  get  reminded  of  their 
upcoming  expenses.  The  wall  organizer  in  Tina  and  Ben’s 
home  was placed in the  family room next  to the computer 
desk.  This  was  done  to  support  the  ease  of  access  and 
coordinate  the  payments  of  bills  on  time.  Such  setups 
utilized the idea of ‘public availability’ [32] – a well-known 
perspective  on  coordination  within  the  CSCW  field.  The 
example of the pocketed calendar system (figure 7) also had 
this  feature  where  it  allowed  Nina  and  Mike  to  coordinate 
and sort their bills and receipts of payments.  
The design of tools for supporting financial activities needs 
to take into account the importance of spatial resources that 
homes  have.  While  much  design  is  focused  on  the  digital 
space  for  finances,  for  example  the  internet  banking 
websites, mobile budgeting apps etc., less is dedicated to the 
physical spaces, such as the various financial hubs employed 
by  many  of  our  participants  in  managing  their  money.  For 
this reason  we consider the spatiality of  family  finances to 
be a promising area for future research. 
Form:  In  addition  to  the  setup,  the  form  of  these  systems 
was  also  an  important  property.  In  our  investigation,  we 
observed a predominantly high use of physical systems. Use 
of  digital  tools  was  limited  to  internet  banking  and  Excel 
spreadsheets for budgeting. Interestingly, we saw the use of 
hybrid tools that utilized a mix of both physical and digital 
tools. The example of cash envelopes may seem to be purely 
physical  system,  but  it  has  been  created  using  computer-
generated spreadsheets by Mike. Similarly, the combination 
of  the  orange  wall  organizer  and  the  computer  next  to  it 
created  a  hybrid  ecology  which  allowed  Tina  and  Ben  to 
coordinate their finances.  
CSCW literature has emphasized the role of physicality and 
materiality 
and 
coordination  during 
joint  activities  [25,  32,  35,  36]. 
Materiality and physicality were quite integral in the design 
and use of these financial systems. The semitransparent wall 

supporting 

cognition 

extended 

in 

1785

the  home  aided 

to 

the  forecast  availability  of 

organizer  not  only  allowed  storage  of  different  financial 
documents, it also afforded family members see if there are 
any pending documents that needed to be dealt with. On the 
other  hand  the  physicality  of  the  cash  envelopes  allowed 
Nina  and  Mike  to  keep  those  envelopes  away  from  their 
attention  and  the  labeling  allowed  them  to  keep  track  of 
their  spending  on  specific  miscellaneous  expenses  on 
“coffee”, “dry cleaning” and so on.  
The form of financial systems and their physical placement 
in 
their  presence,  visibility  and 
accessibility in the home. The calendar system as well as the 
wall organizer were positioned in highly trafficked areas of 
the  family  home.  While  Excel  spreadsheets  and  other 
computer  based  financial  artefacts  may  work  well  for 
families  where  one  person  is  primarily  responsible  for 
handling all the finances, a key feature we observed of the 
material  artefacts  was  their  being  accessed  by  family 
members  to  collaborate  and  cooperate  around  family 
finances and other family activities.  
Scalability: Families are dynamic entities and change as life 
stages progress and financial situations fluctuate. We found 
that  the  systems  people  used  to  manage  their  money  were 
scaled  to  their  specific  situations.  Nina  and  Mike  for 
example  scaled  the  amounts  in  their  cash  envelopes 
depending  on 
income  as 
determined  by  their  monthly  financial  meeting.  Nicky  and 
Albert’s banking arrangement also showed scalability when 
they  purchased  a  home.  The  orange  wall  organizer  had  6 
pockets, but Tina indicated that she often created new labels 
and added new category of financial activity in it. 
Thus it can be seen that family finances are changeable and 
as  such,  the  systems  our  participants  used  to  manage  their 
finances were scalable. This is an important consideration in 
design,  where  any  systems  deployed  to  assist  families 
manage their finances must be able to be appropriated by the 
family  and  scaled  to  their  specific  circumstances.  A  key 
concept  in  HCI  and  participatory  design  is  to  design  for 
appropriation;  rather  than  designing  completely  finished 
products,  emphasis 
is  placed  on  designing  adaptable 
artefacts that can be appropriated to a given situation. This is 
particularly  important  in  the  context  of  family  finances, 
where  the  diversity  in  the  practices,  systems,  trust  and 
routines of financial management mean that a one-size-fits-
all approach to design is unlikely to work in this context. 
Design Insights 
As we showed in the paper, while our participants did make 
use of the internet banking sites, it was the physical systems 
that  dominated 
and 
organization of finances. In the following, we extract certain 
features  of  the  domestic  financial  systems  to  show  what 
really  works  for  participants  when  they  use  physical 
systems.  

their  household  management 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Technology Non-use 
While  it  is  a  common  practice  within  the  HCI/CSCW 
research to develop a set of technological ideas derived from 
a  field  understanding;  findings  such  as  ours  and  of  many 
others  [3,  34]  do  suggest  that  technological  solutions  may 
not be the best answer in such situations.  In some cases, it 
can  even  be  counterproductive  [36].  As  we  showed  in  our 
findings, the use of physical and non-technological financial 
systems  was  dominant  over  the  digital  financial  tools.  The 
three properties of financial systems that we identified in the 
previous section, namely, setup, form and scalability suggest 
that  when  it  comes  to  domestic  lives,  families  tend  to 
appropriate  their  systems  depending  on  their  specific 
situation  and  needs.  Online  banking  was  in  fact  quite 
heavily  used,  but  such  tools  do  not  allow  any  type  of 
appropriation.  We  suggest  that  there  is  a  need  to  critically 
question the role of digital solutions in cases where the use 
of non-digital technology is habituated.  
While  we  advocate  the  ‘non-use’  philosophy  [3],  our 
findings  do  hint  at  possible  ways  a  better  relationship 
between family finances and design can be developed. 
Dealing with sundry expenses 
Our  participants  pointed  out  that  it  was  easier  for  them  to 
keep track of their larger expenses such as home loans, and 
rents,  whereas  managing  smaller,  miscellaneous  expenses 
was challenging. The examples shown in figures 3 and 6 had 
a strong focus on managing the sundry expenses. The cash 
envelopes were explicitly designed to control such expenses. 
Designers  need  to  take  this  point  into  account  and  enable 
users  to  pay  specific  attention  to  their  spending  habits  on 
sundries.  
Setting short and long-term goals 
Setting financial goals and working towards them was seen 
in the examples shown in figures 1a, 1d, 6 and 7. The cash 
envelope system was aimed at controlling sundry expenses, 
so  that  Nina  and  Mike  could  save  enough  money  for  their 
retirement. The calendar system was aimed at storing all the 
relevant bills and payment receipts for tax return purposes. 
In  the  example  of  figure  3,  Beth  indicated  that  she  had  a 
savings  account  where  she  would  transfer  at  least  $500  a 
month  to  be  able  to  buy  a  house  in  future.  Design  of 
financial tools needs to allow users to create short and long 
term financial goals.  
“Out of sight, out of mind” 
We  previously  discussed  the  aspect  of  public  availability 
[15, 32] that was inherent in several of the financial systems 
that we discussed in this paper. Keeping different financial 
objects visible and easily accessible reminded participants of 
their due dates and allowed other members of the family to 
coordinate  and  adapt  their  activities  accordingly.  Ron’s 
highlighted yearly financial sheet had glancable features that 
reminded him of his upcoming expenses. Similarly, the wall 
organizer, calendar and cash envelopes also incorporated the 
aspect of public availability.  

1786

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

This design insight shows that technology may not be easily 
adapted  to  suit  such  behaviors  and  practices.  As  a  design 
feature the aspects of visibility and public availability are of 
great  importance,  and  CSCW  literature  [15,  32,  35]  has 
frequently  shown  their  usefulness  in  supporting  awareness 
and coordination within a group of people 
Supporting cooperative use  
From  a  technology  design  point  of  view,  finance  has  been 
treated  as  a  personal  and  individual  phenomenon.  For 
example the majority of mobile apps available in the market 
assume  that  only  one  person  is  responsible  for  managing 
money. Such apps do not account for family dynamics and 
cooperation, collaboration and division of labor we observed 
from  our  households  in  their  management  of  money.  The 
way Nina and Mike handled their system, where Nina would 
create  cash  envelopes  from  the  spreadsheets  prepared  by 
Mike  showed  not  only  the  joint  effort  but  also  a  joint 
determination  to  cut  down  on  their  extra  expenses.  In  the 
case of Tina and Ben, Tina would collect all the important 
invoices  and  documents  and  sorts  them  out  in  the  orange 
organizer and later Ben would pay them off on the computer 
whenever  necessary.  In  a  majority  of  the  families  we 
interviewed, we found family finances to be a collaborative, 
negotiated  and  democratic  process.  However,  designers 
need to remember that any design artefact aimed at helping 
families  manage  their  finances  may  be  deployed  into 
settings  where  trust  is  not  present,  or  where  one  family 
member has less control over finances. As such, we do not 
advocate  designs  that  assume  a  consistent  level  of  trust 
between 
to  ensure 
transparency in financial activity, but at the same time allow 
for the privacy of all family members to be respected. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper builds on the existing economics, social science 
and  HCI  research  into  the  different  ways  and  systems 
employed by families in their money management. Using an 
ethnographically  informed  approach,  we  looked  in  some 
detail into the different ‘systems’ employed by families and 
how  these  play  out  in  everyday  life.  We  found  that 
managing  money  is  closely  connected  to  other  aspects  of 
domestic  life  and  there  is  a  need  to  look  more  holistically 
into  the  everydayness  of  managing  money.  The  main 
implications  of  the  research  are  that  designs  in  this  area 
must  be  sensitive  to  the  existing  collaborative  practices  of 
family  members;  the  tensions  between  physical  and  digital 
‘places’  of  financial  management  and  that  any  designs 
deployed  need  to  be  able  to  be  scaled  to  the  particular 
circumstances of each family.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We 
the  School  of  Electrical  Engineering  and 
Computer  Science,  at  QUT  for  seed  funding  this  research. 
We are grateful to all of our participants. We also thank our 
reviewers for proving insightful comments and making our 
paper better. 

family  members.  Design  needs 

thank 

REFERENCES 
1.  Katherine J. Ashby and Carole B. Burgoyne. 2008. 

Separate financial entities?: Beyond categories of money 
management. The Journal of Socio-Economics 37, 2: 
458-480. 

2.  Australian Bureau of Statistics. Retrieved on27th July 

2015 
http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Lookup/6
523.0Main+Features22011-12  

3.  Eric P.S. Baumer and M. Six Silberman. 2011. When the 
implication is not to design (technology). In Proceedings 
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI '11), 2271-2274. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979275  

4.  Maribeth C. Clarke, Martie B. Heaton, Craig L. 

Israelsen, and Dennis L. Eggett. 2005. The acquisition of 
family financial roles and responsibilities. Family and 
Consumer Sciences Research Journal  33, no. 4, 321-
340. 

5.  Andy Crabtree, Terry Hemmings, Tom Rodden, and 
John Mariani. 2003. Informing the development of 
calendar systems for domestic use. In ECSCW 2003, 
Springer Netherlands, 119-138. 

6.  Andy Crabtree, Tom Rodden, Terry Hemmings, and 
Steve Benford. 2003. Finding a Place for UbiComp in 
the Home. In UbiComp 2003: Ubiquitous Computing, 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 208-226. 

7.  Andy Crabtree, and Tom Rodden. 2004. Domestic 

routines and design for the home. Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work (CSCW), 13(2), 191-220. 

8.  EPSRC. Digital Economy. Retrieved on27th July 2015 
http://www.epsrc.ac.uk/research/ourportfolio/themes/dig
italeconomy/  

9.  Jennifer Ferreira, Mark Perry, and Sriram Subramanian. 
2015. Spending Time with Money: From Shared Values 
to Social Connectivity. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
& Social Computing (CSCW '15). 1222-1234. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675230  

10. Elizabeth M. Gerber, Michael Muller, Rick Wash, Lilly 
C. Irani, Amanda Williams, and Elizabeth F. Churchill. 
2014. Crowdfunding: an emerging field of research. 
In CHI '14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI EA '14). 1093-1098. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2559206.2579406 

11. Deborah D. Godwin, and Diana D. Carroll. 1986. 
Financial management attitudes and behaviour of 
husbands and wives. Journal of Consumer Studies & 
Home Economics, 10(1), 77-96. 

12. Clinton G. Gudmunson, and Sharon M. Danes. 2011. 

Family financial socialization: Theory and critical 
review. Journal of family and economic issues, 32(4), 
644-667. 

13. Greg Guest, Kathleen M. MacQueen, and Emily E. 

Namey. 2011. Applied thematic analysis. Sage. 

14. Richard Harper. 2003. Inside the Smart Home. Springer, 

London. 

1787

15. Christian Heath and Paul Luff. 1992. Collaboration and 

Control: Crisis Management and Multimedia 
Technology in London Underground Line Control 
Rooms. Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) 
1(1), 24–48. 

16. Marianne A. Hilgert, Jeanne M. Hogarth, and Sondra G. 

Beverly. 2003. Household financial management: The 
connection between knowledge and behavior. Fed. Res. 
Bull., 89, 309. 

17. Jofish Kaye, Janet Vertesi, Jennifer Ferreira, Barry 

Brown, and Mark Perry. 2014. #CHImoney: financial 
interactions, digital cash, capital exchange and mobile 
money. In CHI '14 Extended Abstracts on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA '14). 111-114. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2559206.2559221  

18. Joseph Kaye, Mary McCuistion, Rebecca Gulotta, and 

David A. Shamma. 2014. Money talks: tracking personal 
finances. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '14). 521-
530. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2556975 

19. Frederic Kerber, Pascal Lessel, Maximilian Altmeyer, 
Annika Kaltenhauser, Christian Neurohr, and Antonio 
Krüger. 2014. Towards a novel digital household 
account book. In CHI '14 Extended Abstracts on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA '14). 1921-
1926. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2559206.2581288 
20. Scott Mainwaring, Wendy March, and Bill Maurer. 

2008. From meiwaku to tokushita!: lessons for digital 
money design from japan. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI '08). 21-24. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1357054.1357058 

21. David R. Millen, Claudio Pinhanez, Jofish Kaye, Silvia 

Cristina Sardela Bianchi, and John Vines. 2015. 
Collaboration and Social Computing in Emerging 
Financial Services. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM 
Conference Companion on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work & Social Computing (CSCW'15 
Companion). 309-312. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2685553.2685562  

22. Glenn Muske and Mary Winter. 2001. An in-depth look 

at family cash-flow management practices. Journal of 
Family and Economic Issues, 22(4), 353-372. 

23. Glenn Muske and Mary Winter. 1999. Cash flow 

management: A framework of daily family activities. 
Financial Counseling and Planning, 10(1), 1-12. 

24. Carman Neustaedter, A. J. Bernheim Brush, and Saul 

Greenberg. 2009. The calendar is crucial: Coordination 
and awareness through the family calendar. ACM Trans. 
Comput.-Hum. Interact. 16, 1, Article 6 (April 2009), 48 
pages. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1502800.1502806 

25. Saeko Nomura, Edwin Hutchins, and Barbara E. Holder. 

2006. The uses of paper in commercial airline flight 
operations. In Proceedings of the 2006 20th anniversary 
conference on Computer supported cooperative 
work (CSCW '06). 249-258. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1180875.1180914  

1788

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

26. Jon O'Brien, Tom Rodden, Mark Rouncefield, and John 

Hughes. 1999. At home with the technology: an 
ethnographic study of a set-top-box trial. ACM Trans. 
Comput.-Hum. Interact. 6, 3 (September 1999), 282-308. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/329693.329698  

27. Jan Pahl and J. M. Pahl. 1989. Money and Marriage. 

MacMillan Education, Basingstoke, Hampshire 

28. Jan Pahl. 2008. Family finances, individualisation, 

spending patterns and access to credit. The Journal of 
Socio-Economics, 37(2), 577-591. 

29. Mark Perry and Dorothy Rachovides. 2007. Entertaining 

situated messaging at home. Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work (CSCW), 16(1-2), 99-128. 

30. Daniella Petrelli, Steve Bowen and Steve Whittaker. 
2014. Photo mementos: Designing digital media to 
represent ourselves at home. International Journal of 
Human-Computer Studies, 72(3), 320-336. 

31. Shelley Phipps and Frances Woolley. 2008. Control over 

money and the savings decisions of Canadian 
households. The Journal of Socio-Economics, 37(2), 
592-611. 

32. Toni Robertson. 2002. The public availability of actions 

and artefacts. Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
(CSCW), 11(3-4), 299-316. 

33. Dennis L. Rosen and Donald H. Granbois. 1983. 
Determinants of role structure in family financial 
management.  Journal of Consumer Research, 253-258. 
34. Christine Satchell and Paul Dourish. 2009. Beyond the 

user: use and non-use in HCI. In Proceedings of the 21st 
Annual Conference of the Australian Computer-Human 
Interaction Special Interest Group:  9-16. 

35. Kjeld Schmidt and Ina Wagner. 2002. Coordinative 

artefacts in architectural practice. In: Proceedings of the 
Fifth International Conference on the Design of 
Cooperative Systems (COOP 2002), IOS Press, 
Amsterdam, 257–274. 

36. Abigail Sellen and Richard Harper. 2003. The myth of 

the paperless office. The MIT Press. 

37. Stephen Snow and Dhaval Vyas. 2015. Fixing the 

Alignment: An Exploration of Budgeting Practices in the 
Home. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM 
Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI EA '15). 2271-2276. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702613.2732808  

38. Stephen Snow and Dhaval Vyas. 2015. Fostering 

Collaboration in the Management of Family Finances. 
In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Australian 
Special Interest Group for Computer Human 
Interaction (OzCHI '15), 380-387. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2838739.2838746  

39. Stefanie J. Sonnenberg. 2008. Household financial 

organisation and discursive practice: Managing money 
and identity. J. of Behavioural and Experimental 
Economics, 37 (2), pp.533 – 551. 

40. Capitolina Díaz-Martínez. 2007. Modern couples 

sharing money, sharing life. Edited by Janet Stocks, and 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Björn Halleröd. Basingstoke and Eastbourne: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 

41. Alex S. Taylor and Laurel Swan. 2005. Artful systems in 
the home. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '05). 641-
650. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1054972.1055060  

42. Alex S. Taylor, Lauren Swan and Abigail Durrant. 2007. 

Designing family photo displays. In ECSCW 2007 (pp. 
79-98). Springer London. 

43. Peter Tolmie, James Pycock, Tim Diggins, Allan 

MacLean, and Alain Karsenty. 2002. Unremarkable 
computing. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '02). 
399-406. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/503376.503448 
44. Alladi Venkatesh. 1985. A Conceptualisation of the 

Household-Technology Interaction. Advances in 
Consumer Research, vol. 12, pp. 189–194. 

45. John Vines, Paul Dunphy, Mark Blythe, Stephen 

Lindsay, Andrew Monk, and Patrick Olivier. 2012. The 
joy of cheques: trust, paper and eighty somethings. 
In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on 

 

Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW '12). 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 147-156. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2145204.2145229  

46. John Vines, Paul Dunphy, and Andrew Monk. 2014. Pay 

or delay: the role of technology when managing a low 
income. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '14). 501-
510. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2556961 

47. Dhaval Vyas, Stephen Snow, Margot Brereton, Uwe 
Dulleck, and Xavier Boyen. 2015. Being Thrifty on a 
$100K Wage: Austerity in Family Finances. 
In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference Companion 
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social 
Computing (CSCW'15 Companion). 167-170. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2685553.2698998 

48. Carolyn Vogler, Michaela Brockmann, and Richard D. 

Wiggins. 2006. Intimate relationships and changing 
patterns of money management at the beginning of the 
twenty-first century. The British Journal of 
Sociology, 57(3), 455-482. 

1789

