CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Do Massive Open Online Course 
Platforms Support Employability? 

Tawanna R. Dillahunt1, Sandy Ng1, Michelle Fiesta1, Zengguang Wang2 

1School of Information 
University of Michigan 

2Peking University 

Beijing, China 

{tdillahu, ngsandy, mfiesta}@umich.edu 

wangzg@umich.edu 

social 

career 

capital, 

learners  and 

interviewed  22 

ABSTRACT 
Past research suggests that many individuals take Massive 
Open  Online  Courses  (MOOCs)  for  employment-related 
reasons.  It  is  unclear,  however,  how  learners  leverage 
MOOCs  for  employment  and  how  effectively 
these 
platforms support employability. To explore this further, we 
surveyed  441 
learners 
motivated  to  take  MOOCs  for  reasons  related  to  financial 
limitations and/or reasons related to employment. Using the 
three dimensions of employability as a framework—human 
and 
and  personal 
adaptability—we  find  that  while  most  of  our  participants 
were optimistic about the potential for MOOCs to improve 
their  employability, 
tangible 
evidence  of  employment  mobility  from  taking  MOOCs. 
Though  MOOCs  support  human  capital, 
there  are 
opportunities  to  further  support  social  capital,  career 
identity, and personal adaptability. We contribute a deeper 
understanding of learners who use MOOCs for employment 
and  provide  concrete  design  implications  for  MOOC 
platforms to better support employability in the future. We 
found very few low SES learners using MOOCs for reasons 
of  employment  and  identify  opportunities  for  MOOCs  to 
reach and support these learners.  

there  was  very 

identity, 

limited 

Author Keywords 
Massive Open Online Courses; education; employment; 
employability; socioeconomic status 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation: Misc. 

INTRODUCTION 
Today’s  Information  and  Communication  Technologies 
(ICTs)  offer  solutions  to  address  one  of  society’s  most 
pressing  problems—unemployment  [4,  22,  25].  However, 
most of the research today focuses on how increasing ICT 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work 
for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that 
copies  are  not  made  or  distributed  for  profit  or  commercial 
advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on 
the  first  page.  Copyrights  for  components of  this  work  owned  by 
others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit 
is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or 
to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a 
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights 
licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02...$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819924

233

of 

the 

is  enhanced  by 

employability.  MOOCs 

skills [18, 23], or how social capital from social networking 
sites such as Facebook, could lead to employment [4]. Very 
little  CSCW  or  HCI  research  explores  whether  and  how 
ICTs can support employability, which is defined as one’s 
capacity  to  gain  and  maintain  employment  [17].  An 
individual’s  employability  is  a  key  contributor  to  their 
career  success,  and 
following 
dimensions:  developing  human  and  social  capital,  career 
identity  and  by  adapting  to  environmental  demands  [17]. 
Though  economists  and  sociologists  have  extensively 
studied various dimensions of employability, few HCI and 
CSCW  studies  have  applied  this  concept  to  evaluate 
whether technologies could effectively aid in employability. 
Using one dimension of employability, social capital, Burke 
and  Kraut  found  that  bonding  social  capital,  or  those 
relationships  between  close  friends  and  family,  was 
predictive  of  finding  employment  within  three  months  of 
job  loss  on  Facebook  [4].  However,  little  research  has 
investigated  the  effectiveness  of  such  tools  on  other 
dimensions 
provide 
opportunities  for  individuals  with  Internet  access  to  enroll 
in  a  wide  range  of  courses,  which  provide  human  capital 
and access to individuals around the world. These platforms 
allow  those  enrolled  to  learn  from  distinguished  faculty 
from some of the world’s most elite schools [33].  Finally, 
MOOCs are constantly updated with new material, remove 
the  barriers  associated  with  course  registration  and 
significantly reduce the cost of a traditional education [33]. 
Given these paybacks, MOOCs are in a position to support 
education as well as the three dimensions of employability. 
A  large  majority  of  those  enrolled  in  MOOCs  have 
advanced degrees [9, 11, 28] and are already employed [13, 
28].  These  findings  suggest  that  those  who  are  highly 
educated  and  employed  may  be  driven  to  pursue  further 
education  and  advance  professionally  outside  of  their 
current  place  of  employment.  However,  this  research 
provides little information about whether other populations, 
particularly  those  that  are  less  advantaged  (e.g.,  low 
socioeconomic 
finances, 
employment),  have  similar  intentions.  Friedman  from  the 
New  York  Times’  has  proclaimed  MOOCs’  potential  for 
closing  the  gap  between  the  needy  and  elite  and  wrote, 
“Nothing  has  more  potential  to  lift  more  people  out  of 
poverty—by providing them an affordable education to get 
a job or improve in the job they have” [16]. In addition to 
understanding 
to  support 

the  potential  for  MOOCs 

education, 

limited 

status, 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

employability,  we  wanted  to  explore  this  further  by 
targeting low SES learners in our recruitment process. 
In this article we answer the following research questions: 
1) How are learners using MOOCs for employment? 2) Do
these learners represent learners with financial constraints? 
3) How do MOOC platforms support employability and are
they effective? We present the results of 441 surveys and 22 
qualitative  interviews  with  MOOC  learners  motivated  to 
take  courses  for  financial  and/or  employment-related 
reasons. These learners reported taking MOOCs to receive 
training  for  their  next  job,  to  increase  their  chances  of 
employment, and to overcome financial problems related to 
obtaining  an  education.  We  hypothesized  that  MOOCs 
could  provide  an  opportunity  for  individuals,  particularly 
among  these  populations,  to  access  knowledge  and  skills 
that could lead to employment. Our results reveal that most 
of our interviewees were optimistic about the potential for 
MOOCs 
their  employability.  However, 
participants  in  general  presented  very  limited  tangible 
evidence of employment mobility as a result of taking and 
finishing  MOOCs.  As  a  result,  we  make  the  following 
contributions:  

improve 

to 

• We build upon prior MOOC research [2, 9, 11, 20,
27, 28, 32, 33] by providing detailed insights into
how  learners  motivated  by  employment-related
reasons  perform  in  these  courses  and  leverage
resources.

looking 

learners 

field/job; 

• We provide deeper insight into learners motivated
to  take  MOOCs  for  job-related  reasons.  We
suggest  the  following  categorizations  for  these
learners:  learners  that  transition  to  new  fields;
learners  that  are  looking  to  be  promoted  in  their
current 
for  new
positions  in  their  current  fields  or  jobs;  and
learners looking for a refresher in their current area
of work. This extends motivations proposed in the
Online  Learning  Enrollment  Intentions  (OLEI)
scale [27] and allows us to better understand these
learners in the future.
Social insights into lower SES learner experiences
and perceived and actual barriers to employment.
Concrete design implications for MOOC platforms
to better support employability in the future.

•

•

To the best of our knowledge, these results derive from one 
of the first qualitative studies of MOOC learners in the U.S. 
and how they use MOOCs for employment.  

Related Work 
Past  research  of  learners’  motivations  for  taking  MOOCs 
suggests that many individuals take MOOCs for job-related 
reasons such as skill development and aspirations to change 
careers  [27].  However,  understanding  how  effectively 
MOOCs  address  this  need  is  not  well  understood.  We 

suggest  leveraging  the  dimensions  of  employability  as  a 
framework for evaluation and describe them next. 

Employability 
Employability  alone  does  not  guarantee  employment; 
however, it enhances an individual’s likelihood of obtaining 
employment  [17].  Employability  entails  a  combination  of 
three synergistic component dimensions—human and social 
capital,  career  identity,  and  personal  adaptability.  Though 
an  individual  is  responsible  for  maintaining  his  or  her 
employability,  existing  HCI  and  CSCW  research  suggests 
that ICTs can support certain aspects of employability [4, 8, 
11, 18] such as human and social capital.  
Human  and  social  capital  both  influences  one’s  ability  to 
identify or realize career opportunities [17]. Human capital 
factors include education and experience, which [24] found 
to be the strongest predictors of career progression. Social 
capital, or the benefits inherent in one’s social network, has 
been  shown  to  be  beneficial  in  job  search  [17,  31]. 
Individuals using social networking sites such as Facebook 
and  LinkedIn  leverage  social  capital  for  job  finding. 
LinkedIn, a professional networking site, recently acquired 
Lynda.com,  a  software-training  site  [25].  This  acquisition 
could help to build human capital, to strengthen employers’ 
abilities  to  find  employees,  and  to  support  career  identity 
[25], which is discussed next.  
Career  identity  relates  to  one’s  career  experiences  and 
aspirations [17]. For example, career identity addresses the 
question  of  “who  am  I?”  or  “who  do  I  want  to  be?”  and 
could be expressed in the form of stories, or narratives. For 
example,  imagine  Zuri  desires  to  be  a  human  resources 
(HR)  manager  at  a  high-tech  software  company.  She 
already  has  a  business  administration  degree  with  a 
specialization in HR. However, she decides to take courses 
in software engineering and management to strengthen her 
chances  of  meeting  her  goals.  This  is  a  sample  career 
narrative.  ICTs  could  support  career  identities  by  helping 
individuals  to  create  these  narratives,  or  address  these 
questions. 
Personal adaptability is important as it allows one to adapt 
to the changing demands of the work environment and job 
market. Though characteristics of personal adaptability are 
intrinsic  to  the  individual  (e.g.,  propensity  to  learn, 
optimism,  self-efficacy  [17]),  ICTs  could  support  this 
dimension  of  employability  as  well.  For  example,  ICTs 
could  help 
realize  career 
opportunities.  Understanding  how  ICTs  such  as  MOOCs 
support or do not support these dimensions of employability 
is an open area of research. 

identify  and 

individuals 

Leveraging MOOCs for Employment 
Early  MOOC  demographic  data  provide  insight  into  the 
types  of  students  that  take  MOOCs.  Results  from  a 
Coursera demographic survey of their first course, Machine 
Learning,  found  that  half  of  the  14,045  respondents  were 

234

SESSION: DIGITAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS 
 

the 

technology 

full-time professionals employed in technology [28]. Forty-
one percent of those identified themselves as “professionals 
currently  working  in  the  software  industry”  and  nine 
percent  as  professionals  working  in  other  areas  of  the 
information 
industry.  Nearly  20%  were 
graduate  students  in  traditional  post-secondary  education 
programs  and  another  11.6%  identified  themselves  as 
undergraduates.  Of  the  remaining  respondents,  3.5%  were 
unemployed  or  employed  outside  of 
technology 
industry;  one  percent  were  enrolled  in  a  K-12  school 
program, and 11.5% identified themselves as “other.” When 
a subset of 11,686 participants was asked why they chose to 
take  the  course,  39%  responded  that  they  were  “curious 
about the topic,” another 30.5% said they were interested in 
the  potential  to  “sharpen  the  skills”  used  in  their  current 
position, and 18% were interested in the course as a means 
to  “position  [themselves]  for  a  better  job”  [28].  Similarly, 
more  than  75%  of  students  taking  Udacity’s  first  course, 
“Artificial Intelligence,” were taking the course to “improve 
their skills relevant for either current or future employment” 
[28].  Based  on  this  data,  the  majority  of  the  learners 
enrolled  were  either  highly  skilled  or  knowledge  workers 
with  greater  job  security.  Though  these  results  were 
informative,  there  was  very  limited  insight  provided  on 
those  that  were  unemployed,  or  employed  outside  of  the 
technology industry.  
Another  study  identified  employment  as  an  important 
motivator for taking MOOCs. In this study, more than half 
of  learners  who  enrolled  in  14  Stanford  Coursera  courses 
(56%)  reported  being  motivated  due  to  job  relevance,  and 
more  than  a  third  (36%)  were  motivated  by  ambitions  to 
change  careers  [27].  However,  this  research  does  not 
specify how effective MOOCs are in supporting these goals 
information 
and  offers  no 
these 
individuals 
face 
financial  constraints.  Understanding 
MOOC learners from this perspective is limited.  

regarding  whether 

that 

these 

are 

populations 

Understanding Broader Populations in MOOCs 
It is unclear how less educated and less affluent populations 
[9,  11,  26]  leverage  MOOCs  and  for  what  reasons  (e.g., 
job-related reasons, financial constraints). Existing research 
suggests 
significantly 
underrepresented in MOOCs [2, 11, 13] and is an open area 
for investigation. 
Ho  et  al.  [20]  analyzed  17  online  courses  offered  on  the 
edX  platform  and  sought  to  understand  how  technologies 
could  facilitate  effective  teaching  and  how  students  learn 
both on-campus and online [20]. Cited in Allen and Rutter 
[2],  Chuang,  a  professor  of  electrical  engineering  and 
computer  science  at  MIT  and  coauthor  of  [20],  states, 
“while  typical  MOOC  registrants  have  a  college  degree 
already,  hundreds  of  thousands  of  our  registrants  do 
not...These  MOOCs  are  reaching  many  nontraditional  and 
underserved communities of student learners, very different 
from 
traditional 
universities”  (pp.  2-3).  If  this  is  true,  are  these  learners 

students  on  campuses  at 

typical 

motivated  to  take  MOOCs  for  employability  or  other 
reasons?  

Research Questions 
To the best of our knowledge, no research to date explores 
the  potential  for  Massive  Open  Online  Courses  to  aid  in 
learners’  employability  or  the  inherent  features  of  the 
platform  to  do  so.  Similarly,  little  research  has  explored 
how  populations  with  limited  education,  employment,  or 
finances leverage MOOCs for reasons of employability. To 
help  narrow  this  gap,  we  explored  three  primary  research 
questions:  

•  How are learners using MOOCs for employment? 
•  Do  these  learners  represent  nontraditional  and 

underserved learners as suggested in [2]? 

•  How  do  MOOC  platforms  support  employability 

and are they effective? 

METHODS 
We  conducted  a  recruitment  survey  and  1-2  hour  semi-
structured interviews to address our research questions. Our 
goal  was  to  recruit  learners  who  were  taking  MOOCs  for 
employment-related reasons in several states that had either 
suffered from the economic decline and/or were known for 
their poor education systems (e.g., CA, IA, IL, IN, MI, OH, 
PA,  NE,  TX)  [1,  39].  We 
lower-income, 
unemployed,  and/or  less  educated  learners  that  could  not 
afford a formal education.  

targeted 

Dataset 
Six  Coursera  courses  were  offered  by  the  University  of 
Michigan  from  Fall  2012  through  Winter  2013,  for  11 
courses overall. In total, 666,407 participants registered for 
these courses; however, only 49.4% (N=329,623) provided 
clickstream  data  (e.g.,  took  quizzes,  watched  videos, 
participated  in  forums).  Clickstream  data  provided  IP 
address  geolocation,  which  were  used 
to  determine 
learners’ geographical location (e.g., country, state, city, zip 
code), and could be linked to email address. We contacted 
participants via email.  

Recruitment Survey 
An  invitation  to  participate  in  a  three-minute  Qualtrics 
survey  was  sent  to  all  IP  addresses  from  our  targeted 
locations. We provided participants with a 1/500 chance to 
win $100 depending on the number of respondents (e.g., for 
every 500 surveys, we would raffle $100 gift card). We sent 
emails to 6,881 learners, and 211 of these bounced.  
We  designed  this  three-minute  survey  to  help  us  access  a 
population  that  could  best  address  our  research  questions. 
The  survey  alone  provided  us  with  some  insights  to  our 
question.  The  recruitment  survey  included  motivations  for 
taking  courses  (see  Figure  1),  which  other  MOOC 
platforms  besides  Coursera  they  had  enrolled  (e.g.,  edX, 
Udacity,  Khan  Academy,  Udemy),  the  number  of  courses 

235

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

 

they  had  enrolled  in  the  past  two  years,  and  demographic 
information. We asked demographic questions such as the 
highest  grade  of  school  completed,  yearly  household 
income and current employment status (e.g., employed for 
wages, self-employed, out of work looking for work, unable 
to work), and zip code. We also asked them for their year of 
birth, race and ethnicity, and to identify their households as 
low, medium, or high income.  
We  asked  open-ended  questions  of  those  who  stated  that 
they were taking the MOOCs for training purposes and/or 
to increase their chances of employment. Examples include, 
“What  specific  training  do  MOOCs  provide?”  and  “What 
type  of  training  do  you  seek  for  your  next  job?  We  also 
asked those individuals about the specific training MOOCs 
provided  that  could  increase  their  chances  of  employment 
and  to  specify  their  definition  of  affordability  (e.g.,  what 
does ‘not being able to afford a formal education’ mean to 
you?).  
 Finally,  we  asked  those  among  our  targeted  population 
whether they would be willing to be interviewed and if so, 
we  asked  for  their  contact  information.  Since  this  was  a 
recruitment survey, we used Qualtric’s survey logic to end 
the  survey  for  individuals  not  motivated  to  take  Coursera 
courses  for  employment-related  reasons,  or  reasons  of 
affordability.  We  were  only  able  to  interview  those 
remaining  participants  that  provided  contact  information 
and were available to interview.  

To increase my chances of 
employment 
To get training for my next job 

For personal development 
To be part of a big community 
of learners 

The course is offered for free 

A friend or colleague 
recommended it 

Motivations 

To see what Massive Open 
Online Courses are all about 
To learn more about the course 
topic 
I prefer learning online 
To help me develop 
professionally in order to 
advance my career 
I cannot afford a formal 
education 
 

Figure 1 - Motivations for enrolling in MOOCs 

Interviews 
We  invited  those  respondents  to  be  interviewed  that 
provided  their  contact  information,  and  indicated  their 
motivations  to  take  MOOCs  were  due  to  affordability 
and/or  employment  related  purposes  (e.g.,  advance  career, 
increase  chances  for  employment,  seek  training  for  next 
job). We contacted participants through email or phone. We 
leveraged  Skype,  Google  Hangout,  or  phone  to  conduct 
face-to-face 
interviews  among 
interviews.  These 
to 
communicate over long distances with the option of using 

those  unavailable 
solutions  offered 

for 
the  ability 

video.  Interviews  lasted  1-2  hours  and  we  compensated 
interview participants with 30 USD for their time. 
We conducted 22 semi-structured interviews to allow new 
concepts and ideas to arise during interviews. We selected a 
qualitative approach, as the study was exploratory in nature. 
The  goal  was  to  gain  a  deeper  understanding  of  learners’ 
MOOC experiences as they related to professional growth, 
development,  training,  and  opportunities  for  employment 
and 
to  assess  whether  and  how  MOOCs  supported 
employability.  We  asked  questions  related  to  participants’ 
prior experience with MOOCs, the courses they took, their 
personal goals for each class, barriers they faced, and what 
they  liked  best  and  least  about  MOOCs.  We  also  tried  to 
learn  more  about  participants’  general  strategies  for 
economic  growth  and  development  and  whether  they 
targeted—or  were  more  willing  to  take—certain  types  of 
courses (e.g., business, technical, foundational).  

Data Analysis 
We used descriptive statistics to analyze survey data. Open-
ended  survey  data  were  individually  coded  and  discussed 
among  the  second  and  third  authors  until  agreement  was 
reached. Internal consistency was not measured statistically 
due to the limited number of responses, though coders held 
discussions until consistency was reached. All one- to two-
hour interviews were digitally recorded and professionally 
transcribed;  we  used  Nvivo  software  for  coding.  Our 
interviews lasted from mid-December 2013 until the end of 
March 2014. 
The  third  author  created  a  codebook  with  34  provisional 
codes  based  on  past  MOOC  research,  employment 
literature,  and  our  research  questions  (e.g.,  motivations, 
course  goals,  skills,  features  used,  received  certifications, 
include  courses  on  resume).  The  second  and  third  authors 
worked closely together to conduct interviews and created 
memos, which summarized results and noted key themes at 
the  completion  of  each  interview.  Provisional  codes  were 
updated  based  on  discussion  until  agreement  was  reached 
on  primary  codes.  This  process  happened  iteratively  until 
the  changes  in  the  codes  stabilized  [19].  Interviews  were 
transcribed and coded. 
To  ensure  transparency  and  agreement  on  coding,  all 
authors met for a four-hour detailed discussion and activity 
to  identify  emerging  patterns  from  the  interview  codes. 
Verbatim interview quotes were used to demonstrate these 
patterns  and 
themes  were  revised  until  group 
consensus  was  reached  [30].  We  report  the  results  of  our 
surveys and interviews next.  

these 

RECRUITMENT SURVEY RESULTS 
We  identified  approximately  70%  of  user  IP  addresses 
using  IP  Geolocation.  Of  the  6,881  surveys  emailed,  4 
failed immediately and an additional 207 surveys bounced, 
leaving 6,670 surveys that were received by participants.  

236

SESSION: DIGITAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS 
 

Out  of  these,  6.6%  (N=441)  of  learners  responded  to  the 
survey.  This  response  rate  does  not  vary  much  from  past 
Coursera response rates. However, we note that the list of 
learners  is  based  on  IP  addresses  and  to  the  extent  that 
learners could use more than one address to access lectures, 
this response rate could be an underestimate.  

for 

taking 

these  courses.  Of 

MOOC Experiences and Motivations 
We asked participants about Massive Open Online Course 
websites  they  enrolled  besides  Coursera,  the  number  of 
courses they had enrolled in in the past two years, and their 
motivations 
the  410 
respondents  answering  these  questions,  a  large  majority 
(N=360)  had  not  taken  any  other  platforms  listed  (e.g., 
Udacity,  Khan  Academy,  edX,  Udemy).  EdX,  Khan 
Academy, and Udacity were the most popular sites used at 
28.3%,  27.8%,  and  26.8%  respectively.  21.5%  of  these 
learners  had  enrolled  in  OpenCourse  Ware.  Of  the  410, 
54.9%  had  taken  3-10  courses,  24.4%  had  taken  1-2  and 
15.1% had taken 11-19 courses total. Participants specified 
interest  in  the  following  subjects  in  open-ended  responses 
for employment purposes: computer science, programming, 
statistics, business and finance.  

these 

for  employment-related 

Learner Motivations 
Across  all  survey  respondents,  the  three  most  common 
motivations for taking MOOCs were: personal development 
84.4%  (N=346),  to  learn  about  a  new  topic,  77.3% 
(N=317), and because the courses were free 65.9% (N=27). 
Only 10.7% (N=44) learners indicated an inability to afford 
a  formal  education,  which  is  similar  to  past  research 
findings [9, 11]. 
Nearly  half  (47%;  N=209)  of  learners  indicated  that  they 
took  MOOCs 
reasons.  This 
percentage  is  slightly  less  than  past  research  exploring 
71,475  learner  motivations  across  14  courses  offered  by 
Stanford  University 
through  Coursera  and  OpenEdX. 
Researchers  found 
learners  were 
that  56%  of 
motivated  to  take  courses  due  to  job  relevance  and  36% 
were motivated by aspirations to change careers [27]. This 
disparity could exist because of the types of courses offered 
or the types of learners enrolled; however additional details 
are needed for a finer-grained comparison.  
We allowed survey respondents to include motivations for 
taking  these  courses  beyond  the  options  we  initially 
provided.  Those  responding  to  the  open  text  entry  cited  a 
wide  variety  of  motivations  that  included  fun  (N=4);  a 
passion for learning (N=15); a desire to prepare for college 
(N=5);  easy  access  to  courses  (N=3);  curiosity  (N=3);  a 
desire  to  refresh  their  knowledge  (N=3);  and  eagerness  to 
use the platforms for social networking (N=2). In fact, those 
learners 
leveraging  MOOCs  for  social 
networking were excited to communicate with people from 
around  the  world.  As  one  learner  responded,  “Yes,  I  love 
the  comments  and  involvement  of  people  from  around  the 
world. Their comments and thought processes enrich me.” 

interested 

in 

Figure 2 Percentages of participants at income levels <20K to 
>100K and whether they self-identify as low-income or not 

 

Overall,  these  motivations  are  similar  to  past  research 
reporting on learner motivations [11, 27] though our results 
offer  some  insight  about  cost  as  a  factor  to  enrolling  in 
these  classes,  which  is  not  discussed  in  the  OLEI  scale 
described in [27]. 

MOOC Employability Potential  
We asked all respondents why MOOCs could or could not 
increase  employment.  Out  of  our  441  participants  that 
responded  to  this  question,  only  10%  (N=44)  gave  valid 
text-based  responses.  Those  that  felt  MOOCs  increased 
their  chances  of  employment  felt  so  because  MOOCs 
provided learners with new knowledge (N=17) and helped 
them prepare to develop new skills (N=14); taking MOOCs 
showed  initiative  to  employers  (N=7)  and  helped  learners 
build confidence (N=3). One survey respondent stated, “It 
will greatly increase my chances of employment because I 
have been a stay home mother for a long time. I can prove 
that  I  am  a  quick  learner  [as]  programming  is  pretty 
difficult.” Those that did not believe MOOCs helped with 
employment  and  provided  valid  responses  (N=3),  felt  that 
way  because  they  did  not  see  employers  recognizing  or 
valuing  the  courses.  Another  learner  asserted,  “Employers 
have no respect for MOOCs.”  

Learner Demographics 
We compared age and education demographics against our 
wider  Coursera  sample  (N=41,744)  to  ensure  these  results 
generalized to our previous findings. Overall, we found that 
a greater proportion of those responding to our survey was 
aged  between  25-34  (44.7%)  and  was  either  in  or  had 
already completed a graduate education (54.8%). This also 
compared to past work, which found a greater proportion of 
respondents,  aged  between  25-34  (43%)  and  in  or  had 
completed graduate education (39.8%), [11,20].  
Due to survey skip patterns to aid in efficient recruitment of 
interviewees and because those surveyed did not respond to 
all questions, various sub-samples exist for the next set of 
demographic-related  questions  asked.  Of 
that 
indicated they were taking MOOCs for employment-related 
reasons (N=209), we asked whether they lived in the U.S., 

those 

237

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

 

(N=137).  Eighty-five  percent 

if  we  could  contact  them  for  a  follow-up  interview,  their 
income  and  highest  level  of  education  completed,  and 
whether they considered their household to be low-income.  
Eighty-eight percent of learners (N=184) answered whether 
they  lived  in  the  U.S.  and  of  those,  89.1%  (N=164) 
responded  yes.  Out  of  those  learners  that  responded  yes, 
approximately  75%  stated  that  they  were  willing  to  be 
interviewed 
(N=117) 
specified  their  household  income.  Of  these,  the  majority 
earned  75K  USD  or  more  (45.3%,  N=53);  34.2%  (N=40) 
earned  over  30K  USD  but  less  than  75K  USD;  the 
remaining 20.5% (N=24) earned $30K or less. 
In  terms  of  income  and  affordability  of  education,  our 
results  demonstrate  that  learners  perceived  our  survey 
question related to the ability to afford a formal education 
very  subjectively.  Figure  2  shows  how  some  people 
consider  themselves  low-income  even  with  an  income  of 
100K  USD  and  above,  while  others  consider  themselves 
high  income  with  an  income  of  less  than  20K  USD  per 
year. One learner provided the following in an open-ended 
response, “While I did not check ‘I cannot afford a formal 
education’ because it is not strictly true, I would not have 
been able to afford to engage in the broad range of subjects 
that I have through MOOCs.” 

the 

Eligible Interview Participants  
As  we  stated  earlier,  only  10.7%  (N=44)  indicated  an 
inability to afford a formal education. Of these, only 29 met 
our  criteria  (e.g.,  by  either  indicating  that  they  were 
motivated to take MOOCs for employment-related reasons 
or  were  unable  to  afford  to  pursue  a  formal  education), 
agreed to be interviewed, and provided contact information. 
From 
final  pool,  we  successfully  selected  22 
participants within our allotted time who were living in the 
United States—10 female and 12 male participants from the 
following U.S. states (CA, IA, IL, MI, OH, PA, NE, TX). 
Participants came from a wide range of household incomes 
and  held  a  number  of  vastly  different  occupations  (e.g., 
technical  writer,  homemaker,  screen  writer,  financial 
analyst,  researchers,  IT  specialist,  and  software  and  web 
developers).  Three  learners  were  unemployed  and  out  of 
work looking for work and two were students. Though there 
are no specific guidelines for how SES should be measured, 
widely  accepted  definitions  combine  family 
income, 
education,  and  occupational  status  [21].  Given  that  the 
majority  of  learners  taking  MOOCs  generally  have  high 
income  and  are  well  educated  and  employed,  for  the 
purpose of this study, low SES learners were classified as 
learners with less than a bachelor’s degree who were either 
unemployed, or had a combined household income of less 
than  50K  USD.  Those  reporting  a  total  household  income 
of less than 50K but greater than 30K USD had at least one 
additional  adult  household  member.  Given  these  criteria, 
we 
low 
socioeconomic status (SES). We focused on those learners 
with  less  than  a  bachelor’s  degree.  In  the  U.S.,  as  of 

ten  participants 

as  being  of 

classified 

participants’ 

January  2015,  the  unemployment  rate  of  those  with  a 
bachelor’s  degree  and  higher  was  2.8%  while  those  with 
less than a bachelor’s degree had an unemployment rate of 
19.1%  [38].  We  did  not  notice  many  differences  between 
these 
higher  SES 
participants; any distinction about these participants will be 
highlighted in the interview results that follow. We do wish 
to call attention to the small number of learners that fell into 
this category despite our efforts to recruit individuals from 
these populations. 

responses 

versus 

INTERVIEW RESULTS 
In  this  section,  we  discuss  four  different  categories  of 
learners  and  distinct  learner  motivations,  learners’  general 
perceptions  about  MOOCs,  and  their  effectiveness  in 
helping  with  employment.  We  then  explore  low  SES 
learners’ social insights regarding their MOOC experiences 
as  they  related  to  employment.  Next,  we  provide  a 
summary  of  our  findings.  Finally,  we  consider  concrete 
design implications that could lead to MOOC platforms that 
better  support  those  who  are  using  MOOCs  for  enhanced 
employability.  

Four Categories of Learners and MOOC Achievements 
We  used  our  interview  data  to  categorize  learners  taking 
MOOCs  for  employment-related  reasons.  We  created  an 
affinity  diagram  capturing  participant  responses  to  two 
interview questions: “Can you tell me a little about why you 
decided to take the course?” and “How has participating in 
MOOCs  helped  you  in  terms  of  ‘getting  ahead?’”  Four 
categories of learners emerged from this exercise. In order 
of  frequency,  it  was  1)  learners  looking  for  a  refresher  in 
their current area of work followed by 2) those looking to 
be  promoted  in  their  current  field/job,  3)  learners  looking 
for new positions in their current fields or jobs; and 4) those 
transitioning  to  new  fields.  Several  respondents  fell  into 
multiple  categories.  Understanding  the  four  categories  of 
learners  clarifies  what  groups  MOOCs  could  target  in  the 
future as they relate to employment and employability and 
how best to support learners’ career identities. 
Interestingly, all of our participants earned a certificate for 
one or more of the courses they took. Our interview results 
indicate  that  nine  (N=9)  of  our  participants’  earned  a 
certificate  of  distinction,  with  five  of  these  learners  being 
low SES  learners  (out  of ten). This supports past research 
that  found  learners  who  stated  an  inability  to  afford  a 
formal education had a statistically significant higher rate of 
completing  courses  with  certificates  of  distinction  than 
those  that  did  not  indicate  an  inability  to  afford  a  formal 
education 
their 
certificates  of  distinction  as  an  award—it  was  not 
necessarily  a  priority.  On  the  other  hand,  higher  SES 
learners  responded,  “I  do  want  to  complete  courses  and 
assignments along with the free certificate to show for it” 
(P0405)  and  “I  felt  that  it  would  help  legitimize/add 
credence  to  the  fact  that  I  had  taken  the  course.  MOOCs 

learners  described 

[11].  Low  SES 

238

SESSION: DIGITAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS 
 

are  still  not  well  known/well  respected  compared  to 
standard education” (P1223).  

Opportunities and Barriers for Employment  
We  report  our  interviewees’  general  perceptions  about 
whether  MOOCs  play  a  role  in  economic  mobility  in  the 
U.S.  We  next  discuss  whether  learners  felt  that  MOOCs 
would  increase  their  chances  of  employment.  We  then 
discuss  responses  for  what  types  of  courses  learners  felt 
they  needed  for  employment,  what  type  of  training  they 
were looking to obtain for their next job, and how MOOCs 
should  be 
for 
employment  overall.  Finally,  we  conclude  with  details  on 
how  the  learners  experienced  employment  benefits  as  a 
result of taking MOOCs.  

increase  opportunities 

improved 

to 

General Perceptions of MOOCs and Employability  
Like  our  survey  results,  our  interviewees  provided  mixed 
responses  on  whether  MOOCs  play  a  role  in  economic 
mobility  in  the  U.S.  An  overwhelming  majority  was 
optimistic  (N=14);  three  (N=3)  felt  pessimistic  about 
MOOCs;  another  three  were  mixed  in  their  views  (N=3), 
and two (N=2) stated that it was too early to tell.  
Those  optimistic  about  MOOCs  felt  they  were  beneficial 
for introducing people to new topics and improving skills in 
their current lines of work, and for their capacity to provide 
equal  opportunities  for  individuals  otherwise  unable  to 
afford  education.  For  example,  “MOOCs  allow  for  more 
equality  in  the  classes  (high  school  kids  and  older  adults 
can all take courses)”-P02272; P03022 stated, “It can help 
more people be self starters or business owners themselves 
if they can learn the right skills from MOOCs.”  
Those pessimistic about MOOCs made comments about the 
lack  of  credentialing.  For  example,  P02272  stated,  “You 
aren’t  going  to  succeed  in  corporate  America  without  an 
accredited  degree.”  P01211  was  “not  sure  how  much 
recognition there is for MOOCs for the credential in itself,” 
and P0125 stated, “It’s just a few people that are gonna be 
able to make this work, because it’s not easy and you need 
to pay the bills--you need to pay your rent; and you have a 
family life, you have a broken marriage. Or you have kids 
that you need to take care of.”  

their  knowledge,  skills,  and  experience 

Advertising MOOCs for Employment 
To  understand  whether  interviewees  felt  that  MOOCs 
would  increase  their  chances  of  employment,  we  asked 
them  if  they  included  the  courses  taken  on  their  resumes. 
Resumes  provide  a  way  for  those  seeking  employment  to 
advertise 
to 
employers. Six participants (P0304, P03051, P0313, P0327, 
P0125,  P03022)  said  that  MOOCs  made  them  more 
employable 
employment 
opportunities.  In  fact,  these individuals  put  at  least  one  or 
more  MOOCs  they  had  taken  on  their  resumes.  However, 
eight of the 22 participants were not actively looking for a 
job and therefore had not put these classes on their resumes. 

and  more 

eligible 

for 

Though seven of the remaining 14 learners interviewed did 
not  put  MOOCs  on  their  resumes,  they  said  they  would 
consider  doing  so  in  the  future.  Only  one  participant, 
P1226-2,  stated  that  he  would  never  put  these  courses  on 
his  resume.  He  had  some  reservations  about  how  online 
education  was  perceived  by  employers;  we  discuss  this 
participant  later:  “I  doubt  that  any  serious  software 
company, for example, will open [their] arms [if you] go to 
them  and  then  say,  ‘Hey,  I  completed  [a]  Coursera 
Algorithm class, will [you] give me a job?”  

Opportunities to Improve Employability with MOOCs 
While our survey results suggested that most learners were 
interested  in  learning  about  subjects  such  as  computer 
science,  programming,  statistics,  business  and  finance, 
participants  in  our  interviews  had  a  hard  time  identifying 
which  courses  were  needed  to  help  them  become  more 
“employable”.  Most  participants  (N=13)  had  taken  these 
types  of  courses  (e.g.,  computer  science,  programming, 
statistics,  business  and  finance).  Five  participants  listed 
finance  and  statistics  as  specific  courses  they  found  to  be 
valuable.  One  participant  mentioned  soft  skills  such  as 
communication and those basic skills such as keyboarding 
would be valuable for some of her colleagues (though she 
never  discussed  MOOCs  with  them).  P03022  and  P01212 
stated that project-based courses leading to tangible results 
(e.g.,  a  portfolio)  would  be  valuable  as  there  is  a  need  to 
demonstrate skills needed when transitioning to new jobs.  
Toward  the  end  of  the  interview,  we  asked  interviewees 
what,  if  anything,  they  would  change  about  MOOCs  to 
better support their employment. In total, six learners said 
“nothing”;  eleven  gave  feedback  non-specific  to  MOOCs 
(e.g., flexible courses and more course material or feedback 
specific  to  certain  courses).  Two  of  the  remaining  five 
learners would add improved networking features; the other 
three  would  add  more  technology-related  courses  and 
company-sponsored  MOOCs  versus  those  sponsored  by  a 
university.  In  terms  of  improved  networking  features, 
P03051  stated:  “I  think  that's  the  biggest  thing  that's 
missing from the online experience is the opportunity to sit 
down  and  maybe  work  on  projects  together.”  P0114 
compared  taking  MOOCs  with  ‘brick  and  mortar’  courses 
and discussed how he was unable to talk to the professor to 
learn  more  about  the  professor’s  career  path:  “...so  it's 
definitely the disconnect between the regular [classes and] 
between…online courses that are free. …Being able to talk 
to a professor and say, ‘Where did you come from?’ That's 
like a personal thing obviously...” 

Employment Benefits Achieved in MOOCs 
Finally, we conclude with details on how MOOC learners 
have  benefited  in  terms  of  employment.  Thirteen  learners 
stated 
their  current 
positions. Only three of the 22, however, gave affirmative 
responses  to  whether  MOOCs  helped  them  shift  to  a  new 
job,  and  when  asked  to  explain,  they  said  they  were  only 

that  MOOCs  were  beneficial 

in 

239

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

 

their 

hopeful  and  still  considering  the  benefits  of  taking  these 
courses. In terms of finding new employment, participants’ 
explanations  were  not  consistent  with 
initial 
(affirmative) responses. For example, P0327 and P405 were 
only  hopeful:  “Actually  no,  but  I  fully  expect  they  will  as 
my job search intensifies in the near future,” (P3027) and 
“Not officially, but I'm hopeful. I won't be able to achieve 
my  goals  by  taking  just  two  or  three  courses.  I  need  the 
courses to develop competencies and achievements that will 
help me make the shift. That is just going to take some time, 
and I feel the limiting factor is on me being able to take the 
courses  and  learn  it,”  (P0405).  P12261  indicated  that  he 
was  “still  working  on  those  possibilities.”  Overall,  we 
received  positive  responses  about  whether  participants 
believed MOOCs had tangible benefits in their current jobs. 
Tangible  benefits  included  enhanced  credibility,  a  greater 
understanding  of  how  things  worked  in  their  existing 
companies, and an improvement in current skillsets on the 
job (e.g., statistics, entrepreneurial skills).  

to  explore  whether 

Social Insights from Low SES Learners 
One  of  our  goals  was 
learners 
represented non-traditional or underserved learners. Due to 
the  small  number  of  participants,  we  wanted  to  provide 
social  insights  into  low  SES  learners’  experiences  with 
MOOCs  regarding  employment.  Interestingly,  four  out  of 
the  ten  low  SES  learners  did  not  indicate  a  motivation  to 
take  MOOCs  for  employment  (P0302-1,  P0228,  P02272, 
P0114). These learners enrolled in MOOCs primarily due to 
financial  constraints—e.g.,  an  inability  to  afford  a  formal 
education.  We  talk  about  these  learners  next.  We  then 
discuss insights from these few low SES learners motivated 
to take MOOCs for employment-related reasons. 

is  somewhat  subjective  and  open 

Education and Affordability 
As stated earlier, we suspected that measuring one’s ability 
to  “afford”  an  education  alone  might  not  be  reliable  since 
the  concept 
for 
interpretation.  The  term  ‘affordability’  in  relationship  to 
education could be defined by time or financial constraints. 
Therefore,  we  asked  interview  participants  to  clarify  what 
the  term  meant  to  them.  Fourteen  (N=14)  participants 
indicated  an  inability  to  afford  a  formal  education  for  at 
least  one  motivation  for  enrolling  in  MOOCs.  More  than 
half  of  these  participants  (N=8)  indicated  that  they  were 
referring to the financial cost of an education (5 low SES; 3 
high  SES);  two  were  referring  to  affordability  in  terms  of 
time  (both  high  SES),  and  the  remaining  participants  (all 
low  SES)  said  they  were  referring  to  other,  perhaps  more 
nuanced,  reasons.  For  example,  according  to  P12262  (low 
SES  with  a  trade/technical/vocational  degree),  “Family 
issues  created  the  first  impediment  [to  completing  his 
bachelor’s  degree],  and  then  educational  costs  were  the 
second barrier.”  

240

the  barriers 

Perceived Employment Barriers and other Limitations 
low  SES 
Finally,  we  discuss  some  of 
participants  perceived  and  experienced  when 
taking 
MOOCs  for  employment-related  reasons.  Only  one  of  our 
low  SES  learners  (P02272)  mentioned  issues  around 
MOOCs  and  their  lack  of  accreditation.  A  lack  of 
accreditation was more of a concern for high SES learners. 
P1226-2  (a  low  SES  learner  that  was  mentioned  earlier) 
perceived that the reputation of online education had been 
“tarnished” by for-profit universities, and as a result would 
never  include  MOOCs  on  his  resume.  P0401  (low  SES), 
who  was  out  of  work  and  looking  for  work  felt  that 
MOOCs could only help those who are already employed. 
P03021 (low SES) had not included MOOCs on his resume 
because he felt that MOOCs were too informal. He stated, 
“If  I  did  pay…then  I'd  be  more  likely  to  list  it  'cause  it 
seems  more  formal.”  On  the  other  hand,  P03051,  another 
low SES participant began adding MOOCs to his resume as 
he felt it was a sign of qualification for a particular position. 
Other  barriers  mentioned  included:  a  lack  of  overall 
technical  literacy  (e.g.,  difficult  for  some  to  leverage  the 
platform) and the fact that taking these courses does not or 
cannot  replace  actual  experience.  These  social  insights 
provide  details  into  what  some  underserved  learners  may 
face  when  taking  MOOCs  though  these  learners  are  often 
underrepresented in these platforms [9, 11] and represented 
slightly less than half of our participants (N=10).  

DISCUSSION AND DESIGN IMPLICATIONS 
Nearly  half  of  our  learners  reported  taking  MOOCs  for 
employment related reasons; past research found that 56% 
of their learners did so [27]. Unfortunately, very few of our 
low SES learners were leveraging MOOCs for employment. 
Nevertheless, the goal of this work is to understand if and 
how  MOOCs  support  employability  among  those  who  do 
take  MOOCs  for  employment-related  reasons.  We  use  the 
three dimensions of employability to frame our discussion. 

Human and Social Capital 
At  the  time  of  the  interviews,  MOOC  platforms  such  as 
Coursera  supported  the  addition  of  accomplishments  to 
LinkedIn  profiles  [6],  which  could  help  employers  find 
qualified  employees.  However,  few  learners  made  use  of 
this feature. 
Interviewees spoke of the benefits of courses as they could 
enhance  their  credibility  at  work,  improve  their  job  skills, 
introduce  them  to  new  topics,  and  improve  access  to 
knowledge  at  any  time,  which  support  the  need  for 
additional human and social capital within the platform. For 
example,  participants  expressed  interest  and  value  from 
computer  science,  programming,  statistics,  business  and 
finance  courses  in  our  surveys.  However,  some  of  our 
interviewees 
from 
MOOCs such as more project-based courses and the ability 
to interact with others. Learners could have benefited from 
peer discussion systems like Kulkarni’s Talkabout [29].  

tangible  benefits 

requested  more 

SESSION: DIGITAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS 
 

to  present 

find  ways 

Future CSCW research should investigate ways to connect 
learners  to  external  projects  to  further  strengthen  human 
and  social  capital,  or 
these 
opportunities to learners and offer incentives for those who 
do  so.  For  example,  MOOCs  can  connect  learners  to 
projects from non-profits to provide learners with tangible 
experiences (e.g., website development, review and creation 
of  business  plans).  These  non-profits  could  vouch  for  the 
participants’ work, which could lead to employment. This is 
similar to the Coursolve initiative, which harnesses MOOC 
learners’ talents for real-world problem solving [34].  

for 

support 

showed 

Career Identity 
As  mentioned  earlier,  career  identity  is  described  as  a 
person’s narrative to the questions “who am I?” and “who 
do  I  want  to  be?”  Overall,  neither  data  from  surveys  nor 
interviews 
this  dimension  of 
employability.  In  fact,  our  interview  results  and  derived 
learner categories suggest a need for career identity support.  
One  participant  discussed  the  benefits  of  speaking  with 
professors  and  asking  questions  face-to-face  in  traditional 
classrooms,  which  is  not  possible  within  MOOCs.  If 
MOOCs provided a way for individuals to see, or visualize 
their  peers’  and/or  professors’  paths  to  success,  this  could 
help to broaden participants’ educational experiences and to 
support their career identities. Participant 12261’s statement 
articulates this sentiment: “I think [I] would of like to have 
known, that... what you got your Bachelor's degree in didn't 
necessarily  have  to  be  what  you  actually  did  for  a  living. 
That's  something  that  was  a  misconception  for  me.  That's 
why it took me five years to graduate.” 
When asked to describe ways to improve MOOCs, another 
participant  (P0114)  indicated,  “It's  really  easy  to  talk  to 
professors, like, ‘How did get to where you are? How did 
you know that you like this? What can you do with this kind 
of  stuff?’  So  it's  definitely  the  disconnect  between  the 
regular, between courses like this, like online courses that 
are free, with being able to talk to a professor and say like, 
‘Where  did  you  come  from?’  That's  like  a  personal  thing 
obviously, mostly. But yeah that'd have been nice.” 
Understanding  why  an  engineering  manager  who  studied 
computer  science  is  now  taking  online  entrepreneurship 
courses  might  motivate  a  broader  learning  experience  in 
MOOCs,  especially  for  learners  looking  for  new  positions 
in  their  current  jobs.  Similarly,  knowing  that  a  business 
professor  started  with  an  English  degree  might  encourage 
students  to  further  explore  a  variety  of  their  own  interests 
and  support  learners  transitioning  to  new  fields.  Many 
individuals,  especially  those  who  are  less  educated  and 
have lower incomes may not have access or exposure to a 
wide range of fields of study as they often have no ties to 
those who may be more educated or affluent [10].  
Future  MOOC  platforms  could  show  learner  profiles  and 
career paths. Learners could choose to make their goals and 
paths  visible  to  others  and  serve  as  role  models.  Role 

241

modeling could help to provide structure and guidance for 
all  learners.  Specifically,  this  could  guide  those  learners 
motivated by employment to focus their course selection on 
those  most  relevant  to  their  career  or  educational  goals. 
CSCW  and  HCI  researchers  and  designers  are  well 
positioned to make this concept a reality. 

Personal Adaptability 
Personal adaptability is related to one’s ability to meet the 
demands of a given situation—in this case, changing work 
demands  or  environments.  Learners  in  MOOCs  are  more 
likely to be intrinsically adaptable or have a strong internal 
locus of control as they have already taken the initiative to 
take these courses for various reasons (e.g., jobs, training, 
professional development, have a passion for learning). In 
addition, we found that all participants earned at least one 
certificate and nine (N=9) earned at least one certificate of 
distinction.  
However, in terms of career identity, not all learners had a 
clear  direction  or  path  toward  a  specific  career.  MOOCs 
could  support  personal  adaptability  by  helping  learners 
understand  which  skills  may  be  needed  for  current  and 
future job markets. MOOC platforms have data that could 
help identify trends in terms of courses taken, activities in 
these  courses,  certificates  earned,  or  which  tracks  learners 
have taken (e.g., Signature Tracks in Coursera). To a new 
learner  using  Coursera  for  employment,  this  could  signal 
market  demands  or  changes  and  how  other  learners  are 
adapting to these signals. 

the  reputation  of  online 

External Factors 
While we framed our findings using the three dimensions of 
employability as stated by [17], several reoccurring results 
do  not  fit  within  these  dimensions.  For  example,  since 
MOOCs  offer  no  official  certification,  many  participants 
perceived that employers would not recognize MOOCs. In 
another  case, 
learning  was 
perceived a limitation.  
As stated earlier, individuals are responsible for their own 
employability.  However,  whether  external  factors  such  as 
employer  attitudes  toward  individuals  who  take  MOOCs 
versus  obtain  an  education  from  an  accredited  university 
matters,  is  beyond  our  learners’  control.  Our  low  SES 
learners 
the 
framework  and 
likely  self-imposed  (e.g., 
perceived reputation of online learning, low self-efficacy as 
a  result  of  being  unemployed,  and  belief  that  paying  for 
classes implies formality and adds value to a resume).  
Evans,  Nathan  and  Simmonds  acknowledge  that  external 
factors such as employer perceptions and job demands exist 
in their assessment of the dimensions of employability [14]. 
We  acknowledge  this  in  our  evaluation  of  MOOCs  and 
employability  as  our  interviewees  did  raise  employer 
perception of MOOCs as a limitation to employment. What 
is  promising  is  that  the  Research  Triangle  Institute  (RTI) 

identified  other  factors  not 

these  were 

included 

in 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

 

and Duke University found in a survey of 398 employers in 
North  Carolina  that  31%  of  respondents  had  heard  of 
MOOCs  [35].  These  respondents  consisted  of  human 
resources  staff  that  represented  the  companies.  Though 
most employers had not heard of MOOCs at the time, most 
companies  were  receptive  to  the  possibility  of  using 
MOOCs in hiring and recruiting decisions.  
Nevertheless, our results show a need to support perceived 
external  barriers  primarily  from  low  SES  learners.  This 
could  be  addressed  if  MOOC  platforms  added  support  for 
the  career 
identity  and  social  capital  dimensions  of 
employability and likely benefit all learners. 

SUMMARY OF FINDINGS 
In  summary,  our  results  show  that  learners  using  MOOCs 
for  employment  can  be  categorized  as  follows:  learners 
looking  for  a  refresher  in  their  current  area  of  work; 
learners looking to be promoted in their current field or job; 
learners looking for new positions in their current fields or 
jobs; and those transitioning to new fields. Our survey and 
interview  results  show  that  learners  use  MOOCs  for 
employment  for  the  following  benefits:  easy  to  access 
resources;  to  improve  their  skills  in  their  current  lines  of 
work; to enhance their credibility; and to better understand 
the  operations  of  their  existing  workplace.  These  findings 
address our first research question. 
Our  second  research  question  aimed  to  identify  whether 
these  learners  represented  nontraditional  and  underserved 
learners.  To  recruit  these  learners,  we  designed  a  survey 
asking  specific  questions  related  to  socioeconomic  status 
(e.g., household income, employment status, and education) 
and  recruited  from  areas  that  had  either  suffered  from  the 
economic  decline  and/or  were  known  for  their  poor 
education systems [1, 39]. Despite targeting lower-income, 
unemployed,  and  less  educated  learners  that  could  not 
afford  a  formal  education,  very  few  learners  represented 
this  population.  This  is  consistent  with  past  research  that 
found  that  MOOCs  are  not  reaching  underprivileged 
populations 
[15].  Nevertheless,  we  contribute  social 
insights and barriers from our low SES participants such as 
educational  costs  and  affordability,  obligations  to  family, 
issues  of  technical  literacy,  and  perceived  barriers  that  if 
addressed, could benefit these populations in the future. 
Finally,  our  results  show  that  MOOCs  support  a  partial 
dimension of employability—human capital, which was no 
surprise.  MOOCs  provide  some  support  for  social  capital, 
which should be explored further and very little support for 
career  identity  and  personal  adaptability.  We  contribute 
design  implications  to  help  connect  learners  to  tangible 
projects.  This  could  help  learners  demonstrate  the  skills 
learned  through  MOOCs  to  support  human  and  social 
capital.  We  also  suggest  implications  for  MOOCs  to 
provide  guidance  for  learners  by  making  other  learners’ 
career  goals  visible  to  support  career  identity.  To  support 
personal  adaptability,  we  suggest  helping  learners  to 

identify trends in learning based on course enrollment and 
activity.  These  suggestions  and  our  method  of  using 
employability as a framework for ICT evaluation supports a 
research agenda that guides the evaluation and development 
of ICTs to support employability in the future.  

for 

employment. 

It 

could 

also 

if  one  of 

individuals.  However, 

Limitations 
We  acknowledge  the  limitations  of  our  study,  beginning 
with  our  small  interview  participant  pool.  We  interviewed 
participants  opting  to  be  interviewed  and  those  that 
responded to our invitations. Our recruiting method limited 
our  ability  to  interview  learners  that  may  have  been  low 
SES,  or  unemployed  and  unavailable  due  to  time  or  other 
circumstances.  This  small  number  is  telling  and  could 
signal  just  how  little  this  demographic  actually  uses 
MOOCs 
suggest 
inefficiencies  in  the  ways  MOOCs  have  been  advertised. 
MOOCs  have  primarily  been  advertised  in  publication 
venues somewhat limited to those well-educated and often 
wealthier 
the  key 
advantages  of  MOOCs  is  the  access  they  provide  to  less 
educated and less wealthy populations, then advertising or 
promoting  these  educational  and  employment  resources  to 
these  populations  is  a  key  area  to  focus  in  the  future  as 
suggested  in  [36].  Yet,  there  is  a  limitation  based  on 
availability—e.g.,  individuals  from  these  populations  may 
not  have  enough  time,  as  indicated  by  some  of  our 
interviewees, to take MOOCs and/or partake in our study. 
Next,  the  majority  of  learners  recruited  had  only  taken 
MOOCs  on 
the 
implications  should  generalize  to  other  MOOC  platforms. 
Finally,  our  interviewees  were  confined  to  learners  in  the 
U.S.  and  from  only  eight  states.  This  was  intentional;  an 
understanding  of  these  perspectives  was  missing  from  the 
current  literature.  Because  a  large  number  of  MOOC 
learners  come 
from  both  developed  countries  and 
developing countries, the barriers learners reported in these 
results  did  not  include  issues  that  persist  in  developing 
countries such as limited Internet connectivity. However, a 
recent analysis of Coursera data found that career benefits 
were more likely to be reported by people from developing 
countries  with 
lower 
socioeconomic status [40]. Understanding differences in the 
outcomes  of  these  two  populations  is  an  open  area  for 
future research.  

the  Coursera  platform;  however, 

lower 

levels  of  education  and 

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
We present the results of a study to understand if and how 
MOOCs  could  support  employment.  To  address  this 
question, we surveyed 441 MOOC learners and interviewed 
22  MOOC  learners  motivated  to  take  courses  for  reasons 
related  to  financial  limitations  and/or  reasons  related  to 
employment.  Overall,  MOOCs  support  a  level  of  human 
capital  but  offer  little  support  for  social  capital,  career 
identity  or  personal  adaptability.  We  found  that  though 
most of our participants were optimistic about the potential 

242

SESSION: DIGITAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS 
 

for  MOOCs  to  improve  their  employability,  in  general, 
there  was  very  limited  tangible  evidence  of  employment 
mobility  from  taking  MOOCs.  We  contribute  design 
implications  to  help  connect  learners  to  tangible  projects 
that could help them demonstrate the skills learned through 
MOOCs  to  support  human  and  social  capital;  provide 
guidance for learners by making other learners’ career goals 
visible  to  support  career  identity;  and  help  learners  to  see 
trends  in  learning  based  on  course  enrollment  to  support 
personal 
additional 
contributions:  

adaptability.  We 

also  make 

•  We build upon prior MOOC research [2, 9, 11, 20, 
27, 28, 32, 33] by providing detailed insights into 
how  learners  motivated  by  employment-related 
reasons  perform  in  these  courses  and  leverage 
resources. 

field/job; 

•  We provide deeper insight into learners motivated 
to  take  MOOCs  for  job-related  reasons.  We 
suggest  the  following  categorizations  for  these 
learners:  learners  that  transition  to  new  fields; 
learners  that  are  looking  to  be  promoted  in  their 
current 
for  new 
positions  in  their  current  fields  or  jobs;  and 
learners looking for a refresher in their current area 
of work. This extends motivations proposed in the 
Online  Learning  Enrollment  Intentions  (OLEI) 
scale [27] and allows us to better understand how 
best to support the career identity dimension based 
on these learner categories. 

learners 

looking 

•  We find that very few low SES learners are using 
MOOCs  for  employment  related  reasons.  We 
provide some insight into barriers that the few low 
SES  learners  may  face  when  taking  MOOCs  for 
employment related reasons. We were only able to 
recruit  a  small  number  of  these  learners,  which 
makes it difficult to generalize these results. 

to 

like 

better 

learners 

leveraging  MOOCs 

•  Finally, we contribute concrete design implications 
support 

for  MOOC 
platforms 
employability in the future. 
to  deepen  our 
In  our  future  work,  we  would 
understanding  of 
for 
employment and begin modeling their behaviors. If we can 
detect  these  learners  and  leverage  their  stated  goals,  we 
could  provide  interventions  that  improve  their  overall 
experience and impact MOOCs could play in their careers.  
We  would  also  like  to  increase  MOOC  enrollment  of  low 
SES  and  less  traditional  learners.  To  do  so,  we  need 
improved  methods  of  identifying  these  learners  [26].  We 
believe  expanding  our  research  to  investigate  learners  in 
developing regions could yield more promising results and 
insight [5, 7]. We would also like to extend existing CSCW 
and  HCI  research  that  aims  to  understand  and  address  the 
needs of underrepresented populations for new technologies 

[8,  10,  12,  26].  We  see  MOOCs  as  open  canvases  for 
learners at any education level and with any socioeconomic 
background  to  collaborate,  innovate,  grow  and  improve 
their chances of employability.  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors would like to thank the Bill and Melinda Gates 
Foundation for funding this work and our participants. We 
also  thank  Stephanie  Teasley,  Christopher  Brooks,  Lionel 
Robert,  our  reviewers,  U  of  M’s  CSCAR,  and  those  who 
provided us with preliminary feedback on our work. 

REFERENCES 
1.  24/7 Wall St. (2012, November 27). The best and worst 
run  states  in  America:  A  survey  of  all  50.  Retrieved 
from, http://goo.gl/ngwQqO. 

2.  Kimberly  Allen  and  Michael  P.  Rutter.  (2014,  January 
21). MIT and Harvard release working papers on open 
online courses. MIT media relations.  

3.  Archambault,  A.  &  Jonathan  Grudin.  (2012).  A 
longitudinal  study  of  Facebook,  LinkedIn,  &  Twitter 
use. In Proc. CHI 2012. 

4.  Moira Burke and Robert Kraut. (2013). Using Facebook 
after  losing  a  job:  differential  benefits  of  strong  and 
weak ties. CSCW 2013. 

5.  Nathan M. Castillo, Jinsol Lee, Fatima T. Zahra, Daniel 
A.  Wagner.  (2015).  MOOCS  for  development:  Trends, 
challenges, and opportunities. Information Technologies 
& International Development, 11(2), 35–42. 

6.  Coursera Blog. (2013). Add Coursera accomplishments 
from, 

profile.  Retrieved 

LinkedIn 

your 

to 
http://goo.gl/P1UII1. 

7.  Edward Cutrell, Jacki O’Neill, Srinath Bala, B. Nitish, 

Andrew Cross, Nakull Gupta, Viraj Kumar, William 
Thies. (2015). Blended learning in Indian colleges with 
massively empowered classroom. In 2nd ACM 
Conference on Learning @ Scale.  

8.  Tawanna R. Dillahunt and Amy R. Malone. 2015. The 
promise of the sharing economy among disadvantaged 
communities. In CHI 2015, pp. 2285-2294. 

9.  Tawanna Dillahunt, Bingxin Chen, Stephanie Teasley. 
2014. Model Thinking: demographics and performance 
of MOOC students unable to afford a formal education. 
Learning @ Scale Work in Progress, ACM 2014. 

10. Tawanna  Dillahunt.  (2014).  Fostering  social  capital  in 
economically  distressed  communities.  In  CHI’14,  pp. 
531-540. 

11. Tawanna  Dillahunt,  Zengguang 

(Brian)  Wang, 
Stephanie  Teasley.  2014.  Democratizing  higher 
education:  Exploring  MOOC  use  among  those  who 
cannot afford a formal education. In IRRODL.  

12. Tawanna Dillahunt and Jennifer Mankoff. 2011. In the 
dark, out in the cold. XRDS 17, 4 (June 2011). pp.39-41. 

243

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

 

13. Ezeikal  J.  Emanuel.  (2013,  November  21).  Online 
education: MOOCs taken by educated few. Nature 503, 
342. 

14. Chris  Evans,  Max  Nathan,  David  Simmonds.  (1999). 
Employability through Work Centre for Local Economic 
Strategies, 1 George Leigh Street, Manchester M4 5DL. 
15. Suzannah Evans and Karen McIntyre. 2015. MOOCs in 
the  humanities:  Can 
reach  underprivileged 
students?  Convergence:  The  International  Journal  of 
Research into New Media Technologies. 

they 

16. Thomas  Friedman. 

(2013).  Revolution  hits 
universities. The New York Times, 27 January, SR1. 

the 

17. Mel  Fugate,  Angelo  J.  Kinicki,  &  Blake  E.  Ashforth 
(2004).  Employability:  A  psycho-social  construct,  its 
dimensions,  and  applications.  Journal  of  Vocational 
Behavior, 65, 14–38.  

18. Marria  Garrido, 

Joe  Sullivan,  Andrew  Gordon. 
Understanding the links between ICT skills training and 
employability:  An  analytical  framework.  Information 
Technologies & International Development ITID, vol. 8, 
pp. 17-32, 2012. 

19. Barney G. Glaser and Anselm L. Strauss: The Discovery 
of Grounded Theory. Strategies for Qualitative Research 
(1967). 

20. Andrew  Dean  Ho,  Justin  Reich,  Sergiy  O.  Nesterko, 
Daniel Thomas Seaton, Tommy Mullaney , Jim Waldo, 
Isaac  Chuang.  (2014).  HarvardX  and  MITx:  The  first 
year  of  open  online  courses  (HarvardX  and  MITx 
Working Paper No. 1).  

21.  Improving  the  measurement  of  socioeconomic  status 
for  the  national  assessment  of  educational  progress:  A 
theoretical 
the 
national  center  for  education  statistics.  ERIC  Number: 
ED542101, 
from 
http://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED542101. 

foundation—recommendations 

Retrieved 

2012. 

to 

Nov. 

22. Panagiotis  G.  Ipeirotis.  (2010).  Analyzing  the  Amazon 
Mechanical Turk Marketplace. XRDS: Crossroads, The 
ACM  Magazine  for  Students  17(2)  pp.  16-21.  New 
York, NY: ACM. 

23. Benjamin  Jen,  Jashanjit  Kaur,  Jonathan  De  Heus, 
Tawanna  R.  Dillahunt.  (2014).  Analyzing  employment 
technologies  for  economically  distressed  individuals. 
Proc. CHI EA ’14: 1945-1950. 

24. Timothy A. Judge, Daniel M. Cable, John W. Boudreau, 
& Robert D. Bretz (1995). An empirical investigation of 
the  predictors  of  executive  career  success.  Personnel 
Psychology, 48, 485-519. 

25. Matt Kapko. (April 16, 2015). Why LinkedIn spent big 

on Lynda.com, CIO, http://tinyurl.com/px8qa27. 

26. Anna  Kasunic,  Jessica  Hammer,  Amy  Ogan.  Cultural 
relevance  in  MOOCs:  Asking  about  socioeconomic 
context. Learning @ Scale 2015, pp. 389-392. 

27. René F. Kizilcec, Emily Schneider. Motivation as a lens 
to  understand  online  learners:  Towards  data-driven 
design with the olei scale. ACM TOCHI 22(2), 24. 

28. Steve  Kolowich.  (June  5,  2012)  “Early  demographic 
data  hints  at  what  types  of  student  takes  a  MOOC.” 
Inside 
from, 
http://goo.gl/Rt9GGO. 

Retrieved 

Higher 

Ed. 

29. Chinmay  Kulkarni,  Julia  Cambre,  Yasmine  Kotturi, 
Michael S. Bernstein, Scott Klemmer. 2015. Talkabout: 
Making  distance  matter  with  small  groups  in  massive 
classes.  In  Proceedings  of  the  18th  Conference  on 
Computer-Supported  Cooperative  Work  &  Social 
Computing, pp. 1116-1128. 

30. Steiner  Kvale 

(2009). 
InterViews:  learning  the  craft  of  qualitative  research 
interviewing. 2nd ed. Los Angeles: Sage Publications. 

and  Svend  Brinkmann. 

31. Nan  Lin.  (2001).  Social  capital:  A  theory  of  social 

structure and action. New York: Cambridge Press. 

32. Tharinda 

Rekha 

Liyanagunawardena, 

Andrew 
Alexandar  Adams,  Shirley  Ann  Williams.  (2013). 
MOOCs: A systematic study of the published literature 
2008-2012. In IRRODL. 14(3), 202-227.  

33. Michael  Nanfito. 

(2014).  MOOCs:  Opportunities, 
impacts, and challenges: massive open online courses in 
colleges  and  universities.  CreateSpace  Independent 
Publishing Platform. Lexington, KY. 

34. Zafrin  Nurmohamed,  Nabeel  Gillani,  Michael  Lenox. 
(2014).  A  new  use  for  MOOCs:  Real-World  problem 
solving.  Harvard  Business  Review  Blog  Network. 
Retrieved from: http://goo.gl/DxGa30/. 

35. Alexandria  Walton  Radford,  Jessica  Robles,  Stacey 
Cataylo, Laura Horn, Jessica Thornton, Keith Whitfield. 
(2014). The employer potential of MOOCs: A survey of 
human  resource  professionals’  thinking  on  MOOCs. 
Research 
from, 
Triangle 
http://goo.gl/z5Rbbk. 

Institute.  Retrieved 

36. Parisa Roshan, Maia Jacobs, Michaelanne Dye, Betsy 

DiSalvo. (2014). Exploring how parents in economically 
depressed communities access learning resources. 
GROUP ’14, pp. 131-141. 

37. Katrina  Schwartz.  (2014,  April  16).  Taking  stock:  Do 
MOOCs work best for educated people? Retrieved from, 
http://goo.gl/RPKQCW. 

38. United  States  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics.  (2015). 
from, 

Educational 
http://www.bls.gov/cps/demographics.htm#education. 

attainment. 

Retrieved 

39. United  States  Census  Bureau.  (2011).  Table  233. 

Retrieved from, http://goo.gl/LbBxQd. 

40. Chen  Zhenghao,  Brandon  Alcorn,  Gayle  Christensen, 
Nicholas Eriksson, Daphne Koller, Ezekiel J. Emanuel. 
(September  22,  2015).  Who’s  benefiting  from  MOOCs, 
and why? Harvard Business Review. 

244

