CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Quantifying and Predicting Mental Illness Severity

in Online Pro-Eating Disorder Communities

Stevie Chancellor

College of Computing

Georgia Tech

Atlanta, GA 30332

schancellor3@gatech.edu

Zhiyuan (Jerry) Lin
College of Computing

Georgia Tech

Atlanta, GA 30332
zlin48@gatech.edu

Erica L. Goodman

Department of Psychology
University of North Dakota

Grand Forks, ND 58202

erica.goodman@my.und.edu

Stephanie Zerwas

Department of Psychiatry

University of North Carolina

Chapel Hill, NC 27599
zerwas@med.unc.edu

Munmun De Choudhury

College of Computing

Georgia Tech

Atlanta, GA 30332

munmund@gatech.edu

ABSTRACT
Social media sites have struggled with the presence of emo-
tional and physical self-injury content. Individuals who share
such content are often challenged with severe mental illnesses
like eating disorders. We present the ﬁrst study quantify-
ing levels of mental illness severity (MIS) in social media.
We examine a set of users on Instagram who post content
on pro-eating disorder tags (26M posts from 100K users).
Our novel statistical methodology combines topic modeling
and novice/clinician annotations to infer MIS in a user’s con-
tent. Alarmingly, we ﬁnd that proportion of users whose con-
tent expresses high MIS have been on the rise since 2012
(13%/year increase). Previous MIS in a user’s content over
seven months can predict future risk with ∼81% accuracy.
Our model can also forecast MIS levels up to eight months in
the future with performance better than baseline. We discuss
the health outcomes and design implications as well as ethical
considerations of this line of research.

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.4 Information Systems Applications: Miscellaneous
Author Keywords
Instagram; social media; mental health; mental illness;
selﬁnjury; eating disorder

INTRODUCTION
Online communities can promote well-being and ailment
management by improving perceived self-eﬃcacy and miti-
gating psychological distress [33]. However, online platforms
have been challenged by communities that encourage deliber-
ate destruction of one’s own body. In particular, social media

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW ’16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02...$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819973

platforms like Instagram have been scrutinized for the con-
tinued presence of communities that promote and share self-
injurious1, suicidal, and pro-eating disorder (pro-ED) con-
tent2. These communities promote negative actions as delib-
erate or impulsive choices rather than as symptoms to other
mental disorders or threats to health [34].
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM) [4] identiﬁes speciﬁc behaviors and cognitions that
promote self-injurious behavior, extreme weight control, and
suicidal ideation. Such behaviors may be associated with spe-
ciﬁc mental illnesses like eating disorders. Based on the clin-
ical psychology literature [49, 36], we map manifestations of
such behaviors in social media content to markers of mental
illness severity (MIS).
Vast epidemiological and psychiatric evidence of MIS exists
in clinical research [21, 49, 36, 54]; however, studies of MIS
on social media sites are limited. Most studies in CSCW or
HCI have focused on identifying markers of a mental illness,
e.g. depression [18, 47, 31, 15], not on MIS more broadly
in any given mental illness-prone community. The increas-
ing pervasiveness of mental illness-related content on social
media (such as Instagram, Tumblr, Twitter, and Reddit)1 now
provides an opportunity for rigorous quantitative studies of
markers of MIS on these platforms. The rich content on
these sites may be used both to objectively quantify, measure,
and characterize levels of MIS broadly and also to examine
the distribution of such content over previously inaccessible
timescales and population sizes.
In this paper, we study, estimate, and forecast MIS in
users who share pro-ED content on Instagram. The pro-ED
community gloriﬁes eating disorders as alternative lifestyle
choices rather than as psychosocial disorders [19]. Cogni-
tions present in the pro-ED community include suicidal and

1http://techcrunch.com/2013/06/20/over-a-year-after-new-content-
policies-self-harm-social-media-still-thrives/
2http://www.huﬃngtonpost.com/laurenduca/thinspiration-banned-
frominstagram b 3829155.html

1171

thin ideal ideation, and behavioral activities include direct
self injury [36] and extreme weight control behaviors (which
some have termed indirect self-injury [20, 25]). The pro-
ED community is an ideal community to study because up
to 70% of individuals with eating disorders report a history
of some form of deliberate self-injury [12]. Because of this,
the community presents the largest variety of markers of MIS
not present in communities focused on other mental disor-
ders (e.g., depression or obsessive-compulsive disorder) or
speciﬁc activities (e.g., cutting or suicidal ideation).
We make the following contributions in this paper:
• We present a novel, scalable, and robust method to quan-
tify and characterize MIS in pro-ED Instagram content.
Our method employs topic modeling, speciﬁcally Latent
Dirichlet Allocation, on the tag content of pro-ED posts.
We present a clinically-grounded framework to obtain
novice and expert annotations on low, medium, and high
MIS of the extracted topics.
• We develop an algorithm to combine automatically ex-
tracted topics and their severity scores into inferences of
MIS levels in user content over time.
• We present a supervised learning (regularized multinomial
logistic regression) model to predict to what extent a user
who shares pro-ED content on Instagram would share con-
tent with markers of low, medium, or high MIS in the fu-
ture, based on MIS manifested in their historical content.

Our study uses a large dataset crawled from Instagram of
more than 26M posts from 100K public users between 2010
and 2015. Our rating methodology that combines topic mod-
eling with human annotations can measure MIS in posts with
high accuracy, precision, and recall when compared against
independent ratings from novices and experts. Second, MIS
inferred from a user’s posts over a seven month period is able
to predict levels of MIS during a future month with over 81%
accuracy. Our results show that despite Instagram-enforced
eﬀorts to curb dissemination of such vulnerable content3, the
proportion of pro-ED Instagram users sharing content with
high levels of MIS has been on the rise (13% increase / year).
Our ﬁndings provide one of the ﬁrst quantitative methodolo-
gies to quantify, measure, and forecast MIS on social media
platforms that is automated and applicable at scale. Although
our system is not intended to outright diagnose eating dis-
orders or other mental illness without self-reported informa-
tion on health status, we believe our ﬁndings can be used to
complement mental wellness eﬀorts towards identifying at-
risk populations and to enable social media designers a gauge
community health and well-being.
Ethics, Privacy, and Disclosure. This paper used publicly
accessible Instagram data to conduct our analysis. No person-
ally identiﬁable information was used in this study. Publicly
accessible, blurred out images are used only for exemplary
purposes and were not included in any of our algorithms. Be-
cause we did not interact with our subjects and the data is
public, we did not seek institutional review board approval.

3http://blog.instagram.com/post/21454597658/instagrams-new-
guidelines-against-self-harm

1172

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Our work does not make diagnostic claims. Some of the im-
ages in this paper are graphic in nature.

BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
What is Mental Illness Severity (MIS)?
Clinical deﬁnitions of mental illness severity (MIS) are based
on epidemiological issues and rely on the inclusion and oper-
ationalization of criteria such as diagnosis, disability, and du-
ration [24]. MIS is typically associated with signiﬁcant cog-
nitive function and judgment impairment, emotional instabil-
ity, and limitations in undertaking life activities [35]. The
cognitive and behavioral markers of self-injurious behavior,
extreme weight control measures, and suicidal ideation con-
stitute some of the most crucial indicators of MIS. [50, 24].
Self Injurious Behavior and Suicidal Ideation. The DSM-
5 [4] does not list self-injurious behavior as a unique disorder
but rather as symptoms of several conditions. Self-injurious
behavior involves deliberate injury or damage to one’s own
body. Examples include cutting, self-mutilation, burning,
branding, scarring, scratching, picking at skin or reopening
wounds, biting, and ingesting toxic chemicals [45]. One
in 12 teenagers engage in such risky behavior, and around
10% continue to self-injure into young adulthood [43].
In
some cases, self-injuirous behavior may lead to or is asso-
ciated with serious thoughts of harming or killing oneself,
also known as suicide ideation [58]. Self-injurious behav-
ior is considered to be one of the strongest predictors of who
will commit suicide in the near future [43]. Patients with eat-
ing disorders are known to engage in these behaviors exten-
sively. Over 70% of patients with disordered eating habits re-
port that they self-injure, [57] and eating disorders have some
of the highest comorbidities (80%) with other mental disor-
ders, such as anxiety, depression, dysthymia, and substance
use disorders [32]. Mortality rates in anorexia nervosa are the
highest of any psychiatric disorder – 12 times higher than the
average mortality rate for females aged 15-24 [32].
Extreme Weight Loss Measures. Extreme weight control
measures include abnormal behaviors related to eating and
exercise, such as unusual food restrictions, fear of particular
foods or kinds of food, binging, purging, or abuse of laxa-
tives, and overexercising [54]. The DSM considers extreme
weight control measures to be some of the deﬁning symptoms
of severe mental illness in eating disorder populations [4], in
which anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa constitute the
most well-known and diagnosed form of eating disorders [3].
Clinical and Psychiatric Work on MIS
Literature on these three forms of MIS largely comes from
a psychiatric or medical perspective and focuses almost en-
tirely on treatment. However, to the best of our knowledge,
quantitative and rigorous studies of MIS online are limited.
Since the majority of current studies have been conducted on
individuals with a history of psychiatric treatment [27], lit-
tle is empirically known about MIS among individuals who
are not clinical inpatients, which might be the case with those
frequenting today’s social media platforms [56]. Moreover,
many who suﬀer with these forms of MIS never seek the help
of mental health professionals, often due to the stigmatized
nature of these behaviors or thoughts [14, 52]. Obtaining at-
scale self-identiﬁed suﬀerers of mental illness or of MIS in

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

any capacity may also be challenging, precluding large-scale
investigations of forms of MIS in the larger population.
We believe that social media platforms enable the study of
MIS – particularly within pro-ED communities – that previ-
ously have been hard to study. Our work attempts to over-
come these limitations by providing a methodology to de-
tect MIS and allowing risk assessment over those populations
who might be diﬃcult to reach by clinical means.

Online Pro-ED Communities
Pro-ED communities are groups that promote eating disor-
ders as an alternative lifestyle choice. These communities
share content, provide advice, and glorify thinness and low
body weight as ideal. These communities share restrictive di-
eting plans and advice, coaching, and sharing inspirational
imagery of thin bodies, also known as “thinspiration” or
“thinspo”. Online platforms pose speciﬁc risks for those suf-
fering with eating disorders that may dispose them to harm
themselves through self-injurious behavior or extreme weight
control measures. For instance, imagery and the visual nature
of social networks, especially Tumblr and Instagram, may en-
courage disordered thoughts and actions, such as normative
conceptions of ideal body shape [41]. Such behavior is sup-
ported by statistics that found that 69% of American girls ﬁve
to 12-years old say pictures inﬂuence their concept of ideal
body shape and 47% report that images make them want to
lose weight. Moreover, due to the archival and social nature
of these platforms, they can oﬀer individuals opportunities
to revisit their own or their peers’ self-injury experiences or
taking inspiration for continuing extreme weight control mea-
sures.
The body of research on pro-ED communities online is large
and varied [8, 22, 38, 53]. However, the bulk of this work
is qualitative in nature [6], aside from a few recent excep-
tions [60, 59, 16]. For instance, Yom-Tov et al compared
the content associated with pro-anorexia and pro-recovery
posters on Flickr [60]. However, this literature has not ex-
amined these communities from the angle of MIS, a signif-
icant aspect of and hurdle to recovery in these communities
acknowledged in the DSM [4]. Our paper examines MIS in
Instagram’s pro-ED community to bring one of the ﬁrst em-
pirical insights into a problem on social media1.

Health Behavior Inference from Social Media
Social computing research has shown that content and con-
versational patterns can be used to infer psychological states,
well-being, and social support status. In an early work, De
Choudhury et al. [17] analyzed how new mothers’ risk to
postpartum depression may be detected from content posted
to Facebook and Twitter. Schwartz et al. [51] predicted life
satisfaction score of counties with socioeconomic factors and
Twitter language. Other research includes utilizing social me-
dia content and interactions to identify conditions and symp-
toms related to diseases [48], substance use [44, 40], mental
health [18, 47, 31, 15, 2], and nutrition and health [1].
This body of work shows that valuable information is em-
bedded in social media language, and that language may bear
predictive power to detect health concerns. However, most

prior research has focused on distinguishing between men-
tal illness-prone and control populations; to the best of our
knowledge, they have not focused on characterizing mani-
fested levels of MIS. We also provide a systematic, carefully
constructed, and clinically-grounded characterization of MIS
in pro-ED content based on three types of markers: self-
injurious behavior, suicidal ideation, and excessive weight
control measures. Such cognitive and behavioral markers
have not been discussed in prior social computing research.
Our work oﬀers what we believe is one of the ﬁrst rigorous
and sophisticated methodologies to measure and predict lev-
els of MIS by using linguistic content on social media.

DATA
We gathered a dataset of public posts related to eating dis-
orders on Instagram using the oﬃcial Instagram API4. Note
that Instagram does not have formalized community struc-
tures, like forums or private groups.
Instead, communities
form around more amorphous, public tags. In the case of the
pro-ED community on Instagram, users cluster around tags
relating to eating disorders (e.g., “anorexia”, “proana”).
Our data collection did not prioritize collecting content
shared by tags directly associated with self-injury and sui-
cide; those tags would bias the content and nature of our
results. Observations indicated that speciﬁc self-injury tags
on Instagram (e.g., “selfharmmmm”) heavily favored cutting.
Moreover, searching speciﬁc self-injury or suicide ideation
related tags would generate only a partial sample because the
set of all possible MIS tags on Instagram is unknown. Our
crawl proceeded in two stages described below.

skinny
eatingdisorder
proanorexia
thinspiration
anorexianervosa

thin
probulimia
mia
secretsociety

thinspo
anorexia
bulimia
ana

bonespo
thighgap
promia
proana

Table 1: Example tags used for crawling pro-ED posts and
users in our study.
Constructing Eating Disorder Post Set. First, we identiﬁed
a set of nine “seed tags”5 that have been found to be com-
mon pro-ED organizing tags and structures across social me-
dia platforms [16]. Then, two researchers searched for posts
on each of these nine tags to ensure there was suﬃcient pro-
ED content. With these tags, we conducted an initial month-
long crawl using Instagram’s oﬃcial API; this gave us 434K
posts with 234K unique tags. We identiﬁed 222 total tags that
had at least a 1% co-occurrence rate in our dataset.
Next we expanded the initial seed set by collating a list of all
tags that co-occurred with the seed tags in the initial 434K
posts. From this list, we manually checked and removed tags
that did not map directly to eating disorders. Speciﬁcally, we
found three areas that these removals fell into: too generic, re-
lated to another disorder, or eating disorder recovery-related:

4http://instagram.com/developer/
5Seed tags include:
“anorexia”, “anorexic”,“mia”, “bulimia”, and “bulimic”

“ed”, “eatingdisorder”, “ednos”, “ana”,

1173

(1) Tags that related to eating disorders but were broad
enough to be used by the general population, e.g. “beauti-
ful”, “inspiration”, or “fat”.
(2) Tags that related to other mental disorders or distressing
content, e.g. “nervous”, “ocd”, or “suicidal”.
(3) Tags that were obviously related to the eating disorder
recovery community, e.g. “anarecovery”. We expect the eat-
ing disorder recovery community to not be engaging in self-
injury behavior, excessive weight control measures, or sui-
cide ideation, a ﬁnding supported by prior work [38].
This reduced the ﬁltered co-occurrence tag list from 222 tags
to 72 known to be related to eating disorders (see sample tags
in Table 1). Then we conducted a second longer crawl of pro-
ED content focusing on these 72 tags. This gave us over about
8 million posts dated between January 2011 and November
2014. We removed any posts that were cross-posted to any
recovery tag as well as any that had three tags (“mia”, “ana”,
and “ed”) that did not also contain another tag from our list of
72. Qualitative observation indicated that these three tags are
not associated with pro-ED when they are used in isolation;
rather, they referred to ﬁrst names or references to popular
celebrities (“ed” for Ed Sheeran).
Our dataset at this phase had 6.5 million posts relating to pro-
ED.
Gathering Pro-ED Users and Their Post Timelines. To
construct our candidate set of pro-ED users and their posts,
we obtained a random sample of 100K users from the authors
of the 6.5 million posts collected above. Again, we used In-
stagram API to obtain the post timelines of these users (all
public posts of the users). Our ﬁnal dataset contains over
26M posts from 100K users, with post shared between Octo-
ber 2010 and March 2015.
As Figure 1 (a) and (b) show, the distribution of posts each
user has and the number of tags used in each post are heavy-
tailed. We also note that posts returned by the Instagram API
do not distribute uniformly over time — most of the posts
returned are after late 2012 as shown in Figure 1 (c). Distri-
bution of volume of users with at least one post per month,
referred to as “active” users per month, (Figure 1 (d)) also
follows the same pattern.

METHODS
Inferring Mental Illness Severity (MIS)
In this section we discuss our method of inferring and eval-
uating MIS in a user in a certain point in time. A signiﬁcant
challenge in quantitative studies of any health risk or behav-
ior is the availability of labeled content (i.e., ground truth) on
which users are susceptible. In the absence of self-reported
information on the mental health status of individuals, tags
may serve as a good indicator of whether a user’s content ex-
presses markers of high MIS. However, capturing the set of
all tags related to MIS is diﬃcult, as discussed earlier. Addi-
tionally, assessing in isolation a tag’s MIS level may be dif-
ﬁcult — e.g., “cutting” might be attributable to high MIS,
however the tag “pain” is ambiguous. Furthermore, discrete
human judgments on MIS may not be applicable to a user’s
individual posts, since a user may use their Instagram proﬁle

1174

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Figure 1: (a) User distribution over number of posts. (b) Dis-
tribution of tags used in posts. (c) Number of posts per month
from October 2010 to April 2015. (d) Monthly volumes of
active users from October 2010 to April 2015.

to share not only content with MIS but also on a variety of
other topics.
To overcome these challenges in MIS inference, we adopted
a hybrid approach where we leveraged both automated nat-
ural language processing techniques and human annotations.
We employed Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) [7] on all
posts from all users in our compiled dataset. LDA has been
successfully employed in the inference of health phenomenon
from social media data [48]. Our goal was to obtain a set of
topics spanning the content (tags) of the posts, some of which
we suspect to be aligned to increased MIS. This allowed us
to go beyond simple tag-based MIS inference techniques —
LDA would use all tags for topic inference including those
that co-occur with known/unambiguous MIS tags. Moreover,
LDA assumes each tag to be drawn from a mixture of topics
instead of mapping each tag to a speciﬁc topic (MIS or oth-
erwise). By using LDA, we were also able to obtain a poste-
rior distribution of topics over posts of a user. This prevents
assigning users to speciﬁc topics; instead, we could model
their posts as a distribution over content with varying levels
of MIS.
Our method proceeded in the following steps:
(1) Topic Inference. We built an LDA model on the posts
of all 100K users. We ﬁrst removed common English words6
and converted tags from each post to bag-of-words format.
We trained an online LDA model [29], which is expected
to converge quickly given relatively stationary topics (in this
case, pro-ED related topics) without much drift over time.
Speciﬁcally, we updated the LDA model7 for every chunk of
1 million posts for all 26M posts to obtain 100 topics, which
was found to be appropriate based on initial experiments with
our data.

6NLTK stop words, http://www.nltk.org/book/ch02.html
7We used Gensim library, https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/

(a)

104

105

102

103
Posts #

(c)

#
 
s
t
s
o
P

107
106
105
104
103
102
101
100

(b)

0

50

100

150

200

250

Tags #

(d)

104

103

102

101

#

 
r
e
s
U

100

100

101

1000000

800000

600000

400000

200000

#
 
s
t
s
o
P

#

 
r
e
s
U
 
e
v
i
t
c
A

40000
35000
30000
25000
20000
15000
10000
5000
0
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

Month #

0
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

Month

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

(2) MIS Annotation. By reviewing the top 50 keywords of
each topic provided by the LDA model, we then obtained hu-
man annotations of MIS on every topic. We deﬁned MIS to
span three levels — low (1), medium (2), or high (3). Our
choice of the scale was motivated from prior work on model-
ing and inferring self-disclosure in social media content [5],
on detecting suicide-risk behaviors in social media [30], and
from the clinical psychology literature on MIS [50, 24].
Our annotators included four researchers. Two annotators
were trained clinical psychologists with speciﬁc expertise in
eating disorders and experience interacting with eating dis-
order in-patients, and the other two had considerable social
computing research experience. The researchers created a
set of rules to annotate each topic. The raters ﬁrst manu-
ally browsed pro-ED posts on Instagram by searching over
all of the nine seed tags used for crawling pro-ED data4 —
so the raters could familiarize themselves with MIS mani-
fested in pro-ED posts. Then, the raters collated a set of rules
which were used for the annotation task, heavily referencing
the DSM-5 [4], clinical literature [50], experience of interact-
ing with in-patients with eating disorders, and other related
work [19]. We call this the MIS scoring or rating system:
• High MIS (score of 3):

included extreme weight con-
trol behaviors and “thinspiration” (e.g., “purge”, “thin-
spo”, “starve”, “donteat”), self-injurious behavior (e.g.,
“cutting”, “blades”, “slit”), and suicidal ideation (e.g.,
“killme”. “suicidal”). This categorization is supported by
the clinical psychology literature [24] showing ED suﬀer-
ers to display signiﬁcant suicidal thoughts, eating pathol-
ogy, including increased body dissatisfaction, binging and
purging, compulsive behaviors (e.g., hair pulling, nail bit-
ing, skin picking, self-biting) and impulsive self-injurious
behaviors (e.g., cutting, burning, self-hitting, banging,
scratching).

• Medium MIS (score of 2):

talk, self-
deprecation, emotional instability, cognitive impairment,
social
isolation, and discussing eating disorders (e.g.,
“uglyandfat”, “selfhate”, “broken”, “anorexia”, “eatingdis-
order”, “mia”). In addition, manifestations of mental dis-
orders but without any revealed vulnerability (e.g., “de-
pression”, “bpd”, “anxiety”) were also scored as medium
MIS. Literature [35] suggests high comorbidity of eating
disorders with other psychiatric conditions, such as ma-
jor depression and anxiety disorders, which may or may
not be severe. ED is also known to signiﬁcantly interfere
with judgment, social adjustment and interpersonal rela-
tionships, but these may not be associated with any emo-
tionally or physically dangerous acts [36].
• Low MIS (score of 1): included tags not related to eating
disorders or mental health (e.g., “nyc”, “iphone”, “biking”,
“cats”, “fashion”, “selﬁe”).

included fat

Following the annotation task, the interrater reliability metric
Fleiss’ κ was found to be very high (.91); further, between the
novice (non-clinician) and the expert (clinician) ratings there
was high agreement. Discrepancies were resolved through
mutual discussion. Example topics and assigned MIS scores
are listed in Table 3. 5 topics out of the 100 given by the
LDA model were high (3), 6 as medium (2) and 89 as low

1175

Algorithm 1: Calculate post MIS rating

Input

1 function getPostMISRating(tagList, ldaModel, topicMIS )
: A list of tags used in a post tagList; LDA model
ldaModel; human annotated topic MIS rating
topicMIS

Output: Discretized post MIS rating, or 0 for empty tagList
2 bow ← bag of words(tagList);
3 MIS S core ← 0;
4 if tagList is empty then return NULL;
5 for i = 1 to Number of Topics do
6
7
8 end
9 MIS S core ← round(MIS S core);
10 return MIS S core;

topicS core ← ldaModel.getTopicProb(i) ∗ topicMIS (i);
MIS S core ← MIS S core + topicS core;

(1). We intend to release the LDA model, its associated top-
ics, and MIS ratings of the topics for research use following
acceptance.
(3) Computing Users’ MIS Rating. Given any post, we then
use the topic probability distribution generated by the LDA
model as weights and combine them with the annotated MIS
levels of the topics, to obtain a weighted average MIS rating,
as described in Algorithm 1. Table 2 lists example posts and
the MIS level derived through our algorithm.
(4) Monthly MIS Rating Inference. To infer a user’s MIS
in a time slot (month), we obtained the discretized (rounded)
mean MIS rating over all posts posted by the user on Insta-
gram during the slot.

Evaluation of MIS Ratings
How eﬀective is our LDA topic modeling approach combined
with novice/expert annotations in identifying MIS in a user’s
content? To answer this question, we compare our algorithm-
derived MIS rating in a sample of posts from a sample of
users in our dataset with MIS ratings in the same sample ob-
tained from four human raters – two novices (non-clinicians)
and two experts (clinicians). We ﬁrst randomly sampled a set
of 150 posts with equal numbers for the three MIS ratings 1
(low), 2 (medium), and 3 (high). Thereafter for the sake of
consistency, the same four researchers who labeled the LDA
topics rated this sample of 150 posts for the three MIS ratings.
The raters had high agreement (Fleiss’ κ = .86) and resolved
discrepancies mutually via discussion. Raters found 68 posts
rated as low, 9 as medium, and 73 posts rated as high MIS.
Next, we compared the agreed upon set of human annota-
tions with algorithm derived MIS ratings on the 150 post sam-
ple. This gave high accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 scores
(mean accuracy >71%, mean precision > 68%, and mean re-
call > 70%). These scores were particularly high for MIS
ratings 1 and 3; for these two classes respectively, precision
was over 94% and recall above 64%. However we observe
that the human annotations and algorithm diﬀer signiﬁcantly
in the case of MIS rating 2. A closer look reveals that while
recall is still very high for this class (66%), the low precision
(37%) is responsible for the low F1 score. Manual inspec-

Post

Post tags

Raw Rounded Annotated

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

ﬂy, dragonﬂy, prints, fashion, sketch, illustration, ink, masonry, textiles

rainbow, mexicancat, burrito, tablet, rainbowcat, rainbows, wallpaper, cat, live-
wallpapers, burritocat, livewallpaper, mexican, catwallpaper

starve, bodydismorphia, scars, ana, selfharmmm, bulimia, dead, bones, suicide,
triggerwarning, cuts, razorblade, depression, anorexia, razor, sue, cut, mia, tw,
blade, fat, hungry, purge, ugly, cutting, deb, blood
disappointment, pain, gayteen, selfharmmm, relapsed, selﬁnjury, selfhate, slit,
cutting, fat, cuts, anorexic, depression, razor, gaykik, death, blood, depressed,
ugly, blithe, imsorry, anxiety, triggering, cutter
beautiful, suicidal, ana, bulimic, bulimia, fat, sad, tumblr, cut, blood, cuts, love,
ew, hate, anorexic, depression, anorexia, funny, suicide, ugly, mia, helpme,
depressed, cutting, killme, thin, skinny, happy

1.02

1.15

2.87

2.77

2.82

tumblr, depressed, quote, scars, ehtilb, dark, selfharmmm, blithe, depression

2.01

koolaid, lazy, girl, thinspoo, sugarfree, exercise

1.67

1

1

3

3

3

2

2

1

1

3

3

3

3

3

Table 2: Example posts with tags, raw MIS (Raw) generated using our method, discretized MIS rating (Rounded), and MIS per
agreed upon annotations from four researchers (Annotated). All post images are blurred to avoid disclosure of user information.
Most disagreements happen when MIS rating is medium, where it can be ambiguous.

tion of such misclassiﬁed posts reveals that the disagreement
arises due to the inherent ambiguity in the posts of actual
MIS rating 2 (ref.
last two rows in Table 2). We note that
the MIS ratings 1 and 3 are perhaps the most important and
distinctively deﬁned classes of practical importance (e.g., for
designing interventions, see Discussion) and constitute over
93% of the content (see Table 4).

Prediction of MIS
Our prediction task involves identifying low, medium, and
high MIS in content of users in the future based on MIS in
their previous Instagram posts. For this purpose, we em-
ployed regularized multinomial logistic regression. We con-
sidered using forms of autoregressive integrated moving aver-
age models (ARIMA) [42], as these models are ﬁtted to time
series data to predict future points in the series. However,
since our response variable, i.e. MIS rating, is discrete (cat-
egorical) and not continuous, multinomial logistic regression
was used as the suggested alternative to ARIMA [42].
As with other types of regression, for the regularized multi-
nomial logit method, there is no need for predictor variables
to be statistically independent from each other (unlike, for ex-
ample, in a na¨ıve Bayes classiﬁer or an ordinary least squares
model). Regularization helps us control for collinearity (i.e.,
excessive correlation between MIS ratings that are temporally
close) and sparsity (i.e., users may not post in certain time
slots, thus no MIS can be measured) in our data. Further reg-
ularization allows us to incorporate smoothness in our model
— it is likely MIS changes smoothly across consecutive time

slots for most users’ content. In our case, we used the model
implementation given in the Python package scikit-learn. The
library implements regularized logistic regression using the
liblinear library, newton-cg and lbfgs solvers. The newton-cg
and lbfgs solvers support L2 regularization with primal for-
mulation. Below are the components of the regression model:
Response Variable.
The MIS ratings of users’ content
(1=low; 2=medium; 3=high) at time slot t. Here, the time
slot is taken as a month.
Predictor Variables. We deﬁne a sliding window of size w,
and consider the monthly MIS rating of users’ content over
all time slots between t − w to t − 1 as w predictor variables
of the model.
The class sizes (response variables) in our dataset were unbal-
anced (ref. Table 4), so we employed bagging and boosting
to improve performance of the model [9]. We used 90% of
our data as training data (90K users); the remaining 10% of
users was set aside as the held-out test set on which we re-
port our prediction results. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst generated B
bootstrap samples of the training data using random sampling
with replacement – in these samples we selected users so that
all three classes are balanced. We then trained our regular-
ized multinomial logistic regression model on each of these
bootstrap samples. Following training, in the boosting phase,
we iteratively learned weak regression models using the Ad-
aboost algorithm [13]. That is, we took the weighted sum of
the coeﬃcients of the model – this gave us a robust model that

1176

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Topic Top Representative Tags

MIS Rating

2

3

22

38

32

52

59

68

93

nyc, newyork, london, la, losangeles, graﬃti, streetart, california, frozen, ny, brooklyn, texas, newyorkc-
ity, cali, miamiheat, wall, yup, hawaii, downtown, street, urban, stickers, miami, tokyo, dallas, printing,
airport, philly, manhattan, jelsa , hollywood, houston, westcoast, statenisland, sign, photogrid, changed-
mylife, queens, mural, anna
chicago, fail, nashgrier, magcon, colorado, science, november, crystals, georgia, turkey, sober, gayboys,
indigochild, scruﬀ, ﬂow, snowing, 1dedit, socal, southafrica, blizzard, ﬁtblr, prettylittleliars, sobriety,
photobooth, traﬃc, beachbum, eureka, pll, greece, eurekaca , hairy, stone, istanbul, bayarea, basic, mini-
malism, simplicity, blackboy, shine, citylife
tumblr, ugh, bye, idk, hi, tumblrgirl, tumblrpost, ok, weheartit, hello, textpost, tumblrquotes, adult, hey,
theme, tumblrboy, lsd, justgirlythings, borderlinepersonalitydisorder, tumblrposts, notmine, post, fatty,
cow, sfs, dm, idontcare, mysecretfamily, ifollowbackinstantly, tumblrtextpost , textposts, byee, idc, kbye,
cuidandotusalud, bauchnabel, bauchfrei, tumblrquote, cantstop, hateschool
anorexia, ed, eatingdisorder, anarecovery, ana, eatingdisorderrecovery, edsoldier, prorecovery, beatana,
foodisfuel, strongnotskinny, edfamily, edwarrior, edsoldiers, healthy, anawho, beated, anorexianervosa,
edfam, edﬁghter, healthynotskinny, food , staystrong, togetherwecan, edwarriors, realrecovery, bulimiare-
covery, fearfood, recoveryisworthit, eattolive, weightgain, anorexic, ednos, recover, recoveryisposMISle,
anawarrior, foodporn, anasoldier, bulimia, realcovery, edarmy, recovering, ﬁghtana
anxiety, depression, mentalhealth, mentalillness, hospital, bipolar, bpd, recovery, support, ocd, addic-
tion, insomnia, eatingdisorders, mental, borderline, therapy, ptsd, awareness, schizophrenia, panicat-
tack, panic, kickanasass, stress, medicine, anxietyattack, schizophrenic, schizo, socialanxiety, hallucina-
tions , selfharm, prosupps, addictions, mfp, abuse, bodyimage, mentaldisorder, paranoia, eatingdisorder,
bingeeatingdisorder
ana, anorexia, mia, ed, bulimia, fat, anorexic, eatingdisorder, ednos, skinny, starve, bulimic, depression,
depressed, binge, purge, thin, blithe, anamia, starving, donteat, ugly, size00, deb, fasting, fast, sad, suici-
dal, sue, bones , size0, anxiety, anatips, food, thinspoooo, cat, suicide, gross, diet, hungry
depression, depressed, suicide, suicidal, cutting, ana, blithe, worthless, anxiety, selfharmmm, cut,
anorexia, sad, ugly, mia, fat, scars, cuts, anorexic, selfhate, alone, bulimia, selfharm, sue, deb, broken,
killme, blood, death, cat, dead , lonely, cutter, secret society123, blades, bulimic, die, pain, useless, hate
sad, depressed, depression, alone, pain, broken, hurt, lonely, lost, hate, help, crying, sadness, suicide, cry,
suicidal, anxiety, love, tears, scared, dying, tired, life, done, death, sorry, blithe, heartbroken, helpme,
society , die, girl, unhappy, worthless, dead, sadquotes, upset, quotes, empty, cutting
skinny, thin, thinspo, collarbones, hipbones, thighgap, bones, legs, perfect, beautiful, ana, body, diet,
thinspiration, notme, want, weightloss, ﬂatstomach, perfection, tiny, size0, pretty, thynspo, thinspoooo,
ribs, girl, fat, stomach, ﬁt, motivation , slim, perfectbody, thinstagram, size00, small, skinnylegs, thygap,
ﬁtspo, model, belly

1

1

2

2

3

3

3

3

3

Table 3: Examples of LDA derived topics and their associated human-annotated MIS. The top 40 most representative tags are
displayed per topic. For MIS ratings 1 and 2, we have chosen to show two representative topics, whereas for MIS rating 3, we
show all ﬁve topics which were identiﬁed by our annotators to be of MIS rating 3.

was not biased by class imbalance. The weighted sum of the
coeﬃcients may be interpreted as being equivalent to taking
the majority vote from classiﬁers trained on bootstrap sam-
ples of the training data [23]. This ensemble regression model
given by Adaboost was ﬁnally applied on the 10% heldout set
to report performance on predicting MIS rating.

RESULTS

Description of High MIS Topics
We begin with a discussion of the high MIS topics derived
from combining the LDA model and human annotations. Re-
call, out of the 100 topics generated by the LDA model, ﬁve
were rated by the clinicians and researchers to have high MIS.
From Table 3, we observe that tags like “depression”, “anx-
iety”, “suicide”, “eatingdisorder”, “ugly”, “skinny”, “self
harm” consistently appear in almost all of the high MIS top-
ics. However there are systematic diﬀerences in these topics
despite the presence of these tags.

Statistical observations of these tags establishes that these
topics are diﬀerent. We performed a Kruskal-Wallis one-way
analysis of variance test on the tag distributions (i.e., normal-
ized frequency of tags) across all of the 100 topics; the test in-
dicated statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences to exist in the con-
tent of the topics (F = 8.94; p < 10−7). We then performed
post-hoc analysis using Tukey’s range test to identify whether
the pairs of topics among the ﬁve high MIS topics are signif-
icantly diﬀerent from each other. This indicated signiﬁcance
at the p < .001 level.
Qualitative diﬀerences are noticable across the high MIS top-
ics. The ﬁrst topic, topic 32, discusses expressions of a va-
riety of diﬀerent mental health disorders (e.g., “bpd”, “ptsd”,
“social anxiety”, “schizophrenic”, “ocd”, “panic”). The topic
also contains mentions of stress and anxiety, some of the
known concomitants of mental illnesses disorders like “ad-
dictions” and “insomnia”, as well as some of the probable
causes behind them (e.g., “abuse”). Additionally, the topic

1177

revolves around calls for support, desire or need for recovery,
and mentions of treatment eﬀorts (e.g., “medicine”). Note
that while eating disorders as a distinct illness in the DSM-
5 [4], many other mental health disorders have high comor-
bidities — this explains the nature of content of this topic.
topic 52 centers around commonly adopted harm-
Next,
ful/dangerous habits of pro-ED lifestyles. For instance, we
observe mentions of “binge”, “purge”, “starving”, “blithe”,
“fast”, “hungry”. We also observe manifestation of self-
loathing, e.g., “ugly”, “gross”, “fat”. These tags capture atti-
tudes and thoughts that reinforce these lifestyles (“donteat”)
and seem to share motivations towards continuing to do so
(“anatips”). Literature identiﬁes such manifestation of self-
identiﬁcation with pro-ED lifestyles to be an indirect form of
self-injurious behavior [19].
Topic 59 expresses hopelessness and dejection, including sui-
cidal thoughts. Tags like “worthless”, “alone”, “broken”,
and “useless” reveal expression of lowered sense of self-
esteem. Further, tags such as “selfharmmm“, “cut”, “scars”,
and “blood”, “blades” capture explicit, graphic description of
MIS. Such graphic description is known to allow normaliza-
tion of behavior as the only way to deal with emotional dis-
tress [10]. The topic further illustrates the use of Instagram
as a place to share markers of such behavior — “cutter” is
a tag used to identify oneself as struggling with such chal-
lenges. Finally, we observe “killme”, “death”, “dead”, “die”
to be associated with extreme thoughts of hurting and killing
oneself. Together, the tags in this topic capture a form of
emotion expression that is known to align with perceptions of
a conﬂicted identity [28].
Topic 68 expresses loneliness, pain, thoughts of death and
desire to seek help and advice on these challenges. There
are many tags capturing broad negative aﬀect in this topic —
“sad”, “hurt”, “lost”, ‘cry”, “tears”, “tired”, “heartbroken”,
“unhappy”. Regret and moroseness are visible through tags:
“sorry”, “done”, empty”, “sadquotes”.
Finally, topic 93 is about manifestation of desire to be skinny
and expression of normative perceptions of body image
(“skinny”, “perfect”, “beautiful”, “body”, “tiny”, “size00”,
“pretty”, “slim”, “perfect body”, “model”, “small”). The
topic also includes descriptions of physical attributes of body
(“collarbones”, “hipbones”, “skinnylegs”, “thygap”, “thigh-
gap”, “ﬂatstomach”, “stomach”, “ribs”, “bones”, “legs”,
“belly”). Such description of potentially injurious attitudes
and beliefs may indicate promoting co-construction of the
pro-ED identity — “thinspiration”, “motivation”, “thinsta-
gram”, and “ﬁtspo”.
Together, we conclude that our hybrid model that combines
LDA topics with human annotations on MIS captures a num-
ber of distinctive topics relating to MIS of pro-ED content
sharing Instagram users.

Dynamics of MIS
Next we analyze levels of MIS in our data as well as their
change over time. Table 4 gives the proportion of posts with
low (1), medium (2), and high (3) MIS. The majority of posts
are low MIS (88.8%) and the rest span medium and high
MIS. While in general users who share pro-ED content are

1178

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

expected to show markers of high MIS through the sharing of
content around physically or emotionally dangerous acts (Ta-
ble 3), we ﬁnd that a notable fraction of these users also use
the Instagram platform for sharing non-mental illness related
content, as indicated by the low level of MIS in majority of
the posts.

MIS Rating
Low (1)
Medium (2)
High (3)

Post Count Percentage
87.41%
22,913,989
1,990,031
7.59%
5.00%
1,311,288

Table 4: Proportion of posts with diﬀerent MIS rating.

However, a deeper examination of the way the three levels
of MIS change over time reveals that, while small in the pro-
portion of posts, alarmingly, the relative fraction of users who
share pro-ED content and show high MIS has been on the rise.
Figure 2 presents the proportion of “active” users in our data
with low, medium, and high MIS per month (55 months in all:
Oct 2010 through Mar 2015). The ﬁgure indicates that from
month 18 (Mar 2012) to month 48 (Oct 2014), both medium
and high MIS rating user proportions show a steep increase,
whereas low MIS rating shows decline during the same pe-
riod. In fact at its peak, as many as 10% of users in our data
are inferred to express high MIS rating. A Wilcoxon rank
sum test shows statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences between
the fraction of users with high MIS rating in month 48 and
in month 18 (z = 4.19; p < 10−5). This indicates that change
of proportional volume of users with medium/high MIS rat-
ing over time is signiﬁcant.
We also compute a rate of change metric to capture the
trend of the proportion of medium and high MIS rating users
over time, known as momentum — a measure that observes
changes in time series data. It is given as the mean ratio of
the diﬀerence between medium/high MIS rating users at time
t and that at t − 1 to the medium/high MIS rating users at
time t − 1. The momentum gives a positive value (13%/year),
which indicates that overall proportion of pro-ED Instagram
users with medium/high MIS rating in their content has been
monotonically increasing over time.

MIS Rating Prediction
Fitting Models. In this ﬁnal subsection, we start by reporting
the measures of ﬁtting the MIS rating prediction model on
the bootstrap samples based on our regularized multinomial
logistic regression framework. One of the aspects of this in-
vestigation was determining the appropriate sliding window
size w for which we obtain the best model ﬁt on the bootstrap
samples as well as the one for which the prediction perfor-
mance is optimal.
In Table 5 we present results on ﬁtting a number of mod-
els to our bootstrap training samples with diﬀerent values
of the sliding window w. We report model performance in
terms of deviance. Deviance measures the lack of ﬁt to data,
and lower values are better. It is calculated by comparing a
model with the saturated model — a model with a theoreti-
cally perfect ﬁt, or the intercept-only model – we refer to it

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Figure 2: Fraction of users with low (1), medium (2), and
high (3) MIS rating over time (in months). Here the fraction
of users with a particular level of MIS in a certain month is
given as the ratio between the number of “active” users with
the particular MIS rating to the total number of “active” users
during that month — “active” being deﬁned as any user with
at least one post during the month. Thus these fractions allow
normalization and comparison of MIS ratings across months.

Model
Null model
w = 1
w = 2
w = 3
w = 5
w = 7
w = 10
w = 13
w = 15
w = 17
w = 20

Deviance
915.523
633.028
533.195
489.055
320.625
279.801
297.81
319.259
327.505
417.77
643.989

χ2

282.495
382.328
426.468
594.898
635.722
617.713
596.264
588.018
497.753
271.534

p-value
p < 10−4
p < 10−7
p < 10−8
p < 10−8
p < 10−10
p < 10−10
p < 10−10
p < 10−8
p < 10−7
p < 10−5

Table 5: Summary metrics of ﬁtting the regularized multi-
nomial logit model to our training data. Ten diﬀerent models
with diﬀerent sliding window sizes w are reported, along with
the null (intercept only) model.

as the “null model”. Compared to the null model, all ver-
sions of our regularized multinomial logit models (with dif-
ferent values of w) provide considerable explanatory power
with signiﬁcant improvements in deviances. The diﬀerence
between the deviance of the null model and the deviances of
our models approximately follows a χ2 distribution, with de-
grees of freedom equal to the number of additional variables
in the more comprehensive model. As an example, compar-
ing the deviance of w = 5 model with that of the null model,
we see that the information provided by the MIS ratings
over the past ﬁve months has signiﬁcant explanatory power:
χ2(5, N = 90K) = 915.523 − 320.625 = 594.898, p < 10−8.
This comparison with the null model is statistically signif-
icant after Bonferroni correction for multiple testing (α =
0.005 since we consider 10 diﬀerent models corresponding
to the 10 values of sliding window w). The best model ﬁt
(in terms of lowest deviance) is given by the w = 7 model

Figure 3: Coeﬃcient weights (β) for model ﬁts corresponding
to the two best models: w = 7 and w = 10. “Intc” is inter-
cept, and −i is the coeﬃcient weight corresponding to the i-th
predictor variable, in other words it is the MIS rating at time
t − i when the prediction is for MIS rating at time t.

Model Accuracy (%) Precision Recall
0.655
w = 1
0.706
w = 2
w = 3
0.724
0.797
w = 5
w = 7
0.804
0.790
w = 10
w = 13
0.754
0.728
w = 15
w = 17
0.619
0.617
w = 20

59.89
62.76
67.98
69.32
81.89
73.99
72.26
67.42
66.32
61.50

0.647
0.674
0.676
0.723
0.817
0.808
0.808
0.774
0.684
0.638

F1
0.651
0.690
0.699
0.758
0.810
0.799
0.780
0.751
0.650
0.627

Table 6: Predicting low, medium, high MIS ratings of users in
heldout test set using the regularized multinomial logit model.

(χ2(7, N = 90K) = 915.523−279.801 = 635.722, p < 10−10),
with best ﬁts (low deviance) for models where w is closer to
w = 7 and decreasing as w goes lower or higher.
Next, in Figure 3 we report the mean weights of the coeﬃ-
cients (β) in the models generated on the bootstrap training
samples. We report on two models with best model ﬁts in Ta-
ble 5. We observe that the weights of the coeﬃcients mono-
tonically decrease backwards in time from the time when re-
sponse (MIS) is estimated — that is, if the model is ﬁt for
MIS in month ti, then the predictor variable (MIS) in month
t j has a larger coeﬃcient compared to the predictor variable
in tk, if month t j is closer to ti relative to month tk. Expect-
edly, more recent values of MIS in a user’s content provide
greater explanatory power towards future MIS values.
Prediction on Heldout Data. In the next part of our MIS pre-
diction analysis, we present the performance of our approach
when tested on the heldout test dataset of 10K users. We sum-
marize performance metrics of this multi-class classiﬁcation
via Table 6. We report average accuracy, precision, recall, and
F1 measures across the 10 diﬀerent sliding window choices
of our logit model. As also observed in the results on model
ﬁt, the highest accuracy (82%) and F1 (82%) are given by
model w = 7. Speciﬁcally, we obtain high accuracy and F1
for the 1 (low) and 3 (high) MIS ratings (accuracy: 89% and

1179

med
high
low

0.15

0.1

0.05

)
h
g
i
h

 
,

d
e
m

(
 
s
r
e
s
u

 
.
c
a
r
F

 

1

)

0.9

w
o
l
(
 
s
r
e
s
u

 
.
c
a
r
F

0.8

0

 

10
10

20
20

30
30
Months

40
40

50
50

0.7

Intc
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1

0

0.2

β

0.4

0.6

Intc
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1

0

0.2

β

0.4

0.6

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Figure 4: Distribution of diﬀerences between MIS ratings in
test set and those in the training set for all correct predictions
given by the w = 7 model (w is sliding window size). Positive
diﬀerence (right side of the distribution) implies the model
was able to predict that in the eighth month, the MIS rating
measured from content of a user was higher than the mean
MIS rating over the seven months preceding it.

87% respectively; and F1: 87% and 84% respectively). The
performance is found to be relatively lower for MIS rating 2
(medium) (accuracy 70% and F1 71%), which we attribute to
the ambiguity and subjectivity in such content. However all
three classes perform above baseline models (majority vote
models; since we use bagging and boosting, we are able to
test against a baseline of 33% — equally split three classes),
showing that past MIS rating of users measured from their
Instagram postings is indeed able to forecast future MIS.
Predicting low/medium MIS to high MIS Transitions.
Next, we wanted to investigate if our best performing model
(w = 7) can predict increase in MIS in the future in cases
where past MIS may be relatively lower. Being able to iden-
tify spike in MIS in a user’s content where past MIS was
lower can help direct appropriate help and support to those
likely to be at a heightened risk in the future. We calculate
the distribution of correctly classiﬁed users in our test set with
respect to the diﬀerence between their predicted/test MIS rat-
ing and the mean MIS rating in historical/training data. Pos-
itive diﬀerence between predicted/test data MIS rating and
that in historical/training data would indicate that our model
predicted correctly the increase in MIS for the user’s content
(ref. distribution in Figure 4).
As reported earlier (Table 6), in the set of 10K users in our test
dataset, 8,189 users are correctly classiﬁed i.e., we are able to
infer MIS rating in their content in the eighth month correctly,
based on ratings in the seven months before. We ﬁnd that in
the distribution given in Figure 4, for bulk of these correctly
classiﬁed users predicted future MIS rating is approximately
the same as past (notice the spike near zero diﬀerence). How-
ever, there is a notable fraction of the users (∼ 11%) for whom
our model correctly predicted an increase in MIS rating de-
spite comparatively lower MIS rating values in the past (no-
tice the right side of the distribution). Similarly, for ∼ 17%
we were able to infer accurately a decrease in MIS in the fu-
ture even though their MIS in the past was higher.

1180

Figure 5: Change in accuracy and F1 score of the w = 7 MIS
prediction model (w is sliding window size) for prediction
horizons h between 2 months and 10 months. Here prediction
horizon h implies the model is predicting MIS rating at month
t + h (h > 1) using MIS rating predictors from months t − w
through t − 1.

Broadly, this investigation shows that our model can not only
infer future MIS based on historically manifested MIS of sim-
ilar rating, but also is eﬀective in capturing increases and de-
creases in MIS based on the content shared on Instagram.
Prediction Horizon. Finally, how far out into the future can
we predict a user’s MIS rating? In other words, so far we have
shown that a model trained on MIS rating data between time
t − w and t − 1 (w is the sliding window size) can predict MIS
rating at time t. Using the same model, could we predict MIS
rating at time t + h, where h > 1? Here we deﬁne h as the
“prediction horizon” and Figure 5 presents the accuracy and
F1 measures of applying the w = 7 model (our best perform-
ing model from the previous paragraph) to predict MIS rating
2 months to 10 months out into the future (h = 2, 3, ..., 10).
Observations from Figure 5 indicate that, not surprisingly,
performance as measured by accuracy and F1 steadily dete-
riorates as we attempt to predict MIS rating further out into
the future. The best models, in other words, are found to be
those where predictions are attempted to be made closer in
time to the last observed time of MIS rating in the model (the
h = 2 model gives an accuracy of 78% and F1 of 80%). How-
ever we do note that since bagging and boosting allows us to
compare model performance at the baseline level (balanced
class sizes, 33%), our predictions of MIS rating continue to
be better than baseline through eight months into the future.

DISCUSSION
Summary of ﬁndings. Our results indicate that, despite the
majority of posts in our data bearing low levels of mental ill-
ness severity (MIS), users that share pro-ED content on Insta-
gram exhibit a trend of increasing MIS in their content over
time. Examples of high MIS content spans from expression
of negative self-perceptions to disordered thoughts about eat-
ing to graphic illustration of acts that could lead to physical
and emotional harm or death. Notably, we have found that
we can forecast a user’s manifested MIS over time up to eight
months into the future based on their MIS previously seen in
their Instagram posts. We show that historical tagged content

104

102

s
r
e
s
u

 
f
o

 
r
e
b
m
u
N

100
Test − Train MIS rating difference

−2

0

2

e
r
u
s
a
e
m
 
e
c
n
a
m
r
o
f
r
e
P

80
70
60
50
40
30
20

 

2

 

accuracy
F1

Prediction horizon (months)

8

10

4

6

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

and levels of MIS inferred from such content may predict the
MIS level in a user’s content in the future.
Implications of increase in MIS over time. A signiﬁcant
ﬁnding of our work is the steady increase in the proportion
of medium and high MIS users who share pro-ED content
over time. While pro-ED users would be expected to have a
higher manifestation of MIS, we show that there is a relative
increase in medium and high MIS expressed in content over
time. Although causal relationships cannot be inferred with-
out a more systematic investigation, examining why high MIS
occurs opens up several avenues for future research. Are indi-
vidual users showing markers of riskier behaviors because of
contagion eﬀects of the content they consume on Instagram?
Could increases in MIS be indicative of a shift in social norms
in the community?
It is important to note that, in response to media scrutiny in
2012 over the widespread prevalence of harmful content8, In-
stagram banned some of the most common tags and started
providing content advisories on certain others associated with
self-injurious behavior, suicide, pro-ED, and related content.
Per Instagram’s policy, banning does not prevent use of a tag
in a post but precludes these tags from returning in search
results. Could high MIS tag usage reﬂect an adversarial re-
sponse to these content moderation policies? Our conjecture
springs from the observation that communities often adopt
unprecedented and competing avenues to combat content reg-
ulation and moderation. For example, citizens of authoritar-
ian regimes avoid censorship by embracing diﬀerent forms
of linguistic variation [39]. Similar adoption of unorthodox
practices engender deviant communities engaging in cyber-
bullying and online harassment [55] as well as those involved
in socially unacceptable or damaging activities (human traf-
ﬁcking, drug abuse, violence, or organized crime) [11]. Fu-
ture research could explore the relationship between the ob-
served increases in levels of MIS in connection with the larger
moderation policy enforced by Instagram.

Design Implications
Limitations of Existing Efforts
Designing appropriate online interventions for populations at
risk to mental illness has been of interest to the HCI and
CSCW communities [37, 2]. Social media sites, in particular,
have traditionally relied on active human interventions, such
as reporting from peers, to identify users who may be shar-
ing vulnerable or harmful content. In the context of pro-ED
content with noticable levels of MIS, these eﬀorts may be lim-
iting. Often individuals sharing such content tend to remain
socially cohesive, isolated from the larger online community,
and exchange signiﬁcant social support around the promotion
and maintenance of harmful/dangerous behavior [46]. These
factors make traditional methods of discovery and interven-
tion challenging, if not impossible.
Some social media platforms have been making alternative
eﬀorts to contain the dissemination of such risky and vulner-
able content. As mentioned earlier, Instagram already has

8http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/social-
media/9775559/Concerns-raised-over-Instagram-after-app-allows-
users-to-see-photos-promoting-anorexia.html

a moderation policy in place for pro-self injury, pro-suicide,
and pro-ED content. Pinterest outright bans such content,
YouTube censors it, and Tumblr has taken a slightly diﬀer-
ent stance by providing public service announcements when
a user searches on such tags for the ﬁrst time. Certainly, there
are other platforms which do not take speciﬁc action on such
content – examples include Twitter, Flickr and Reddit.

Interventions
Our analytical methods may be used to ameliorate current ef-
forts to help discover vulnerable groups faster with greater
coverage and in a more robust, data-driven manner. This is
particularly valuable since MIS-prone individuals are known
to be 100 times more likely to commit suicide compared to
the general population [43]. In fact, we believe our models
can be used not only to predict individual MIS risk, but also to
identify at-risk communities outside of the pro-ED commu-
nity. Importantly, being able to trigger appropriate interven-
tions to help vulnerable communities may also help dampen
the eﬀect of social transmission of such content and behaviors
and even lead to dispersion of such clustered and cohesive
groups. We propose the following design considerations:
(1) Social and psychiatric support. Searches on content
with high MIS ratings by our method may automatically be
directed to links hosting helpful and research-supported re-
sources, highlighting the health risks of such activities. Sim-
ilarly, our methods could be used to detect whether a user
is attempting to post triggering content (e.g., pictures of cut-
ting). At that point the system could interject with a private
message that provides link to an appropriate psychological
disorder helpline.
(2) Self-monitoring.
Individuals may volunteer to self-
monitor their MIS estimated through our methods from their
social media content. Those keen on recovery may generate
and share abstracted trends of their MIS with a trusted friend,
family member, or therapist. These logs of risk over time
may provide more temporally nuanced assessments on MIS
than is possible through surveys, interviews, or other self-
reported information. This information can complement ex-
isting forms of psychological therapy, help establish rapport
between therapists and clients, and help overcome diﬃcul-
ties encountered in these settings due to clients’ reluctance in
sharing sensitive information about their mental health. How-
ever, disclosures through social media also raise ethical is-
sues for clinicians who need additional information in order
to make a determination of their patient’s level of risk to his
or herself. Use of our rating system would need to be nego-
tiated on a personal basis to ensure that each patient receives
the best treatment or intervention.
(3) Early-warning systems. Online communities and social
media platforms struggling with the contentious issue of pro-
ED, eating disorders, and mental illness more broadly may
leverage our method and ﬁndings to design and deploy per-
sonalized early-warning systems. In cases when inferred vul-
nerability is forecasted to surpass safety levels, support com-
munities may be engaged who can help and provide encour-
agement and psychosocial support. In fact, many online com-
munities also harbor a thriving “recovery” community to dis-
courage the adoption and manifestation of such at-risk behav-

1181

iors. For instance, “StopSelfHarm” is a subreddit on Reddit;
tags “stopselfharm”, “edrecovery”, and “dontgiveup” are of-
ten used on Instagram and Tumblr to raise awareness about
the harmful eﬀects of eating disorders and self-injurious be-
havior. For individuals whose social media content bears
markers of high mental health severity, such content may be
promoted or recommended in their respective social media
proﬁles, so that it increases exposure to alternative perspec-
tives on the issue.

Ethical Considerations
We note that intervention design in this space needs to honor
the privacy of the sensitive populations we study.
It is
also crucial to critically consider ethical issues arising with
algorithmically-driven interventions, such as conﬁdentiality,
risk of false alarms, and potential loss of control caused by
surveillance, forecasting, and regulation. Although we con-
sider public data in this work, social media posts are personal
information, and therefore appropriate ways need to be de-
vised that allow secure transmission and storage of content
used or generated by the interventions.
Mental illness is also a controversial topic. Is manifestation
of self-injurious behavior or suicidal ideation tendencies in
a public social media platform a “bad” thing? Who decides
what is “good” and what is “bad”? How can interventions be
implemented without infringing on the right for individuals
to express their ideas? We also need to think carefully about
the consequences of any kind of intervention. Communities
around mental illness have been known to prefer remaining
hidden, and any intervention made through social media plat-
forms like Instagram needs to ensure that it does not drive
the community in the fringes where they would be diﬃcult
to discover and extend help to. Platforms that wish to de-
sign and implement interventions will need to consult with
relevant stakeholders, such as clinicians, designers, and re-
searchers, to balance the desire to help individuals who may
need help, medically compliant/eﬀective diagnosis, and the
rights of users on these platforms.

Limitations and Future Work
Risk Factors of MIS Versus Diagnosis. We note that our
prediction is built for population-level analysis. Care should
be taken to extending these methods and ﬁndings to speciﬁc
individuals without direct clinical advice. Although our work
is corroborated by clinicians familiar with eating disorders,
our model accounts for risk factors to MIS only. Our research
does not make any claims to the Instagram users we study; it
is not clear to what extent individual users meet DSM criteria
for having an eating or other psychological disorder. We note
that we base our estimates of MIS solely on the content posted
on Instagram. We cannot be certain if the shared content is an
actual reﬂection of one’s mental health status, or there could
be under or over-reporting of the risk factors of MIS. Thus our
model does not claim to diagnose any user with a psycholog-
ical disorder or that a speciﬁc user will indeed act out any of
these dangerous behaviors. However, we do note the value
of our contributions in providing a complementary source of
data which can reveal markers of or levels of MIS above and
beyond self-reported or other clinical diagnosis information.

1182

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Oﬄine Behavior and Online Presence. We also recog-
nize that individuals, depending on their perception of the
social audience on Instagram, may carefully craft and ma-
neuver how they report MIS through their content. Our
method solely depends on the nature of content (tags) in the
Instagram posts, and hence our ﬁndings cannot account for
inter-individual diﬀerences due to personality attributes, self-
presentation, identity manifestation, or self-censorship [26].
However, since we measure changes in MIS per user over
time, we measure relative increase or decrease in MIS and
we believe that our method is not aﬀected by these concerns.
Beyond Eating Disorders. We presented a study focusing
on one kind of community (pro-ED) that shares content with
markers of high MIS. While the nature of MIS this commu-
nity portrays on Instagram is incredibly varied, it is possible
they do not include certain forms of MIS more prevalent in
other communities. We suggest caution in generalizing our
ﬁndings to arbitrary mental disorder communities or arbitrary
social media platforms; however, it remains an exciting direc-
tion for future research.
Future Directions. Finally, although we found that past low,
medium, or high MIS may be predictive of future MIS, we
need deeper understanding of the drivers and design char-
acteristics of the corresponding social media platform where
this kind of dangerous and vulnerable content is shared. Ad-
ditionally, future research could collaborate with clinicians
and their patients to examine the kinds of content patients and
those in recovery share on social media.

CONCLUSION
In this paper, we provided one of the ﬁrst empirical insights
into quantifying and characterizing levels of mental illness
severity (MIS) in social media content. Speciﬁcally, we pro-
posed a new method to predict future MIS in users who share
pro-ED content on Instagram. Our method combines LDA
topic modeling with clinicially-grounded human annotations
on MIS. Our results on a large dataset of 26M posts and 100K
users showed that prior content inferred to be of low, medium
or high MIS can be used to predict future MIS rating with
81.5% accuracy. This method was also found to perform bet-
ter than baseline up to eight months into the future. Impor-
tantly, we found that the proportional volume of Instagram
users who share pro-ED content and are inferred to express
heightened MIS has increased since 2012. We hope our ﬁnd-
ings to be valuable in the design of interventions that can
bring help and support to this proliferating vulnerable com-
munity on social media platforms.

REFERENCES
1. Soﬁane Abbar, Yelena Mejova, and Ingmar Weber.

2015. You Tweet What You Eat: Studying Food
Consumption Through Twitter. In Proc. CHI.

2. Nazanin Andalibi, Pinar Ozturk, and Andrea Forte.
2015. Depression-related Imagery on Instagram. In
Proc. CSCW’15 Companion. 231–234.

3. Jon Arcelus, Alex J Mitchell, Jackie Wales, and Sren

Nielsen. 2011. Mortality rates in patients with anorexia
nervosa and other eating disorders: a meta-analysis of 36
studies. Archv. Gen. Psychiatry 68, 7 (2011), 724–731.

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

4. American Psychiatric Association and others. 2013.

Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders,
(DSM-5). American Psychiatric Pub.

5. Jin Yeong Bak, Suin Kim, and Alice Oh. 2012.

Self-disclosure and relationship strength in twitter
conversations. In Proc. ACL. 60–64.

6. Anna M Bardone-Cone and Kamila M Cass. 2006.

Investigating the impact of pro-anorexia websites: A
pilot study. European Eating Disorders Review 14, 4
(2006), 256–262.

7. David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan.
2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine
Learning Research (JMLR) 3 (2003), 993–1022.
8. Dina LG Borzekowski, Summer Schenk, Jenny L

Wilson, and Rebecka Peebles. 2010. e-Ana and e-Mia:
A content analysis of pro–eating disorder web sites.
American journal of public health 100, 8 (2010), 1526.
9. Leo Breiman. 2001. Random forests. Machine learning

45, 1 (2001), 5–32.

10. Jay Callahan. 1996. A speciﬁc therapeutic approach to
suicide risk in borderline clients. Clinical Social Work
Journal 24, 4 (1996), 443–459.

11. Richard F Catalano and J David Hawkins. 1996. A

Theory of Antisocial Behavior. Delinquency and crime:
Current theories (1996), 149.

12. Laurence Claes, Koen Luyckx, Patricia Bijttebier,

Brianna Turner, Amarendra Ghandi, Jos Smets, Jan
Norre, Leen Van Assche, Els Verheyen, Yvienne Goris,
and others. 2015. Non-Suicidal Self-Injury in Patients
with Eating Disorder: Associations with Identity
Formation Above and Beyond Anxiety and Depression.
European Eating Disorders Review 23, 2 (2015),
119–125.

13. Michael Collins, Robert E Schapire, and Yoram Singer.

2002. Logistic regression, AdaBoost and Bregman
distances. Machine Learning 48, 1-3 (2002), 253–285.
14. Karen Conterio, W Lader, and JK Bloom. 1998. Bodily

harm: The breakthrough treatmentprogramfor
self-injurers. (1998).

15. Glen Coppersmith, Mark Dredze, and Craig Harman.
2014. Quantifying mental health signals in twitter. In
Proc. ACL CLCP Workshop.

16. Munmun De Choudhury. 2015. Anorexia on Tumblr: A

Characterization Study. In Proc. Digital Health.

17. Munmun De Choudhury, Scott Counts, Eric Horvitz,
and Aaron Hoﬀ. 2014. Characterizing and Predicting
Postpartum Depression from Facebook Data. In Proc.
CSCW.

18. Munmun De Choudhury, Michael Gamon, Scott Counts,
and Eric Horvitz. 2013. Predicting depression via social
media. In Proc. ICWSM.

19. Sharon K Farber, Craig C Jackson, Johanna K Tabin,

and Eytan Bachar. 2007. Death and annihilation
anxieties in anorexia nervosa, bulimia, and
self-mutilation. Psychoanalytic Psych 24, 2 (2007), 289.

20. Angela Favaro and Paolo Santonastaso. 1998. Impulsive

and compulsive self-injurious behavior in bulimia
nervosa: Prevalence and psychological correlates. The
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 186, 3 (1998),
157–165.

21. Armando R Favazza, Lori DeRosear, and K Conterio.
1989. Self-Mutilation and Eating Disorders. Suicide &
Life-Threatening Behavior 19, 4 (1989), 352–361.

22. Rachel A Fleming-May and Laura E Miller. 2010. I’m

scared to look. But I’m dying to know: Information
seeking and sharing on Pro-Ana weblogs. Proc. ASIST
47, 1 (2010), 1–9.

23. Yoav Freund, Robert E Schapire, and others. 1996.

Experiments with a new boosting algorithm. In ICML,
Vol. 96. 148–156.

24. W Gaebel, H Z¨aske, and AE Baumann. 2006. The

relationship between mental illness severity and stigma.
Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 113, s429 (2006),
41–45.

25. Sarah A St Germain and Jill M Hooley. 2012. Direct and
indirect forms of non-suicidal self-injury: Evidence for a
distinction. Psychiatry research 197, 1 (2012), 78–84.
26. Erving Goﬀman and others. 1959. The presentation of

self in everyday life. (1959).

27. Kim L Gratz, Sheree Dukes Conrad, and Lizabeth

Roemer. 2002. Risk factors for deliberate self-harm
among college students. American Journal of
Orthopsychiatry 72, 1 (2002), 128.

28. P Hasking, R Momeni, S Swannell, and S Chia. 2008.
The nature and extent of non-suicidal self-injury in a
non-clinical sample of young adults. Archives of Suicide
Research 12, 3 (2008), 208–218.

29. Matthew Hoﬀman, Francis R Bach, and David M Blei.
2010. Online learning for latent dirichlet allocation. In
Proc. NIPS.

30. Christopher M Homan, Ravdeep Johar, Tong Liu,

Megan Lytle, Vincent Silenzio, and Cecilia Alm. 2014a.
Toward Macro-Insights for Suicide Prevention:
Analyzing Fine-Grained Distress at Scale. ACL 2014
(2014), 107.

31. Christopher M Homan, Naiji Lu, Xin Tu, Megan C

Lytle, and Vincent Silenzio. 2014b. Social structure and
depression in TrevorSpace. In Computer-Supported
Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW).
32. James I Hudson, Eva Hiripi, Harrison G Pope, and

Ronald C Kessler. 2007. The prevalence and correlates
of eating disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey
Replication. Biological psychiatry 61, 3 (2007),
348–358.

33. Grace J Johnson and Paul J Ambrose. 2006. Neo-tribes:
The power and potential of online communities in health
care. Commun. ACM 49, 1 (2006), 107–113.

34. Adrienne S Juarascio, Amber Shoaib, and C Alix

Timko. 2010. Pro-eating disorder communities on social
networking sites: a content analysis. Eating disorders
18, 5 (2010), 393–407.

1183

35. Kelly L Klump, Cynthia M Bulik, Walter H Kaye, Janet
Treasure, and Edward Tyson. 2009. Academy for eating
disorders position paper: eating disorders are serious
mental illnesses. Int J Eat Disord 42, 2 (2009), 97–103.

36. Katrina Kostro, Jessica B Lerman, and Evelyn Attia.
2014. The current status of suicide and self-injury in
eating disorders: a narrative review. Journal of Eating
Disorders 2, 1 (2014), 19.

37. Reeva Lederman, Greg Wadley, John Gleeson, Sarah

Bendall, and Mario ´Alvarez-Jim´enez. 2014. Moderated
online social therapy: Designing and evaluating
technology for mental health. ACM Transactions on
Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 21, 1 (2014), 5.

38. Stephen P Lewis and Alexis E Arbuthnott. 2012.
Searching for thinspiration: the nature of internet
searches for pro-eating disorder websites.
Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking 15,
4 (2012), 200–204.

39. Rebecca MacKinnon. 2008. Flatter world and thicker
walls? Blogs, censorship and civic discourse in China.
Public Choice 134, 1-2 (2008), 31–46.

40. Diana MacLean, Sonal Gupta, Anna Lembke,

Christopher Manning, and Jeﬀrey Heer. 2015. Forum77:
An Analysis of an Online Health Forum Dedicated to
Addiction Recovery. In Proc. CSCW.

41. Jeanne B Martin. 2010. The development of ideal body
image perceptions in the United States. Nutrition Today
45, 3 (2010), 98–110.

42. Terence C Mills. 1991. Time series techniques for

economists. Cambridge University Press.

43. Paul Moran, Carolyn Coﬀey, Helena Romaniuk, Craig

Olsson, Rohan Borschmann, John B Carlin, and
George C Patton. 2012. The natural history of self-harm
from adolescence to young adulthood: a
population-based cohort study. The Lancet 379, 9812
(2012), 236–243.

44. Elizabeth L Murnane and Scott Counts. 2014.

Unraveling abstinence and relapse: smoking cessation
reﬂected in social media. In Proc. CHI.

45. Matthew K Nock and Mitchell J Prinstein. 2004. A

functional approach to the assessment of self-mutilative
behavior. Journal of consulting and clinical psychology
72, 5 (2004), 885.

46. Mark L Norris, Katherine M Boydell, Leora Pinhas, and
Debra K Katzman. 2006. Ana and the Internet: A review
of pro-anorexia websites. International Journal of
Eating Disorders 39, 6 (2006), 443–447.

47. Minsu Park, David W McDonald, and Meeyoung Cha.

2013. Perception Diﬀerences between the Depressed
and Non-depressed Users in Twitter. In Proc. ICWSM.

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

48. Michael J Paul and Mark Dredze. 2011. You Are What

You Tweet: Analyzing Twitter for Public Health. In
Proc. ICWSM.

49. Rebecka Peebles, Jenny L Wilson, and James D Lock.
2011. Self-injury in adolescents with eating disorders:
Correlates and provider bias. Journal of Adolescent
Health 48, 3 (2011), 310–313.

50. Mirella Ruggeri, Morven Leese, Graham Thornicroft,
Giulia Bisoﬃ, and Michele Tansella. 2000. Deﬁnition
and prevalence of severe and persistent mental illness.
The British Journal of Psychiatry 177, 2 (2000),
149–155.

51. Hansen Andrew Schwartz, Johannes C Eichstaedt,

Margaret L Kern, and Lukasz et al. Dziurzynski. 2013.
Characterizing Geographic Variation in Well-Being
Using Tweets. In ICWSM.

52. Yukari Seko. 2013. Picturesque Wounds: A Multimodal
Analysis of Self-Injury Photographs on Flickr. In Forum
Qualitative Sozialforschung/Forum: Qualitative Social
Research, Vol. 14.

53. Leslie Regan Shade. 2003. Weborexics: The Ethical

Issues Surrounding Pro-Ana Websites. SIGCAS Comput.
Soc. 33, 4 (Dec. 2003).

54. Fr´ed´erique RE Smink, Daphne van Hoeken, and

Hans W Hoek. 2012. Epidemiology of eating disorders:
incidence, prevalence and mortality rates. Current
psychiatry reports 14, 4 (2012), 406–414.

55. John R Suler and Wende L Phillips. 1998. The bad boys

of cyberspace: Deviant behavior in a multimedia chat
community. CyberPsychology & Behavior 1, 3 (1998),
275–294.

56. Karen L Suyemoto. 1998. The functions of

self-mutilation. Clinical psych rev 18, 5 (1998),
531–554.

57. Brianna J Turner, Angelina Yiu, Brianne K Layden,
Laurence Claes, Shannon Zaitsoﬀ, and Alexander L.
Chapman. 2015. Temporal associations between
disordered eating and nonsuicidal self-injury: examining
symptom overlap over 1 year. Behavior Therapy 46, 1
(2015), 125–138.

58. Robert F Valois, Keith J Zullig, and Amy A Hunter.

2013. Association between adolescent suicide ideation,
suicide attempts and emotional self-eﬃcacy. Journal of
Child and Family Studies 24, 2 (2013), 237–248.

59. Markus Wolf, Florian Theis, and Hans Kordy. 2013.

Language Use in Eating Disorder Blogs Psychological
Implications of Social Online Activity. Journal of
Language and Social Psychology 32, 2 (2013), 212–226.

60. Elad Yom-Tov, Luis Fernandez-Luque, Ingmar Weber,

and P Steven Crain. 2012. Pro-Anorexia and
Pro-Recovery Photo Sharing: A Tale of Two Warring
Tribes. J Med Internet Res (2012).

1184

