CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Taking Notes or Playing Games?  

Understanding Multitasking in Video Communication 

Jennifer Marlow 

FXPAL 

marlow@fxpal.com 

Eveline van Everdingen 

Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam 
e.a2.van.everdingen@student.vu.nl

Daniel Avrahami 

FXPAL 

 daniel@fxpal.com 

ABSTRACT 
This  paper  presents  a  detailed  examination  of  factors  that 
affect  perceptions  of  and  attitudes  towards  multitasking  in 
video conferencing. We first report findings from interviews 
with  15  professional  users  of  videoconferencing.  Our 
interviews revealed the roles and potential link of technology 
and activity. We then report results from a controlled online 
experiment with 397 participants based in the United States. 
Our  results  show  that  the  technology  used  for  multitasking 
has  a  significant  effect  on  others’  assumptions  of  what 
secondary  activity  the  multitasker  is  likely  engaged  in,  and 
that  this  assumed  activity  in  turn  affects  evaluations  of 
politeness and appropriateness. We also show that different 
layouts of the video conferencing UI can affect perception of 
engagement  in  the  meeting  and  in  turn  ratings  of  polite  or 
impolite  behavior.  We  propose  a  conceptual  model  that 
captures  our  results  and  use 
to  discuss 
implications  for  behavior  and  for  the  design  of  video 
communication tools.  
Author Keywords 
Multitasking; Video mediated communication; Experiment; 
Video conferencing 
ACM Classification Keywords  
H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: User 
Interfaces - Interaction styles.  
General Terms  
Human Factors; Design; Measurement. 
INTRODUCTION 
In  a  connected  digital  world, 
in  which  notifications, 
communication,  and  immediate  access  to  information  all 
fight  for  our  attention,  the  temptation  to  multitask  during 
face-to-face  and  online  meetings  is  great.  Certainly,  the 
modern workplace is full of distractions that can be difficult 
to  manage.  Multitasking  often  results  from  external  events 

the  model 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal  or  classroom  use  is  granted  without  fee  provided  that  copies  are  not 
made  or  distributed  for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that  copies  bear this 
notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this  work 
owned  by  others  than  the  author(s)  must  be  honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is 
permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to  redistribute  to 
lists, 
fee.  Request  permissions 
from  Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.  
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819975 

'16,  February  27-March  02,  2016,  San  Francisco,  C A,  USA  

requires  prior  specific  permission  and/or  a 

1726

Figure 1. Multitasking on a mobile device during a video 

conference (a keyframe from the experiment). 

and interruptions, or it can be self-initiated [1, 10, 11, 13]. 
 The pressure to multitask can be exacerbated by a workplace 
culture that requires employees to attend to multiple tasks or 
multiple  projects  at  once  [17].  With  the  proliferation  of 
personal  smartphones,  tablets  and  other  mobile  devices  in 
the workplace, opportunities to self-interrupt, be interrupted, 
or  multitask  have  grown.  Furthermore,  with  such  personal 
devices, the delineation between personal and work activities 
in the workplace is blurring. 
As distributed work teams become more prevalent, more and 
more meetings are being held over video conferencing. This 
can involve groups of people communicating via conference 
rooms  with  a  specialized  video  setup,  but  another  common 
scenario is one-on-one meetings with participants connecting 
to a video call from a personal laptop or desktop computer. 
This means that in some cases people are already using the 
computing  device 
they  will  also  be  using  for 
multitasking. 
While  the  effects  of  multitasking  in  face-to-face  meetings 
have been previously studied, the perceptions and effects of 
multitasking in small, video-mediated work conversations – 
the focus of this paper – are not well known. Past research 
has  provided  anecdotal  evidence  that  participants  in  video-
mediated  meetings  and  conversations  both  engage 
in 
multitasking  behaviors  and  suspect  others  are  doing  so  too 
(e.g.  [6]).  Building  on  these  observations,  the  goal  of  the 
present work was to answer the following research question:  
What factors influence perceptions of and attitudes towards 
multitasking behavior in video conferencing?

that 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

the  combination  of 

interviews  and  a 

To  investigate  this  question,  we  first  interviewed  people 
whose  jobs  involved  remote  collaboration  about  their 
experiences  with  multitasking  during  video  conferences. 
These  interviews  uncovered  parameters  that  influence  the 
obviousness and acceptability of multitasking behavior. We 
then  conducted  a  controlled  experiment  to  tease  apart  the 
relative influence of various technical and social factors on 
perceptions of multitasking behaviors in a video conference-
based meeting between two people (see Figure 1). 
large 
Through 
controlled  experiment  we  make  the  following  contributions 
to  the  field  of  CSCW:  1)  An  exploration  of  the  context  of 
multitasking in videoconferencing, uncovering the roles and 
potential  link  of  technology  and  activity,  2)  A  controlled 
investigation  of  the  effect  of  technology-related  factors  on 
observers’  evaluations  of  multitasking  behavior,  and  their 
assumptions about what secondary activity is being engaged 
in, and 3) A demonstration of the role that the design of the 
videoconferencing  tool  itself  may  have  in  influencing 
perceptions  and  outcomes.  Our 
results  have  direct 
implications  for  the  design  of  videoconferencing  tools  and 
device  ecosystems  for  reducing  the  negative  impact  of 
multitasking on communication. 
RELATED WORK 
Multitasking in face-to-face meetings 
Multitasking  activities  during  a  meeting  can  take  many 
forms: they may be related to something that is going on in 
the  meeting  (e.g.  verifying  information,  looking  at  the 
document  being  discussed),  they  may  be  related  to  other 
work that the participant needs to get done, or they may be 
personal and unrelated to either the meeting or work. Several 
lines of work have looked at the role of multitasking during 
in-person meetings.  
One  relevant  area  pertains  to  differences  in  the  perceived 
politeness  and  self-reported  frequency  of  using  technology 
such  as  laptops  and  mobile  phones  for  work  or  non-work 
purposes during meetings [5, 25]. Particularly, multitasking 
may not always be easy to detect. For example, when laptops 
are  used  during  a  meeting,  speakers  cannot  be  sure  what  a 
laptop  is  being  used  for  (e.g.  taking  notes  or  browsing  the 
internet),  which  may  deter  them  from  attributing  disrespect 
[14].  Additionally,  it  is  not  always  clear  to  an  observer 
whether a multitasking behavior (for example, replying to a 
text message during a meeting) is necessary or not [17].  
Finally,  individual  characteristics  also  influence  the  degree 
to which multitasking is viewed as acceptable. For example, 
an  individual’s  own  tendency  to  multitask  [4],  national 
culture [8], social and organizational norms [23] and gender 
[25]  can  influence  perceptions  of  the  acceptability  and 
civility of doing other things during a meeting.  
Video-mediated multitasking 
Multitasking  behavior  over  video  conferencing  has  been 
described 
and  personal 
conversations.  For  example,  teenagers  often  divide  their 

in  both  work-related 

[6] 

impact 

attention  between  multiple  activities  (like  browsing  the 
internet or social networking sites) while on a video call [7]. 
Several elements may contribute to a desire to multitask in 
online meetings: First, the communication itself most likely 
takes  place  on  a  computing  device  (a  computer,  tablet, 
phone, etc.) where other applications and information await. 
Next, unlike in face-to-face meetings, in video conferencing, 
only  a  small  part  of  the  user’s  body  and  surroundings  are 
typically  visible  to  other  parties  in  the  meeting  allowing  to 
potentially  hide  their  secondary  activity.  Finally,  it  is  even 
possible that participants would feel that in online meetings, 
even if it were known that they are multitasking it could be 
less obvious to other parties who are not co-located what it is 
they are doing.  
One 
that  multitasking  can  have  on  video 
communication is that it potentially affects gaze. People are 
fairly  accurate  at  detecting  when  eye  contact/gaze  is  being 
directed  at  them,  and  this  feeling  of  direct  eye  contact  can 
build  trust  [3].  For  this  reason,  much  research  on  building 
video conferencing systems has focused on finding ways to 
enhance  the  perception  of  direct  eye  contact  (e.g.  [12]). 
Multitasking  can  disrupt  the  feeling  of  direct  eye  gaze  by 
causing  an  individual’s  attentional  focus  to  be  directed 
elsewhere. For example, when engaging in an unrelated chat 
or  email  during  a  video  conference,  attention  and  eye  gaze 
will be shifted away from the webcam or video chat screen.  
Therefore, the technology used for multitasking may play a 
big  role  in  influencing  perception.  For  example,  a  user 
performing  the  secondary  task  on  their  smartphone  will 
appear  different  from  a  user  performing  the  secondary  task 
on the same screen where the videoconferencing software is 
running.  People  participating  in  meetings  with  a  single 
device have greater obscurity with regards to what they are 
doing  (they  could  be  doing  different  things  in  different 
browser tabs, only one of which is visible at any given time.)  
In addition to where a person is looking, the reason for the 
multitasking,  or  perhaps  more  importantly,  the  reason 
assumed  by  the  other  person,  is  likely  to  also  influence 
perceptions  of  the  appropriateness  of  the  behavior.  The 
effects of gaze are at least partly determined by a subjective 
interpretation [9]. Therefore, an observer’s assumption about 
what  a  person  is  looking  at  could  affect  perceptions  of 
behavior more than any absolute activity.  
Consequences of multitasking 
Multitasking 
in  a  meeting  can  be  disruptive  and 
counterproductive to other participants. For example, 51% of 
respondents to a recent survey about videoconferencing cited 
people who are multitasking – e.g., tapping on a keyboard – 
as  a  major  distraction  [21].  When  there  is  a  large  group, 
there may be some expectation that not all participants need 
to  be  actively  engaged.  In  one-on-one 
interdependent 
conversations,  however,  multitasking  by  one  party  all  but 
guarantees a disruption in the flow of events [17]. 

1727

also 

regards 

is 

that 

occur 
to 

their  behavior 

less  obvious  since 

The  concept  of  actor-observer  asymmetry  [19]  states  that 
people  often  perceive  their  own  behavior  in  a  way  that  is 
different  than  how  others  perceive  that  behavior.  This  has 
been observed in the context of multitasking during face-to-
face  meetings  [5],  where  respondents  thought  others  were 
much more likely to be playing games, browsing their social 
network  or  browsing  the  web  during  meetings  than  they 
reported doing themselves. 
Although  individuals  may  think  their  own  multitasking 
behavior  is  either  unobtrusive  or  appropriate,  they  tend  to 
evaluate  others  who  are  multitasking  more  harshly  and  see 
that  behavior  as  rude  [16].  Krishnan  et  al.  [17]  found  that 
when a negotiation partner was receiving and checking text 
messages during a conversation, they were perceived as less 
professional and less trustworthy. It is possible that a similar 
in 
phenomenon  will 
video-mediated 
communication  with 
the  perception  of 
multitasking. A multitasker in a videoconference might also 
feel 
their 
conversation partner does not have access to  the full  set of 
cues about what they are doing.  
Ultimately,  multitasking  in  a  video  conversation  involves  a 
series  of  tensions  between  a  person’s  need  or  desire  to 
perform  multiple  tasks,  and  a  need  to  focus  (and  appear 
focused)  on  the  video  communication.  The  ambiguity  of 
behavior that comes with multitasking in video conferencing 
could  be  beneficial  or  harmful  to  different  parties  in  the 
conversation.  
In  this  paper  we  examine  the  following  general  questions: 
in  video 
How 
conferencing?  What 
towards 
multitasking in video conferencing? 
To  answer  these  questions,  we  first  conducted  a  series  of 
interviews with remote workers about their experiences with 
multitasking  in  video  communication.  We  then  used  the 
insights  gained  through  these  interviews  to  design  and 
conduct a controlled experiment that explores these factors in 
detail. In the remainder of this paper, we report the findings 
from the interview and experiment, then discuss implications 
for behavior and technology design.  
VIDEOCONFERENCING IN PROFESSIONAL USE 
To  begin  understanding  the  different  instances  in  which 
multitasking  might  occur  during  video  meetings,  we 
conducted semi-structured interviews with professional users 
of  videoconferencing  technologies.  These  interviews  were 
conducted  as  part  of  a  larger  study  on  videoconferencing 
practices. We interviewed 15 knowledge workers (11 male, 4 
female) from a variety of industries and companies. In these 
interviews,  participants  discussed 
their  use  of  video 
for  both  one-on-one  and  group  video 
conferencing 
conferencing  meetings.  Across 
the  cases,  multitasking 
naturally emerged as a major theme when experiences with 
videoconferencing were discussed.  

for  multitasking 
factors  affect  attitudes 

technology  used 

is 

1728

SESSION: RICH TELEPRESENCE

these 

to  multitasking  with 

Participants mentioned engaging in multitasking themselves 
and  suspecting  that  their  meeting  partners  were  doing  the 
same. However, all multitasking was not the same, nor was 
the way in which it was performed. From the many examples 
given  by  the  interviewees,  the  nature  of  the  multitasking 
activity  and  the  device  on  which  the  secondary  activity 
occurred  emerged  as  two  key  dimensions.  We  analyzed  all 
examples  pertaining 
two 
dimensions in mind. 
The nature of the multitasking activity 
Comments  about  the  multitasking  activities  fell  into  three 
main  categories:  First,  the  multitasking  could  be  meeting 
related  where  a  participant  may  wish  to  look  at  related 
documents, check facts, or engage in “sidebar conversations” 
related to the topic being discussed in the meeting. This type 
of  behavior  is  related  to  the  topic  being  discussed  in  the 
meeting, but may mean shifting one’s attention to a different 
part  of  the  screen,  a  different  area  of  the  screen  than  the 
video  window,  or  to  a  different  screen  altogether.  The 
second  category  of  activities  was  other  work-related 
multitasking  in  which  a  participant  may  be  distracted  by 
another important or urgent work-related inquiry, such as an 
IM message from another colleague or client. Finally, a third 
category  was  personal  activities  such  as  checking  personal 
email, browsing Facebook, or playing with physical toys.  
Meeting-related multitasking 
Interviewees provided examples of cases where they (or their 
teammates)  would  multitask  during  meetings,  but 
the 
multitasking  behavior  was  relevant  to  the  content  being 
discussed.  Typically 
large  group 
conferences;  this  type  of  “sidebar”  behavior  has  been 
frequently observed in other contexts as well (c.f., [20]). As 
one interviewee said: 

took  place 

this 

in 

One thing that happens sometimes is we have IM chats, 
like  side  conversations  going  on  during  the  meeting. 
Usually, I can’t do that, because I am the chair, so I am 
usually sharing, so I can’t. (P9) 

In  cases  where  screen  sharing  of  common  referents  like 
documents, photos, etc. was a main focus of activity, it was 
possible that a meeting participant would pull up the referent 
in a new browser tab or window and focus their attention on 
the artifact. This, however, was challenging because it meant 
that they were unable to focus on the video window showing 
the  “talking  head”  of  their  conversation  partner,  but  they 
were  nevertheless  engaged  in  the  topic  of  the  conversation 
even if their gaze was not directed at the other person.  

I  find  it  hard  to  engage  [over  videoconferencing]  with 
people. I find I am not actually looking at them most of 
the  time  when  I  am  video  conferencing.  It  is  the  same 
way  with  the  lesson.  I  am  looking  at  the  photo  that  he 
sent me, I am not looking at him. (P7) 
We weren't screen sharing or anything. I guess we just 
tabbed away from the video screen and then had the doc 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

up. When we were referencing it, we could go through it 
together. (P1) 

Other work-related multitasking 
Another category of multitasking behavior was dealing with 
disruptions related to other work not relevant to the meeting. 
For example, responding to another colleague’s messages or 
interruptions  during  a  meeting  (for  example,  if  a  question 
needed to be addressed). This meant that the focus would not 
completely be on the conversation. 

Sometimes I have other interaction going on with other 
team  members  and  side  comments.  I  have  another  IM 
going on. (P2) 

type  of  behavior  would  sometimes  occur 

This 
in 
videoconferencing meetings that involve multiple people at a 
single location: 

There's  two  people  remotely,  three  people  in  the  room, 
and somebody asks a question and the people remotely 
are  talking,  and  then  somebody  in  the  room  thinks  it's 
okay  to  ask  me  a  question  about  something  slightly 
different while they're talking. (P4) 
Personal and unrelated multitasking 
Finally,  a  third  category  of  multitasking  behavior  that  was 
mentioned  was  doing  personal  or  unrelated  multitasking 
during  a  meeting,  often  not  paying  attention 
the 
conversation.  

to 

If  you’re  not  in  on  the  conversation,  if  it’s  something 
completely unrelated to you, you might be playing with 
Buckyballs or reading your email instead or something 
like that. (P11) 

In fact, being able to multitask without being seen was cited 
as a reason for preferring to meet over the phone instead of 
via a video call: 

Usually,  I  don’t  like  doing  video  because  if  you’re 
working on something else, it would be rude to not look 
at the camera all the time, so personally I prefer voice 
calls... (P6) 

The same interviewee noted that when she was working on 
something else off-screen, audio cues could still give away 
the fact that she was otherwise engaged:  

If I’m typing something, you can hear it in the chat, and I 
feel really bad because it’s obvious sometimes. (P6) 

technical  configurations  for 

Technology used for multitasking 
Another  theme  that  emerged  was  that  participants  had 
different 
their  work.  The 
comments 
certain 
configurations  were  more  likely  to  be  used  for  some 
purposes than for others. For example, laptops could be used 
for meeting-related multitasking: 

they  made 

suggested 

that 

that 

If  something’s  mentioned  mid-conversation,  I  might 
actually look into it while other people are talking about 
it on my laptop but yeah, it’s not consistent amongst all 

1729

the  employees  whether  we  do  or  not...  [Name],  for 
instance,  almost  always  brings  her  laptop  to  the  table 
and  is  usually  multitasking  in  the  middle  of  the 
conversation. (P11) 

Having  multiple  monitors  also  enabled  one  participant  to 
refer to relevant meeting-related material in the course of a 
conversation: 

I  actually  have  four  monitors  on  my  system,  and  most 
people have two. You can be sharing a couple of screens 
and looking at a third screen to look up stuff. (P9) 

Other activities were not tied to an exclusive configuration. 
For example, taking notes or accessing email could occur on 
either a laptop or a mobile device: 

Yes, usually take notes on my iPhone or on Note. (P7) 
I’d say 25% of the time I am doing emails on my laptop 
and I’d say 70% of the time or 65% of the time I’m doing 
it on my phone. Then 5 to 10% of the time I’m doing it 
on my iPad. (P5) 

tool 

itself 

influence 

perceptions 

finally,  does 

These initial findings give valuable insight into self-reported 
multitasking  behaviors  and  the  range  of  activities  engaged 
in,  and  devices  or  technologies  used.  These  insights  also 
expose three important questions: How does the technology 
used  for  multitasking  affect  observers’  assumptions  about 
the  secondary  activity?  How  does 
technology  affect 
evaluations  of  the  appropriateness  and  politeness  of  the 
the  video 
multitasking  behavior?  And 
conferencing 
of 
multitasking? 
EXPERIMENT 
To  further  understand  how  the  factors  elicited  in  our 
interviews  influence  perceptions  of,  and  attitudes  towards 
multitasking behavior in video conferencing, we designed a 
controlled  experiment.  In 
the  experiment,  participants 
viewed one of a set of short video clips depicting a part of a 
videoconferencing  meeting  between  two  coworkers.  In  the 
clip  (except  for  a  control  condition),  one  of  the  coworkers 
engaged in multitasking (see Figure 1).  
Participants then rated the behavior of the people in the clip 
along  several  dimensions  of  interest,  including  politeness, 
engagement,  and  the  likely  secondary  activity  of  the 
multitasker.  We  focused  on  one-on-one  interactions  as  a 
good  starting  point  because  this  is  a  setting  in  which 
perceived  attention  should  be  most  important  (there  is  no 
plausible deniability or doubt about participation). We were 
interested in what influenced the perception of what activity 
a person was likely to be doing, how engaged did they seem, 
and how appropriate or polite their behavior was. The two 
key  elements  manipulated  in  the  experiment  were  thus  the 
technology used for the secondary task, and the layout of the 
videoconferencing tool. 

Hypotheses 
In our interviews, laptops, second monitors, and smartphones 
were  all  mentioned  as  technologies  used  for  multitasking 
during  videoconferencing.  Given  that  these  devices  are 
commonly  associated  with  different  primary  uses,  we 
hypothesize  that  seeing  a  person  multitask  on  different 
devices  will  influence  what  observers  assume  the  person  is 
doing:  
H1.  The  technology  used  for  multitasking  will  have  a 
significant effect on the assumed secondary activity. 
The assumed activity should, in turn, affect how polite and 
acceptable multitasking behavior is judged: 
H2.  The  assumed  secondary  activity  will  have  a  significant 
effect on ratings of politeness and acceptability. 
Furthermore,  the  technology  used  may  make  multitasking 
easier to spot and may have a direct or indirect effect on how 
polite or acceptable the multitasking behavior is judged: 
H3.  The  technology  used  for  multitasking  will  have  a 
significant effect on ratings of politeness and acceptability. 
Still,  if  H3  is  supported,  would  more  overt  multitasking  be 
considered  more  or 
less  acceptable?  On  one  hand, 
multitasking on a different screen or device may be seen as 
more forthcoming and less deceiving, and thus more polite. 
On the other hand, multitasking on the same screen may be 
seen  as  less  egregious  and  more  ambiguous.  We  thus  pose 
two, contradicting, sub-hypotheses for H3, expecting at least 
one to be rejected. 
H3a: Multitasking on one screen will be rated as more polite 
and acceptable than on a second-screen or mobile device. 
and 
H3b: Multitasking on a second-screen or mobile device will 
be rated as more polite and acceptable than on one screen. 
Finally, we were interested in whether the presentation of the 
parties  in  the  videoconference  influences  attitudes  towards 
multitasking.  While  in  some  videoconferencing  tools  the 
local  and  remote  participants  are  both  shown  at  the  same 
size, in others, the video of the remote participant occupies 
the  majority  of  the  screen  and  the  local  participant  is  only 
shown a small video of herself. We hypothesize that a larger 
view  of  multitasking  by  a  remote  participant  would  reduce 
ratings  of 
the 
their  engagement 
acceptability of their behavior: 
H4:  Seeing  multitasking  in  a  visually  larger  format  will 
reduce  ratings  of  the  multitasker’s  engagement  in  the 
meeting and how polite and acceptable their behavior is.  
Method 
For  the  experiment,  which  employed  a  between-subjects 
design,  we  created  a  set  of  short  1-minute  video  clips 
depicting  a  part  of  a  meeting  between  two  coworkers.  In 
these  clips,  one  coworker  (“Person  A”)  describes  three 
different  locations  in  which  an  advertising  campaign  could 

the  meeting  and 

in 

1730

SESSION: RICH TELEPRESENCE

be conducted. The second coworker (“Person B”) passively 
responds to Person A’s remarks with short comments such as 
“yeah”  and  “uh-huh”.  While  the  clips  varied  along  several 
dimensions  (detailed  below),  all  clips  without  exception 
followed the script shown in Figure 2.  
The  video  clips  were  created  as  follows:  First,  in  order  to 
control  for  differences  that  might  stem  from  the  gender  of 
the  coworkers  depicted  in  the  videos,  we  created  two 
versions  of  each  clip:  one  in  which  Person  A  and  B  were 
both  male,  and  one  in  which  Person  A  and  B  were  both 
female.  The  script,  timing,  and  behaviors  were  identical 
across the two versions. For simplicity, in the remainder of 
this  section,  whenever  a  clip  is  described,  it  should  be 
assumed that two identical clips were created for both actor 
genders. 
In  order  to  maintain  experimental  control,  we  recorded  the 
video  of  Person  A  once,  and  used  this  video  in  all  the 
conditions.  This  novel  approach  prevents  any  difference  in 
the  behavior  of  Person  A  from  influencing  participants’ 
judgment of the behavior of Person B. 
To test the effect of the technology used for multitasking, we 
created 
the  video  with  Person  B 
multitasking  (see  Figure  3)  and  a  fourth  version  with  no 
multitasking. In all conditions, Person B begins by directing 

three  versions  of 

...Which is why we need it by next Thursday. 
I see… Should I talk to Don about it? 

A: 
B: 
A:  Yeah. That’s a good idea. 
A:  So...the main thing I have for today is that I wanted to 
get your opinion on three potential locations where we 
[notification sound plays] could show the ads as part of 
the marketing campaign 

B:  Uh-huh  
 
A:  So, looking at the pictures I took today, the first location 

B begins multitasking 

is a bus stop downtown near the courthouse. The 
Northbound and eastbound buses all stop here so there 
should be lots of potential traffic. 

B:  Mmmhmm…. 
A:  The second location is a billboard that is next to the 

highway 

B:  Yeah 
A:  The third location is near the baseball stadium 
B:  Sure 
A:  Now, if you look at the email I sent, you can see the 

relative costs and potential views for each of the 
locations.  
B looks back at A 

 
A:  The bus stop is going to be the least expensive, the 

billboard is the most expensive, and the baseball stadium 
is somewhere in between. 

Figure 2. Video script: An exchange between two coworkers 

(Person A and Person B). 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

a) Multitasking on the same screen 

 

b) Multitasking on a dual monitor 

  

c) Multitasking on a mobile device 

  

Figure 3. Sample key-frames showing B’s gaze when multitasking in three experimental conditions. 

a) Side-by-Side UI layout 

 

 

b) Big-and-Small UI layout 

 

Figure 4. Two UI layouts used in the study based on common layouts in video conferencing applications. 

the  same  screen  on  which 

their  gaze  towards  the  webcam  (straight  ahead).  However, 
after  a  short  notification  sound  is  heard,  Person  B  starts 
engaging  in  multitasking.  In  the  first  version,  the  Same 
Screen condition (Figure 3a), Person B directs their gaze to a 
different  window  on 
the 
videoconference  is  taking  place.  In  the  Dual  Monitor 
condition  (Figure  3b),  Person  B  directs  their  gaze  to  a 
secondary  monitor  set  up  next  to  the  main  screen.  In  the 
Mobile  device  condition  (Figure  3c),  Person  B  directs  their 
gaze  downwards  to  a  mobile  phone  they  were  holding  and 
interacting with in their lap.  
In  order  to  test  hypothesis  H4,  we  created  two  versions  of 
each  video  that  varied  in  the  presentation  layout  of  the 
videoconferencing  (see  Figure  4).  We  chose  two  common 
layouts of videoconferencing applications. In the first layout, 
which we refer to as “Big-and-Small”, Person B is shown in 
a  large  window  occupying  the  majority  of  the  video  and 
Person  A  appears  in  a  small  thumbnail  (Figure  4a).  This 
layout  is  similar  to  popular  videoconferencing  applications 
such as Skype and Google Hangouts. In the second, “Side-
by-Side” layout, Person A and Person B are shown side by 
side with equal size video feeds (Figure 4b). This common 
videoconferencing layout is used most often in multi-person 
video meetings.  
To summarize, the full experimental design was as follows: 
× 4  Multitasking Technology  

(Same Screen, Dual Monitor, Mobile Device, None) 

 

× 2  Layout (Side-by-Side vs. Big-and-Small) 
× 2  Actor gender (Female-Female vs. Male-Male) 
= 16 conditions in total 

1731

Measures 
After  watching  the  video,  participants  were  asked  to  give 
open-ended  responses  describing  separately  what  they  saw 
each  person  in  the  meeting  do.  We  used  these  open-ended 
responses both to confirm that participants had paid attention 
to  the  video  clip  and  also  to  get  an  initial  sense  of  their 
impressions  of  and  reactions  to  Person  A  and  Person  B’s 
behaviors.  
To test hypotheses H2 and H3, we asked participants to rate 
the  behavior  of  Person  B  (the  multitasker).  Since  the 
participants  in  our  experiment  only  observed  the  meeting 
rather than participated in it (not an uncommon situation in 
multi-person  meetings),  we  asked 
the 
obviousness of the multitasking from their perspective, and 
the perspective of Person A. The following were rated on a 
5-point Likert-scale ranging from “Completely Disagree” to 
“Completely Agree” 
1.  Person B’s behavior was polite during the conversation 
2.  Person B’s behavior was acceptable during the 

them 

to 

rate 

3. 
4. 

conversation 
It was obvious to me that Person B was multitasking 
It was obvious to Person A that Person B was 
multitasking 

5.  Person A was engaged with the meeting  
6.  Person B was engaged with the meeting  
Next, in order to test H1 and H2, participants were asked to 
rate the likelihood that Person B was engaged in each of a set 
of  8  secondary  activities  on  a  5-point  Likert-scale,  from 
“Very  Unlikely”  to  “Very  Likely”.  Two  of  the  8  activities 
were meeting related (“Focusing on the document person A 

age, 

gender, 

experience  with 

is talking about”, and “Searching for other locations for the 
advertising  campaign”),  three  were  related  to  other  work 
activities  (“Looking  at  a  document  for  another  project”, 
“Reading  a  work-related  email  from  another  co-worker”, 
and  “Chatting  with  another  co-worker”),  and  three  were 
personal  activities  (“Browsing  Facebook”,  “Reading  a 
personal email”, and “Chatting with a friend”). The order of 
the list of activities was randomized for each participant. 
Finally,  we  collected  demographic  information,  including 
participants’ 
video 
conferencing  (Skype,  Google  Hangouts,  etc.)  and  comfort 
with  multitasking  (using  the  PAI  scale  of  polychronic-
monochronic tendency [15]). 
Procedure 
The  experiment  was  set  up  as  an  online  experiment  using 
Amazon  Mechanical  Turk.  Participation  in  the  task  was 
limited  to  individuals  in  the  United  States.  Upon  accepting 
the task, participants were randomly assigned to one of the 
sixteen conditions described above. Participants were shown 
a  1-minute  video  clip  of  the  videoconferencing  meeting 
based  on  their  assigned  condition.  We  used  a  timer  on  the 
page  to  prevent  participants  from  advancing  past  the  video 
before the video was finished. Participants then answered the 
open-ended  questions,  rated  the  behavior  they  saw  in  the 
video,  and 
finally  provided  biographical  data  and 
information about their multitasking preferences.  
We recorded the time participants took to interact with each 
page of questions in order to filter participants who quickly 
answered all the questions or neglected the task for very long 
durations.  We  also  included  a  “check  question”  about  the 
locations  discussed  in  the  meeting  (see  Figure  2)  to  ensure 
that  participants  had  paid  attention  to  the  content  of  the 
video. The full task took 3 minutes to complete. Participants 
were paid 30 cents for their time. 
Participants 
436  participants  completed  the  task1.  We  excluded  18 
participants  who  failed  to  answer  the  check  question 
correctly or gave the same rating value to all questions. We 
also excluded 10 participants whose completion time was too 
short/long  based  on  a  Mahalanobis  Outlier  analysis.  Thus, 
our  full  dataset  for  analysis  included  408  participants,  with 
an  average  of  25  participants  per  condition  (Min=17, 
Max=36, SD=5.36). 48% of participants were women. Age 
was reported in bands with 50% between the ages of 25-34. 
RESULTS 
Overall, participants appropriately rated Person A as highly 
engaged  in  the  meeting  (M=4.4)  and  Person  B  as  less 

                                                             
1 Nearly half (47%) of participants attempted to complete the 
task  a  second  and  third  time;  however,  to  keep  the 
experiment  as  a  between-subject  design,  only  their  first 
attempt was kept. 

1732

SESSION: RICH TELEPRESENCE

ratings 

(whether 

and  Acceptability 

engaged (M=2.6). A Wilcoxon Signed Rank test shows this 
difference is significant (p<.001).  
Politeness 
ratings  were 
significantly  highly  correlated  (r=.82;  p<.001).  Ratings  of 
Person B’s engagement in the meeting were correlated with 
the  behavior  seen  as  polite  (r=.71;  p<.001)  and  acceptable 
(r=.67; p<.001). On the other hand, the more obvious it was 
that  multitasking  was  taking  place,  the  less  polite  (r=-.49; 
p<.001)  and  less  acceptable  (r=-.42;  p<.001)  the  behavior 
seemed.  A  comparison  showed  that  participants  thought  it 
was more obvious to them that multitasking was taking place 
than to Person A (M=3.5 vs. M=3.0; t(396)=9.4; p<.001). In 
the  remaining  analyses,  we  look  only  at  how  obvious 
multitasking was to the participant. 
Open-ended responses 
Checking participants’ open-ended responses to confirm our 
manipulations,  it  was  apparent  that  overall,  they  perceived 
what  was  happening  in  the  videos  as  intended.  Many 
expressed an opinion that Person A was “actively involved in 
the  conversation  and  was  leading  it.”  For  the  multitasking 
conditions,  many  responses  referred  to  Person  B  doing 
something  else 
it  was  explicitly  noted  or 
‘presumed’ behavior). Participants also referred to noticing a 
change  in  Person  B’s  gaze,  body  language,  and  behavior 
(e.g.  “Person  B  started  off  engaged  and  then  kind  of  got 
distracted or drifted off”).  
In  the  process  of  examining  the  open-ended  responses,  we 
also discovered that while participants in the Mobile Device 
condition easily identified that multitasking was taking place 
(and  gave  a  high  rating  for  multitasking  being  obvious, 
M=3.88),  more  than  half  of  them  thought  that  Person  B’s 
secondary  activity  was  taking  notes  rather  than  interacting 
with their phone (as opposed to the Dual Monitor condition 
where  multitasking  was  both  rated  as  obvious  (M=4.1)  and 
correctly  perceived  as  happening  on  a  second  screen).  The 
fact that a downward gaze was as easily interpreted as being 
fully engaged in the meeting as it was as being completely 
disengaged  is  interesting.  However,  in  order  to  understand 
attitudes  towards  multitasking  in  the  context  of  technology 
use, we wanted to focus on exploring participants’ reactions 
when they realized that Person B’s activity was taking place 
on a phone, not on paper.  
To  address  this,  we  recruited  49  new  participants  for  the 
Mobile Device condition, this time clarifying that Person B’s 
downwards gaze was directed at a phone. Specifically, prior 
to watching the video, instructions now stated that “During 
the  meeting,  one  person 
their  phone.” 
Examining  the  responses  of  these  new  participants  showed 
that  while  multitasking  was  rated  just  as  obvious  as  before 
(M=3.87),  ambiguity  was  reduced,  with  comments  often 
referencing  the  use  of  a  phone  (e.g.,  “Person  B  was 
distracted  and  checking  his  phone  messaging.  He  wasn't 
offering  any  feedback  to  Person  A  except  for  a  minimal 
'mmhuh'  etc.  He  was  being  rude,  disrespectful  and 
inattentive  to  Person  A”,  and  “She  basically  listened  to 

looking  at 

is 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Figure 5. Effect of technology on assumed activity. 

Figure 6. Effect of technology on politeness of multitasking. 

 

 

Person A and then she started looking at her phone and not 
really  listening.  She  was  kind  of  rude.”).  In  subsequent 
analyses, for the Mobile Device condition, we used the data 
from  these  new  participants.  The  full  data  analyzed  thus 
includes a total of 397 participants.  
Multitasking vs. No Multitasking 
To  test  the  underlying  assumption  that  multitasking  is 
perceived  more  negatively  than  no  multitasking,  we  align-
ranked  participants’  ratings  [26]  and  performed  analyses  of 
variance 
(ANOVA)  of  Multitasking  Technology  on 
Politeness,  Engagement  (of  B),  and  Obviousness  of  the 
multitasking.  We  then  compared  ratings  from  the  Control 
condition and each other condition. 
As expected, participants in the Control condition rated the 
Obviousness  of  multitasking  very  low,  significantly  lower 
than  any  of  the  multitasking  conditions  (M=2.3  vs.  M=3.9; 
F[3,393]=50.7; p<.001). Behavior in the Control group was 
also  rated  as  more  polite  (M=3.8)  than  in  any  of  the  other 
conditions  (F[3,393]=53.5;  p<.001)  and  more  acceptable 
(M=3.7) 
the  Dual  Monitor  and  Mobile  Device 
conditions  (F[3,393]=36.4,  p<.001).  However,  engagement 
in 
the  Control  condition  was  rated 
significantly  higher  than  the  Dual  Monitor  and  Mobile 
Device  conditions,  but  not  different  from  the  Same  Screen 
condition (F[3,393]=18.7; p<.001).  
We were now ready to test our hypotheses. In the analyses 
described  below,  we  describe  results  from 
the  285 
participants in the multitasking conditions. 
The effect of technology on assumed secondary activity 
To  test  H1,  which  stated  that  the  technology  used  for 
multitasking will affect the assumed secondary activity, we 
first combined the list of eight secondary activities into three 
Activity categories: Meeting-related activities, Other-Work-
related  activities,  and  Personal  activities.  We  used  the 
average  likelihood  rating  provided  by  each  participant  for 
each  category.  We  then  conducted  a  repeated  measures 
mixed-model  ANOVA  on  the  align-ranked  ratings,  with 
Activity Likelihood as the dependent measure. We included 
Activity  Category,  Multitasking  Technology,  and 
the 
interaction  between  them  as  independent  measures.  The 

the  meeting 

than 

in 

1733

than  personal  activities 

and  Activity  Category  was 

gender of people in the video (“Video-Gender”), UI Layout, 
and  the  Participant  Gender  were  included  as  control. 
ParticipantID was modeled as a random effect. 
As shown in Figure 5, the interaction between Multitasking 
Technology 
significant 
(F[4,573]=20.6; p<.001). When a mobile device was used for 
multitasking, participant assumed that the secondary activity 
was significantly more likely to be personal (M=3.54) than 
related  to  the  meeting  (M=2.23;  t(573)=7.4;  p<.001)  or  to 
other  work  (M=2.74;  t(570)=2.4;  p<.05).  This  result  is 
important  given  that,  according  to  the  findings  of  our 
interviews, phones are often used for meeting related tasks. 
In  the  Same  Screen  condition,  on  the  other  hand,  meeting-
related activities were assumed to be most likely (M=3.03), 
significantly  more 
(M=2.89; 
t(574)=4.3; p<.001). Specifically, it suggests that people will 
assume  that  someone  multitasking  on  their  phone  is  doing 
something  personal  and  unrelated  to  the  meeting,  while 
someone  multitasking  on  the  same  screen  is  likely  doing 
something related to the meeting. This confirms H1.  
Looking at all eight activities for more detail, we again find a 
significant interaction between the technology used and how 
likely  a  secondary  activity  was  rated  (F[14,2017]=16.9; 
p<.001).  The  activity  assumed  most  likely  for  the  Mobile 
Device condition was “Chatting with a friend” (M=3.8). For 
the Dual Monitor condition it was “Reading a work-related 
email from another co-worker”. “Focusing on the document 
person  A  is  talking  about”  was  the  most  likely  assumed 
activity  in  the  Same  Screen  condition,  significantly  higher 
than in either the Dual Monitor or Mobile Device conditions. 
Effects on attitudes towards multitasking 
To  test  our  hypotheses  on  factors  influencing  attitudes 
towards  behavior,  we  performed  analyses  of  variance 
(ANOVA) with Politeness, Obviousness, and Engagement as 
dependent  measures  and  Multitasking  Technology,  UI 
Layout,  Video-Gender, 
as 
independent measures. To test the effect of assumed activity, 
we also included participants’ likelihood ratings of activities 
(Meeting-related, Other-work-related, and Personal). Having 
found  no 
experience  with 

and  Participant  Gender 

effects  of  Age-range, 

videoconferencing, or Polychronicity tendencies, those were 
not included in the models reported here. 
Effects on Politeness and Acceptability 
Testing  our  second  hypothesis,  our  analysis  found  a 
significant  effect  of  the  assumed  secondary  activity  on 
Politeness.  The  more  participants  assumed  the  secondary 
activity was Meeting-related, the more polite they rated the 
behavior  (F[1,276]=40.9;  p<.001)  and  the  more  acceptable 
(F[1,276]=57.6,  p<.001).  The  more  they  assumed  the 
activity  was  Personal  or  related  to  Other  Work,  the  less 
polite they viewed the multitasking (F[1,276]=30.0;  p<.001 
and  F[1,276]=7.8;  p<.01).  The  more  the  secondary  activity 
was assumed to be Personal, the less acceptable it was rated 
(F[1,276]=40.72, p<.001). 
As shown in Figure 6, the technology used for multitasking 
also  had  a 
significant  main  effect  on  Politeness 
(F[2,276]=18.5;  p<.001).  Technology  used  also  had  a  main 
effect on Acceptability (F[2,276]=14.7, p<.001). A post-hoc 
comparison  showed 
that  Same  Screen  was  rated  as 
significantly  more  polite  (M=3.4)  than  both  the  Mobile 
Device  (M=2.1;  t(276)=5.8,  p<.001)  and  Dual  Monitor 
(M=2.8;  t(276)=3.97,  p<.001).  We  found  no  additional 
effects  on  Politeness.  Similarly,  the  Same  Screen  was  also 
rated  as  more  acceptable  (M=3.5)  than  both  the  Mobile 
Device  (M=2.19;  t(276)=24.04,  p<.001)  and  the  Dual 
Monitor (M=2.88, t(276)=17.67, p<.001). 
These results confirm both H2 and H3 and suggest that the 
technology a person uses for multitasking, and what people 
assume  they  are  doing  with  that  technology,  significantly 
affect how polite and acceptable that behavior is judged.  
Effects on Obviousness of multitasking 
Looking at the effect of the technology used for multitasking 
on how Obvious the multitasking was, we find a significant 
effect  (F[2,276]=3.7;  p<.05),  with  multitasking  rated  as 
significantly more obvious on the Dual Monitor than on the 
Same  Screen  (4.1  vs.  3.6;  t(276)=2.64,  p<.001).  Since  less 
obvious  multitasking  (Same  Screen)  was  also  associated 
with  higher  politeness  ratings,  we  may  accept  H3a  and 
reject H3b. 
Effects on Perceived Engagement 
Hypothesis H4 predicted that seeing Person B multitasking in 
a visually larger format will make them appear less engaged 
in the meeting and, in turn, less polite. Our analysis found a 
main  effect  of  UI  Layout  on  ratings  of  Engagement. 
However, the effect was the opposite of what we expected; 
Person  B  was  rated  as  significantly  less  engaged  when 
viewed in the Side-by-Side layout (M=2.3) than in the Big-
and-Small layout (M=2.8; F[1,276]=15.8; p<.001). Thus, we 
must  reject  H4.  We  return  to  this  surprising  result  in  the 
Discussion section. 
Perceived  engagement  was  also  affected  by  the  technology 
used  for  multitasking  (F[2,276]=4.3;  p<.05).  Engagement 
was rated significantly lower when multitasking on a Mobile 

1734

SESSION: RICH TELEPRESENCE

 
Figure 7. A proposed model of factors influencing perception 
of, and attitudes towards multitasking in video conferencing. 

Device  compared  to  on  the  Same  Screen  (2.0  vs.  2.9; 
t(276)=2.9; p<.01). 
Effects of personal characteristics 
As  mentioned  earlier,  we  found  no  effects  of  Age-range, 
experience  with  videoconferencing,  or  Polychronicity 
tendencies. We also analyzed the effects of Video-Gender as 
well as the participant’s gender on attitudes and perceptions.  
We  found  no  significant  differences  between  participants 
that  watched  a  meeting  between  the  two  women  and  a 
meeting  between  the  two  men.  We  did  find  a  small 
significant  effect  of  the  participant’s  gender  on  ratings  of 
obviousness,  with  women  perceiving  multitasking  as  more 
obvious than men (4.0 vs. 3.7; F[1,276]=4.5; p<.05).  
DISCUSSION 
Our interviews and experiment give insight into multitasking 
during  videoconferencing  from  the  perspective  of  both  the 
multitasker and the observer of multitasking. Our study also 
provides a first examination into how the unique affordances 
of  video  conferencing  (such  as  UI  layouts  which  show 
participants in different sizes, or a field of view that restricts 
what is seen) influence how such behavior is seen. In Figure 
7, we propose a model summarizing the role of technology 
and UI layout on our outcome measures.  
The results reveal that observers of video-mediated meetings 
use  cues  such  as  the  technology  used  for  multitasking  to 
form assumptions about the secondary activity that is taking 
place.  This  relates  to  findings  from  studies  of  the  use  of 
laptops  in  face-to-face  meetings  where  multitasking  was 
ambiguously 
as 
demonstrated  by  our  work,  ambiguity  in  the  case  of 
videoconferencing  can  be  significantly  greater.  As  Table  1 
illustrates, first, in video communication, the device used for 
multitasking may be outside the camera’s field of view, as in 
the  case  of  a  mobile  device.  Next,  when  activities  all  take 
place on a single screen, there will often be ambiguity about 
whether  multitasking  is  at  all  taking  place.  Finally,  even  if 
the location of multitasking is apparent, as in the case of a 
dual monitor, the secondary activity is still unknown (similar 
to the face-to-face case in [14,17]).  
 

[14]).  However, 

interpreted 

(e.g. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Secondary 
activity on: 
Single screen  
Dual Monitor  
Mobile device  

Is multitasking 

obvious? 

Is the technology 
used obvious? 

No 
Yes 
Yes 

Yes 
Yes 
No 

Table 1.  Variations in ambiguity of behavior and technology 

used for multitasking. 

that 

them 

to  hide 

this  ambiguity  allows 

As  discussed  in  [6],  participants  in  videoconferencing  may 
hope 
their 
multitasking, while at the same time believe they are able to 
detect multitasking in others. Indeed, our study participants 
believed it was easier for them to spot multitasking than for 
the person in the video.   
Our  findings  also  highlight  how  observers’  assumptions 
about the secondary activity will affect their reactions to that 
behavior.  For  example,  when  multitasking  took  place  on  a 
phone,  activities  were  assumed  to  be  of  a  personal  nature. 
This  finding  is  important  since  the  secondary  activity  is 
rarely entirely known to the videoconferencing partner, and 
an  incorrect  interpretation  will  lead  to  incorrect  evaluation. 
Consider,  for  example,  our 
interview  findings  where 
individuals reported using mobile devices also for meeting-
related  activities;  in  those  cases,  an  entirely  appropriate 
behavior may be judged negatively.  
Additionally, the  technology used influences how apparent, 
or  obvious,  the  multitasking  behavior  is.  Engagement  was 
positively  correlated  with  politeness/acceptability,  while 
obviousness  had  the  reverse  effect.  As  we  show,  these 
assumptions and interpretations of the secondary activity can 
negatively  affect  how  behavior  is  viewed  as  more  or  less 
polite, engaged, and acceptable. This has implications for the 
behavior  of  people  who  participate  in  video  meetings,  as 
well as the design of future video conferencing technologies. 
Our  experiment  also  revealed  a  surprising  effect  of  the 
videoconferencing  tool  itself  on  how  engaged  meeting 
participants  appear.  Our  comparison  of 
two  popular 
videoconferencing  UI  layouts  showed  that,  contrary  to  our 
expectations,  the  multitasker  appeared  more  engaged  when 
shown in a large window, and less engaged when appearing 
in  a  smaller  side-by-side  view  at  equal  size  as  the  other 
meeting participant. There are at least two explanations for 
this effect: One explanation for this finding is that being able 
to see a participant in a larger window gives extra emphasis 
when their gaze is directed towards the camera. An alternate 
explanation  is  that  when  presented  side-by-side,  direct 
comparison  between  meeting  participants  can  be  easily 
made, with a multitasker appearing much less engaged than 
their counterpart. This result may have direct implication for 
the design of videoconferencing applications. 
Implications for behavior 
Our  findings  hint  at  how  behavioral  cues  may  highlight  or 
mask multitasking behavior and perceptions thereof. Clearly, 

1735

the  best  course  of  action  is  not  to  engage  in  activities 
unrelated to the meeting at all. However, if multitasking is 
unavoidable,  our  findings  suggest  that  multitasking  on  the 
same device appears less inappropriate than interactions on a 
second screen or device. Multitasking on a dual monitor was 
easy to spot and rated negatively (although at least secondary 
activities  were  assumed  to  be  work-related  rather  than 
personal).  
The  case  of  interacting  with  a  mobile  device  during  a 
videoconference is interesting because the device itself is not 
seen  in  the  video  in  most  camera  configurations.  Thus,  the 
multitasker  may  benefit  from  their  behavior  misinterpreted 
as paying attention (e.g., taking notes). However, if activity 
is  correctly  interpreted  as  interaction  on  a  phone,  their 
interlocutors are likely to assume that they are engaged in an 
unrelated personal activity, such as playing a game, texting, 
chatting, etc. Two potential recommendations emerge: First, 
hoping  to  rely  on  the  phone  being  off  camera  to  hide 
multitasking may prove risky. Second, users may wish to tell 
their  meeting  partners  when  they  are  using  their  phone  for 
meeting-related  activities,  to  prevent  those  from incorrectly 
assuming the activities are personal.  
Implications for design 
Our  findings  offer  several  implications  for  the  design  of 
video  conferencing  systems.  Eye  gaze  and  body  language 
being  directed  elsewhere  besides  (relatively)  straight  ahead 
at the camera, are easy to detect and negatively perceived by 
meeting  viewers.  Therefore,  design  decisions  may  vary 
depending  on  whether  they  are  geared  towards  helping  a 
multitasker be perceived less negatively, or helping another 
participant  have  a  better  idea  of  what  their  conversation 
partner is doing.  
In the first case, systems should be designed such that users 
can  direct  all  incoming  alerts  and  notifications  from  their 
smartphone  and  secondary  monitors  to  a  primary  screen  of 
their  choice  while  they  are  in  “in  a  meeting”  status.  This 
way, disruptive gaze re-direction can be minimized.  
Second,  in  the  case  of  multiple  monitors  and  multiple 
cameras, a system could be designed to use face-detection to 
dynamically  determine  which  screen  or  camera  a  person  is 
facing  and  automatically  switch  to  that  camera.  This  may 
allow users to maintain a consistent impression of direct eye 
gaze,  translating  the  apparent  benefit  of  the  single-screen 
condition to the case of multiple monitors.  
Finally,  video  conferencing  systems  could  allow  for  the 
layout  and  information  about  participants’  behavior  to  be 
displayed 
individual 
tendencies/characteristics.  The  video  window  could  also  be 
supplemented  with  additional  cues  about 
the  other’s 
behavior,  but  such  an  option  should  be  treated  with  care. 
Visualizations  of  others’  behavior  or  psychological  states 
over  video  conferencing  have  been  explored  in  other 
contexts such as visualizing browser activity [18], stress or 
mood  levels  [22,  24].  While  these  can  be  useful,  there  are 

differently 

based 

on 

SESSION: RICH TELEPRESENCE

towards 

attitudes 

on a mobile device. In particular when videoconferencing on 
a phone or a tablet, the ability and method for multitasking is 
different: applications typically occupy the entire screen, and 
since the device is completely mobile the camera also moves 
around,  potentially  breaking  any  illusion  of  eye  contact.  In 
future work we plan to explore the effect of multitasking in 
additional videoconferencing setups, and build and evaluate 
the effectiveness of tools that dynamically transition between 
cameras to follow the multitasker’s gaze. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper addresses the tension between the growing use of 
video  conferencing  and  meeting  participants’  desire  for 
multitasking.  Through  a  combination  of  interviews  and 
controlled experimentation, we provide a detailed account of 
technological  and  video  conferencing  UI-based  factors 
influencing 
in 
videoconference  meetings.  Given  the  nature  of  the  modern 
workplace and the increasing proliferation of mobile devices, 
it is unlikely that workers’ tendency for multitasking will go 
away  soon.  Our  results  indicate  that  all  multitasking 
behavior  is  not  perceived  equally;  the  association  of 
technology  and  common  activities  along  with  how  the 
activity  is  presented  through  the  video  conferencing  tool 
layout  influences  observers’  assumptions  and  attitudes. 
While  we  do  not  pass  judgment  on  whether  or  not 
multitasking  should  occur,  our  study  provides  insights  into 
how the negative interpersonal perceptions that come along 
with it when it does happen can be accentuated or reduced 
using technology and social cues. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Removed for blind review. 
REFERENCES 
1.  Rachel F. Adler and Raquel Benbunan-Fich. 2013. Self-
interruptions in discretionary multitasking. Computers 
in Human Behavior 29, 4, 1441–1449. 

multitasking 

2.  Robert Bajko. 2011. Mobile Telephone Usage and 

Perception During Group Meetings. Proc. CONISAR, 1–
10.  

3.  Ernst Bekkering and J.P. Shim. 2006. Trust in 

Videoconferencing. Commun. ACM 49, 7, 103–107.  
4.  Caroline S. Bell, Deborah R. Compeau, and Fernando 
Olivera. 2005. Understanding the social implications of 
technological multitasking: A conceptual model. Proc. 
SIGHCI 2005, 2. 

5.  Matthias Böhmer, T. Scott Saponas, and Jaime Teevan. 
2013. Smartphone use does not have to be rude: making 
phones a collaborative presence in meetings. Proc. 
MobileHCI, ACM, 342–351.  
Jed R. Brubaker, Gina Venolia, and John C. Tang. 2012. 
Focusing on shared experiences: moving beyond the 
camera in video communication. Proc. DIS, ACM, 96–
105.  

6. 

social 

is  possible 

tradeoffs  between 

two  strangers  converse.  It 

well-documented 
increasing 
awareness  of  another  person’s  activity  and  preserving 
privacy.  Thus,  more  work  is  needed  to  know  how  cues 
related  to  meeting  relevant  and  irrelevant  behavior  are 
perceived  by  both  sides  in  a  multitasking  context  where 
participants  may  have  different  motives  and  privacy 
concerns. 
Limitations and future work 
One  limitation  of  our  experiment  is  that  participants  were 
placed  in  the  role  of  non-participating  meeting  observer 
watching 
that 
participants’  reactions  or  perceptions  would  be  different  if 
they  were  actively  participating  in  a  video  meeting  with 
people they knew well. It is important to note, however, that 
being  a  passive  observer  in  a  meeting  is  not  uncommon, 
particularly in multi-person videoconferencing meetings. As 
noted  by  our  interviewees,  in  multi-person  video  meetings, 
meeting participants will try to manage how their activities 
appear  to  others,  and  judge  other  participants’  multitasking 
behavior.  Furthermore,  our  results  strongly  suggest  that 
participants  understood  the  situation  well;  their  open-ended 
responses  often  contained  affective  attributions  stemming 
from the multitasking behavior.  
Next, while our experiment focused on a handful of factors 
that emerged from our interviews (e.g., the technology used 
and  the  secondary  activity),  as  we  learned  from  our 
interviews,  video  meetings  can  take  a  variety  of  forms  and 
be  held  between  many  different  types  of  people.  As  such, 
other dimensions of multitasking in video meetings still need 
to be explored in future work.  
One such dimension involves the nature of the meeting and 
the  participants.  As  the  number  of  meeting  participants 
grows  or  the  length  of  the  meeting  increases,  attitudes 
towards one or several people’s multitasking behavior could 
change.  Social  dynamics  may  also  play  a  role:  In  our 
experiment,  conversation  dynamics  suggested 
that  one 
person  was  in  charge  and  leading  the  meeting.  Exploring 
additional  status  relationships  could  be  important  since  this 
relationship may influence attitudes towards the multitasker 
(e.g. [25]).  
Another interesting dimension to investigate is whether if a 
person  verbally  elevates  their  multitasking  behavior  to  the 
foreground (e.g., by stating “Hold on, I need to reply to this 
message.”), their behavior could appear more appropriate or 
polite. Similarly, new technologies such as smartwatches and 
head-mounted  displays  are  becoming  available  and  present 
interesting new context for multitasking. Exploring the role 
of these and other variables in future work will give greater 
insight into additional factors (both social and technical) that 
influence the dynamics of multitasking in meetings held over 
video conferencing. 
Finally, the videoconferencing itself, not only the secondary 
activity,  can  take  place  on  a  range  of  devices  and  setups, 
ranging from dedicated videoconferencing rooms to running 

1736

18.  Danielle Lottridge, Eli Marschner, Ellen Wang, Maria 
Romanovsky, and Clifford Nass. 2012. Browser Design 
Impacts Multitasking. Proc. of the Human Factors and 
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, SAGE 
Publications, 1957–1961.  

19.  Bertram F. Malle. 2006. The actor-observer asymmetry 

in attribution: a (surprising) meta-analysis. 
Psychological Bulletin 132, 6, 895-919. 

20.  Bonnie A. Nardi, Steve Whittaker, and Erin Bradner. 
2000. Interaction and outeraction: instant messaging in 
action. Proc. CSCW, ACM, 79–88.  

21.  Polycom report. Video Conferencing Expected to be 

Preferred Business Communications Tool in 2016 
According to New Survey on Global Video 
Conferencing Trends and Etiquette 
(2013).http://www.polycom.com/company/news/press-
releases/2013/20131015.html [Accessed May 2015]. 
22.  Andreas Sonderegger, Denis Lalanne, Luisa Bergholz, 
Fabien Ringeval, and Juergen Sauer. 2013. Computer-
supported work in partially distributed and co-located 
teams: the influence of mood feedback. In Proc. 
INTERACT. Springer, 445–460.  

23.  Keri K. Stephens and Jennifer Davis. 2009. The social 
influences on electronic multitasking in organizational 
meetings. Management Communication Quarterly.  

24.  Chiew Seng Sean Tan, Kris Luyten, Jan Van Den 

Bergh, Johannes Schöning, and Karin Coninx. 2014. 
The role of physiological cues during remote 
collaboration. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual 
Environments 23, 1, 90–107. 

25.  Melvin C. Washington, Ephraim A. Okoro, and Peter 
W. Cardon. 2013. Perceptions of civility for mobile 
phone use in formal and informal meetings. Business 
Communication Quarterly, 52-64. 

26.  Jacob O. Wobbrock, Leah Findlater, Darren Gergle, and 
James J. Higgins. 2011. The aligned rank transform for 
nonparametric factorial analyses using only ANOVA 
procedures. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, 143–146. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

7.  Tatiana Buhler, Carman Neustaedter, and Serena 

Hillman. 2013. How and why teenagers use video chat. 
Proc. CSCW, ACM, 759–768.  

8.  Peter W. Cardon and Ying Dai. 2014. Mobile Phone 
Use in Meetings among Chinese Professionals: 
Perspectives on Multicommunication and Civility. 
Global Advances in Business Communication 3, 1, 2. 
9.  Elena Francesca Corriero, Stephanie Tom Tong, and 
Pradeep Sopory. 2015. Behaviors, Perceptions, 
Responsiveness, and Presence: The Dyadic Model of 
Mediated Communication. HICCS, 462-471. 

10.  Mary Czerwinski, Eric Horvitz, and Susan Wilhite. 

2004. A diary study of task switching and interruptions. 
Proc. CHI, ACM, 175–182.  

11.  Laura Dabbish, Gloria Mark, and Víctor M. González. 
2011. Why do I keep interrupting myself?: environment, 
habit and self-interruption. Proc. CHI, ACM, 3127–
3130. 

12.  Jim Gemmell, Kentaro Toyama, C. Lawrence Zitnick, 
Thomas Kang, and Steven Seitz. 2000. Gaze awareness 
for video-conferencing: A software approach. IEEE 
Multimedia 7, 4, 26–35. 

13.  Victor M. González and Gloria Mark. 2004. Constant, 
constant, multi-tasking craziness: managing multiple 
working spheres. Proc. CHI, ACM, 113–120.  

14.  Shamsi T. Iqbal, Jonathan Grudin, and Eric Horvitz. 

2011. Peripheral computing during presentations: 
perspectives on costs and preferences. Proc. CHI, ACM, 
891–894.  

15.  Carol Felker Kaufman, Paul M. Lane, and Jay D. 
Lindquist. 1991. Exploring more than 24 hours a day: A 
preliminary investigation of polychronic time use. 
Journal of Consumer Research, 392–401. 

16.  Lisa Kleinman. 2010. Physically present, mentally 
absent? Technology multitasking in organizational 
meetings. PhD dissertation, University of Texas. 

17.  Aparna Krishnan, Terri R. Kurtzberg, and Charles E. 

Naquin. 2014. The Curse of the Smartphone: Electronic 
Multitasking in Negotiations. Negotiation Journal 30, 2, 
191–208. 

 

1737

