CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Vendors’ Perspectives of Coordination in the Information 

Technology Offshore Outsourcing Industry: An 

Exploratory Study from the Philippines 

Aloha May Hufana Ambe 

MSU-Iligan Institute of 

Technology 

Iligan City, Philippines 

alohamay.ambe@msuiit.edu.ph 

Margot F. Brereton 
Queensland University of 

Technology 

Brisbane, Australia 

m.brereton@qut.edu.au 

Markus Rittenbruch 
Queensland University of 

Technology 

Brisbane, Australia 

m.rittenbruch@qut.edu.au 

investigates  how  offshore 

ABSTRACT 
information 
This 
study 
technology  (IT)  service  providers  (vendors)  coordinate 
work  with  their  clients  (employers)  in  order  to  succeed  in 
the  global  IT  offshore  outsourcing  industry.  We  reviewed 
literature  on  coordination  studies,  interviewed  offshore 
service  providers  in  the  Philippines,  and  used  thematic 
analysis to analyse coordination practices from the point of 
view of these individual vendors in a newly industrialized 
country.  We  used  Olson  and  Olson’s  framework  on 
‘collaboration  at  a  distance’  as  a  lens  to  structure  the 
results.  The  study  provides  an  understanding  of  vendors’ 
individual attitudes towards the coordination of distributed 
work  and  draws  attention  to  how  differences  in  power 
affect the work situation of vendors, and by implication all 
stakeholders.  We  offer  this  insight  as  a  way  to  enhance 
existing  CSCW  frameworks,  by  imbuing  them  with  the 
perspective of non-equal relationships. The study found that 
vendors were generally able to produce outputs that satisfy 
their  clients,  however  these  results  were  only  achieved 
because  individuals  were  willing  to  take  risks  and  make 
sacrifices  in  their  personal  lives.  The  relationship  was 
further  characterised  by  a  complex  interplay  between  the 
client’s  control  of  the  overall  work  arrangements  and  the 
vendors’  ability  to  establish  a  level  of  autonomy  in  their 
work practices and their flexible use of coordination tools.  
Keywords 
Coordination,  coordination  practices,  CSCW,  information 
technology  outsourcing,  virtual  team,  global  software 
development, ITO vendor. 
ACM Classification Keywords 
K.7.1 Occupations, K.6.1: Project and People Management, 
H.5.3. Group and Organization Interfaces.  

  319

 

and 

temporally 

information 

in  particular 

geographically 

IT  has  made 

INTRODUCTION 
In  the  age  in  which  technology  blurs  the  boundaries 
between 
dispersed 
individuals, equal opportunities arise for skilled individuals 
on  a  global  scale.  The  Internet  through  information  and 
communication  technology  (ICT)  is  a  game  changer  for 
developing  countries,  and 
for  newly 
industrialized  countries  that  have  a  highly  skilled  and 
trained IT workforce [45]. Service providers or vendors in 
these  countries  provide  a  wide  range  of  IT  services  to 
offshore clients commonly situated in developed countries. 
Organizations, small or large, are taking advantage of ICT 
to  enhance  their  performance  and  to  leverage  expertise 
across  the  globe  while  also  cutting  operational  costs  by 
outsourcing or building virtual teams [29,31,67]. 
According  to  Kitchen  and  McDougall,  the  widespread 
adoption  of 
technology 
outsourcing  (ITO)  a  growing  multi-billion  dollar  industry 
[37]. The emergence of this trend is supported by the Asian 
Development  Bank’s  outlook  on  the  IT  and  Business 
Process  Outsourcing  industry  in  Asia,  which  stresses  the 
need  for  timely,  concentrated  efforts  to  outline  strategies, 
programs  and  projects  to  respond  to  the  opportunities  and 
challenges of this industry [45]. Offshore service provision 
is receiving increased attention and is on the rise despite a 
well  understood  risk  of  failure  [37].  Organizations  set  up 
virtual  teams  to  manage  their  outsourced  activities.  These 
teams  consist  of  geographically  and  temporally  dispersed 
groups  of  workers  brought  together  by  technology  to 
accomplish organizational tasks often across different time 
zones and cultural contexts [21,24,27].  
Studies  of  coordination  in  the  context  of  IT  offshore 
outsourcing have generally focused on the effect and impact 
on the client, the organization needing the offshore service 
[1,43,47].  While  the  ITO  industry  is  most  visible  through 
large  company  clients  utilizing  the  services  of  offshore 
vendor  teams  or  companies,  it  is  fuelled  by  the  work  of 
skilled IT practitioners that often act as individual vendors 
or  freelancers.  Existing  research  commonly  focuses  on 
virtual  teams  as  a  whole  [33,57]  emphasizing  relationship 
building,  trust,  communication  [17,28,29,62,66]  and  the 
effects  of  ITO  at  an  organizational  level  [2,31,59].  We 
propose that there is a noticeable gap in the literature with 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Industry 

in  newly 

industrialized 

regards to the role that individual vendors play in the ITO 
process  and  a  lack  of  understanding  of  how  the  attitudes 
and  perspectives  as  well  as  the  context  under  which  these 
interactions  take  place  shape  the  way  that  collaborative 
work is conducted in this context. This gap is also apparent 
in  Hätönen  and  Eriksson’s  work  on  outsourcing  which 
focusses on transactional cost economics [32] as well as in 
works by Hinds et al [34], Boden et al [10,11], Prikladnicki 
[56],  and  Haine’s  et  al’s  [30]  on  global  software 
development  which  assert  the  need  for  a  more  contextual 
and dynamic view of culture to shed light on global work.  
COORDINATION IN IT OFFSHORE OUTSOURCING 
In the next section we first present the contextual details of 
the study locale. We then present an overview of literature 
on  coordination,  followed  by  the  motivations  for  the 
methodology  used,  and  describe  the  method  of  data 
collection  and  analysis  in  detail.  This  is  followed  by  the 
presentation  and  discussion  of  the  thematic  analysis  of 
coordination from the perspective of the vendor.  
IT  Outsourcing 
countries 
So  far,  India  and  the  Philippines  are  the  two  predominant 
countries  in  Asia  that  have  established  themselves  as 
information  technology  and  business  process  outsourcing 
(BPO)  industry  centres  [45].  IT-BPO  export  earnings 
continually grew; from USD100 million (2001) to USD1.5 
billion (2004) to USD13.5 billion (2012) and are projected 
to reach USD25 billion in 2016. The industry has become a 
major generator of job opportunities; it is estimated that by 
2016  full-time  employment  will  reach  1.3  million  and 
indirect  employment  will  reach  3.2  million.  With  a  large 
roster of service-oriented people with English language and 
other  skills, 
the  Philippines  has  outperformed  other 
Southeast  Asian  Nations.  In  2012  and  2013  significant 
growth of the industry was expected amongst the country’s 
“next  wave”  cities  [45].  This  expectation  was  surpassed 
when  cities  not  yet  on 
list  [23] 
outperformed  highly  urbanized  cities  such  as  Baguio  City 
and Iloilo City. 
Iligan  City,  a  small  city  in  the  southern  part  of  the 
Philippines in Mindanao, serves as the locale of this study. 
Iligan City is included in the top 20 Philippine cities with 
the  most  number  of  freelancers  and  online  vendors  [24]. 
Iligan  earnings,  reported  through  the  online  platform 
Elance-oDesk (now Upwork.com), reached PhP342 million 
(approximately  USD7.8  million),  second  to  Metro  Manila 
(the  National  Capital  Region),  between  2010  and  2014 
[26,27].  
Iligan City is well aware of the challenges brought on by IT 
outsourcing. Efforts have been made by the Department of 
Science  and  Technology  together  with  freelancer.com,  a 
well-known Web platform that provides a marketplace for 
freelancers and clients to meet each other, to further create 
online  job  opportunities  in  the  rural  area  [46].  Newsbyte 
reports 
the  National  Statistics 

the  “next  wave” 

that  “According 

to 

to 

Coordination  Board,  as  of  2014,  10  of  the  16  poorest 
provinces  of  the  country  are  in  Mindanao.  It  has  an 
estimated labour force of 10 million with an unemployment 
rate  of  4.5%.  In  spite  of  this,  Mindanao  produces  on 
average 700,000 college graduates a year, who specialize in 
IT-related  fields  such  as  computer  science,  information 
technology  and  engineering 
[46].”  Mindanao  State 
University  –  Iligan  Institute  of  Technology,  one  of  the 
country’s  top  universities  [18],  is  one  of  the  major 
producers of computer science, information technology and 
engineering graduates in the region.  
Our study specifically focuses on ITO vendors from Iligan 
city who are part of a Global Software Development set-up 
providing  software  development  services 
foreign 
countries. 
Coordination frameworks and theories 
Lin et al identified five factors that affect the performance 
of  virtual  teams  –  relationship  building,  cohesion,  trust, 
communication  and  coordination  [40].  Coordination  arises 
from  the  efforts  of  team  members  to  manage  collective 
resources and make their activities logically consistent and 
coherent. Offshore vendors are a central component of ITO 
teams, and how these vendors contribute to and coordinate 
with the overall team is essential to the success of the team 
as a whole [22]. 
Various  coordination  theories  and  frameworks  address  the 
relationship  between  different  actors 
in  collaborative 
settings. We examine to what extent these approaches can 
be  applied 
to  describe  and  elucidate  dimensions  of 
coordination between offshore ITO clients and vendors.  
Malone  [42]  defined  coordination  theory  as  a  body  of 
principles about how the activities of separate actors can be 
coordinated.  Common  coordination  problems  addressed  in 
this  theory  are  task  division,  task  assignments,  resource 
allocation and conflict resolution. In coordinating multiple 
actors, issues arise such as the form of coordination to use, 
how 
to  boost  cooperative  behaviour,  shared  visions, 
alignment  of  goals,  decision-making  and  knowledge-
sharing. Chen et al studied the coordination processes and 
dynamics of outsourced engineering projects from the client 
organization’s perspective [19]. The study showed that even 
though  the  large  client  has  the  organizational  power  the 
coordination processes are improved when they are shaped 
between the client and the vendor. The process of offshore 
ITO  requires  further  investigation  into  how  goals  are 
defined  and  negotiated  between  vendors  and  clients  in 
particular  in  light  of  the  potential  inequalities  in  status 
between vendor and clients. 
Lee and Paine traced the history of cooperation models in 
CSCW since Malone’s work [39]. They discussed a variety 
of  conceptual  frameworks  such  as  those  by  Grudin, 
Johansen,  Gerson  and  Strauss  [39].  They  argued  that 
existing models of groupware and collaboration in CSCW 
are  too  technology–centric,  or  at  least  that  researchers  are 

320

SESSION: DISTANCE, COORDINATION, AND MOTIVATION

that 

most  likely  to  adopt  this  technology-centric  aspect  of  the 
models overlooking other aspects. They also found existing 
models too focused on work [39].  
A  notable  body  of  work 
follows  a  similar 
sociotechnical approach is that of Olson and Olson [50] and 
Olson  et.  al.  [49].  These  studies  encourage  CSCW 
researchers to reflect on the nuances and social dimensions 
of  remote  collaboration  and  stress  that  “distance  still 
matters” in (globally) distributed teams. Olson and Olson’s 
work  focuses  on  five  key  sociotechnical  conditions  which 
are considered requisites for effectively conducting work at 
a  distance:  collaboration  readiness  (motivation  of  team 
to  collaborate),  technology  readiness  (the 
members 
groupware  currently  adopted  by  the  team  with  respect  to 
habit,  infrastructure,  etc.),  common  ground  (common 
knowledge  and  vocabulary  of  team  members  and  the 
awareness of such commonality), nature and coupling of 
work1 (the dependencies of group work) and management 
and  decision  making  (the  challenges  of  distance,  this 
endeavour requires good and just leadership).  
While technology has advanced, many of the fundamental 
challenges outlined in Olson and Olson’s work still remain 
highly  relevant  [8].  We  thus  use  their  work  as  a  lens,  to 
consider  different  aspects  of  remote  collaboration  while 
specifically focusing on the perspective of ITO vendors and 
freelancers with regards to their individual work experience 
as  well  as  how  they  manage  and  perceive  collaborative 
processes.  
In  addition  to  the  five  key  conditions,  Olson  and  Olson’s 
work mentions three additional factors that are of relevance 
to  our  study:  time  zones,  culture  and  trust  [50,51].  Of 
particular  interest  is  the  distribution  of  power  which  is 
discussed  in  the  broader  context  of  culture  in  Olson  and 
Olson’s “Distance Matters” work [50]. There they draw on 
the  notion  of  “Power  distance”,  originally  introduced  by 
Hofstede,  which  addresses  questions 
the 
perception  and  distribution  of  power  and  expresses  “the 
extent to which less powerful members of institutions and 
organizations within a country expect and accept that power 
is  distributed  unequally”  [35,p28].  However,  postcolonial 
computing  [36]  has  argued  to  move  away  from  such 
colonial tropes that apply broad brush approaches to culture 
often at the national level and instead offers a more nuanced 
lens  and  generative  models  of  emerging  cultures  and 
personal histories. We reflect on this in our data gathering 
and findings. 
Coordination in Virtual Teams 
Greenberg et al observed that teams go through predictable 
stages  in  their  process  of  accomplishing  tasks  to  achieve 
common goals [29]. They found five distinct stages in the 
                                                 
1 Referred to as “Coupling of work in Olson and Olson [50] and 
“Nature of work” in Olson et. al. [49] 

regarding 

321

includes 

that 

impact 

selective, 

introduction, 

lifecycle of a virtual team: (1) establishing the team which 
includes choosing members, training, reward structure, (2) 
inception  which 
team-building 
exercise, (3) organizing which includes establish their norm 
of behaviour, procedure of task assignment, participation in 
organizing  activities,  interaction  patterns,  (4)  transition 
which includes information exchange, established roles and 
responsibilities,  developing  working  relationships  (5)  and 
accomplishing the task [29].  
Since  virtual  teams  are  dispersed,  it  is  important  to  know 
the nature of the dispersion and where the vendor fits within 
it.  The  dimensions 
the  global  software 
development  team  are  (1)  geographical  dispersion,  (2) 
temporal  dispersion,  (3)  cultural  and  linguistic  dispersion, 
(4)  work  and  process  dispersion  and  (5)  organizational 
dispersion  [41,47,48].  Nguyen-Duc  et  al’s  systematic 
literature review [47] described the coordination challenges 
brought about by each kind of dispersion that distance work 
needs to overcome or at least manage. Their study confirms 
the common perception  that  geographical dispersion has  a 
negative impact on team performance, temporal dispersion 
has  a  negative  impact  on  software  quality  and  that  these 
issues  can  be  addressed  by 
structured 
communication  and  collaborative  tools  [47].  Noll  et  al 
suggest that solutions to overcome the effects of dispersion 
are site visits, synchronous communication technology and 
knowledge sharing infrastructure [48]. 
Tang et al investigated teams that work across global time 
zone difference. They revealed strategies and technologies 
to  foster  collaboration  –  synchronous  meetings,  flexibility 
in  time  negotiation,  leveraging  time  zone  isolate,  tailored 
collaboration  processes,  reliance  on  email  and  interest  in 
using  video.  Their  study  focused  on  temporal  dispersion 
and resulted in valuable implications for CSCW tools [64]. 
The study results reflect an effective experience of globally 
distributed  teams  despite  their  geographical  and  temporal 
dispersion. 
Coordination is a situated activity that depends on a variety 
of factors such as the nature of the dispersion of the team, 
coordination  technology  set-up,  available  infrastructure, 
client’s management style etc. Studies of team coordination 
often 
in  which 
coordination  mechanisms  arise  [47].  The  emergence  of 
coordination  challenges  and  effectiveness  of  coordination 
mechanisms is difficult to observe in either cross sectional 
studies [47] or in the large by studying an entire team in the 
ITO industry.  
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
We  used  qualitative  methods  to  study  how  individual 
vendors viewed and understood the concept of coordination 
in  their  work.  We  used  grounded  theory  techniques  to 
discover and develop themes by drawing upon the approach 
of Strauss and Corbin [63].  

lack  a  description  of 

the  context 

interviews 

The primary data in this study is qualitative data – interview 
data of ITO vendors’ accounts of their situation in the work 
relationship. As a means of data analysis, we opted to use 
thematic  analysis  as  it  is  a  widely  used  qualitative  data 
analysis method that identifies patterns of meaning across a 
set of data to answer research questions at hand [15].  
The  thematic  analysis  revealed  themes  that  helped  us  to 
address four broad research questions (RQ): 
RQ1:  What  are  the  coordination  practices  of  individual 
vendors? 
RQ2: What are the issues associated with coordination? 
RQ3: What are the attitudes of the vendors with respect to 
their work and coordination set-up? 
RQ4:  How  do  coordination  practices  affect  vendor 
attitudes? 
The  research  design  of  this  study  was  as  follows:  (1) 
Preliminary interviews (2) Interviews (3) Thematic analysis 
(3.1)  Open  coding  analysis,  (3.2)  Axial  coding,  (3.3) 
Selective coding and (4) Presentation of study findings and 
reflection  through  the  lens  of  Olson  and  Olson  work  on 
collaboration at a distance [50,51]. 
Preliminary Interviews 
We undertook an initial inquiry by conducting exploratory 
interviews  with  four  vendors.  The 
lasted 
between  20-30  minutes  and  were  conducted  in  one  of  the 
researchers’ offices. We inquired about study participant’s 
work  practices,  their  technology  set-up  and  coordination 
processes.  These 
interviews  gave  us  a  better 
perspective on the industry and allowed us to improve the 
interview process for the next data collection phase. 
All  four  interviewees,  three  BS  Information  Technology 
graduates  and  one  BS  Computer  Science  graduate,  were 
MSU-Iligan Institute of Technology alumni who at the time 
of the study worked as freelancers or vendors of IT services 
to  offshore  companies;  they  served  clients  in  the  United 
States  of  America  (2),  United  Kingdom  (1)  and  Australia 
(1). The four interviewees reported similar sets of perceived 
advantages  and  problems  with  regard  to  their  online  job. 
Commonly mentioned advantages were the perceived time 
flexibility,  the  monetary  power  of  their  salary  in  a  small 
city province of a developing country, and the satisfaction 
of  knowing  their  work  was  used  and  appreciated  in  the 
above-mentioned industrialized countries. 
The  exploratory  interview  uncovered  problems  such  as 
problematic 
or 
unprecedented  brownouts,  difficulties  agreeing  on  project 
schedules  and  challenges  in  coordinating  communication 
and progress monitoring. However, the interviewed vendors 
generally felt very satisfied with their jobs. The preliminary 
interviews indicated the line of exploration was fruitful and 
could be extended. 
Interviews 
Qualitative  data  was  collected  through  semi-structured 
interviews.  The  interviews  were  conducted  in  English  and 

connections, 

initial 

Internet 

scheduled 

V1  male 
V2  male  
V3 
V4  male 

37  5 years 
22  3 mos. 
female  24  5 years 
35  8 years 

V5 
V6 
V7 

female  33  10 mos. 
female  21  3 years 
female  27  15 mos. 

21  3 years 
V8  male 
30  6 years 
V9  male 
V10  male 
28  5 years 
V11  female  32  2 years 

Work/Position 

Work 
hrs/wk 
40  manager, programmer, web scraper 
48 
40 
40 

Programmer 
programmer/ad hoc team leader 
Project manager, operations 
manager, db administrator, sys admin 
Programmer 

48 
48  Quality assurance / software tester 
flexi  Web developer and administrator, 

database administrator 
iOS developer 
Software developer 
Programmer/developer 

40 
40 
40 
40  Haskell programmer 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Cebuano-Iligan vernacular (the local dialect). In this phase 
of  the  study,  a  total  of  eleven  vendors  participated  in  the 
interview  sessions  which  lasted  between  33  to 61  minutes 
each. Interviews were audio-recorded and notes were taken. 
The first author translated interviews conducted in Cebuano 
into English. The interview guide contained a prepared set 
of questions. We further allowed the participants to lead the 
interview  to  interesting  and  relevant  topics  that  were  not 
anticipated. 
Vendors’ Profile 
All  participating  vendors  were  information  technology 
service  providers  who  were  part  of  one  or  more  global 
software development team. The interviews were conducted 
at participants’ work environments the office of one of the 
researchers,  or  during  meetings  in  a  café.  Participants 
included  six  males  and  five  females  whose  ages  ranged 
from  21  to  37  years.  With  one  exception,  the  participants 
either  held  a  BS  Computer  Science  or  a  BS  Information 
Technology  degree  from  the  Mindanao  State  University. 
Their  online  job  experience  ranged  from  three  months  to 
eight  years  and  they  catered  for  clients  from  the  USA  the 
UK,  Australia  and  Canada.  Being  part  of  software 
development  teams,  the  majority  of  the  participants  were 
programmers  with  some  of 
them  also  undertaking 
managerial roles. Table 1 depicts the above information. 
 

Gender  Age Years in 

Online Job 

Table 1. Vendors’ Profile  

Eight  of  the  interviewees  were  home-based  while  three 
were housed by their clients in a rented office. The home-
based  participants  had  set-up  a  work  area  in  their  homes 
(Figure 1). 

Figure 1. Two vendors’ home work areas 

 

322

SESSION: DISTANCE, COORDINATION, AND MOTIVATION

Category 
unique 
family/ 
home  
setup 

Analytical Process  
Interview  recordings  were  transcribed  and  coded.  In  this 
study,  theoretical  sampling  was  used  as  the  analytical 
process  to  reveal  themes  based  on  Strauss  and  Corbin’s 
qualitative analysis method [20,63].  
We  used  open  coding,  line  by  line  on  the  interview 
transcripts, to identify initial points of interest and concepts.  
Additional codes were added as open coding analyses were 
done  on  succeeding  interviews.  Axial  coding  was  then 
undertaken  to  draw  concepts  into  categories.    Through 
selective  coding,  these  categories  were  then  grouped  into 
themes (illustrated in Figure 2)  
Code 
children 
understand 
opposite body 
clock 
family time 
weekends 
distant feeling 
even if in one 
house  
opposite 
sleeping time 
with wife 
wife demands 
time 
increase weight 
in home-based 
setup 
developed ulcer 
different aura 
with graveyard 
shift 
no night life 
missed family 
and friends 
gatherings 
no more family 
talk during 
dinner time 

non-physical 
changes 
missed events 

Theme 
Effects on  
work-life 
balance. 

physical health 
changes 

health issues 
 

Concept 
family situation 

marital situation 

limited 
social life 

missed family 
routine 

Table 2. Sample of coding process  

Table 2 shows a section of the coding outcome to illustrate 
how a theme (effects on work-life balance) was revealed. 
STUDY FINDINGS 
We observed a range of phenomena regarding the nature of 
communication  and  coordination  practices  that  helped 
vendors  and  clients  to  establish  and  maintain  their  work 
relationship.  The 
(1) 
coordination  practice  adhocracies,  (2)  client  relationship, 
(3)  online  work  in  practice  and  (4)  effects  on  work-life 
balance. The themes and categories are shown in Figure 2.  

that  emerged  were: 

themes 

323

 

Figure 2. Themes with their categories (subthemes) and their 

connections.  
Coordination Practice Adhocracies 
The  first  theme  that  emerged  was  coordination  practice 
adhocracies. The theme reflects the fact that all interviewed 
vendors  utilized  very  flexible,  adaptable  and  informal 
coordination practices. All vendors in the study belonged to 
distributed  software  development  teams  and  were  able  to 
successfully  set  up  and  manage  their  collaborative  work 
environment as they engaged in tightly coupled cooperation 
with  other  remote  team  members.  What  was  particularly 
notable  was  the  low  level  of  overhead  required  to  set  up 
work  relationships.  We  observed  that  vendors  and  clients 
were  adept  at  initiating  and  negotiating  contracts  using 
simple tools such as email.  
Vendor  V3,  who  had  three  previous  employers  before  her 
current one, related her experience and how she perceived 
the  hiring  process  in  their  industry,  “I  posted  resumé  in 
onlinejobs.ph.  Created  a  profile.  Set  range  [of  pay].  Put 
skills set.  The type of work I want.  I update it every now 
and  then.    If  an  employer  is  interested,  the  employer  will 
directly  contact  you  through  email.    You  will  start  with 
email...    If  it’s  okay,  you  will  then  communicate  through 
Skype.  From there you will have a test task.  You will agree 
whether to be paid or not on that test task.  In Skype, you 
can talk either through call or chat… There are clients that 
are generous, and will right away ask how much the pay for 
the test task…  Others will hire you immediately. Your first 
month  is  a  test.    You  are  like  on  probation.    But  in  my 
current employer, I was immediately hired… Based on my 
history, I now have a portfolio so it is much easier.” 
Vendor V6 recounted her experience, “…I was interviewed 
[through a referral]. No exams.  I was hired right there and 
then  [laughs].  Immediately  because  I  think  they  really 
wanted  to  have  someone  by  Monday.    I  was  interviewed 
Friday.” 
Beyond  their  role  in  the  setup  and  initiation  of  work 
relationships,  coordination  technologies  were  vital  for  the 
execution  of  tasks  and  the  orchestration  of  work  between 
team  members.  Study  participants  were  required 
to 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

through 

coordinate  work  through  services  like  shared  repositories 
and shared code servers (Team Foundation Server / Visual 
Studio  server).  The  coordination  of  work  around  these 
shared resources was often ad hoc and did not follow a set 
protocol.  Vendors  coordinated  edits 
informal 
communications  or  sometimes  by  making  assumptions. 
“Luckily  currently,  only  two  of  us  are  in  this  specific 
project. So we know who made the recent changes. As for 
coordination with the other team - provide documents this 
time.”(V3) 
The  vendors  felt  that  the  ad  hoc  coordination  system  they 
implemented  suited  their  needs  and  they  did  not  perceive 
any specific problems. They attributed this to the fact that 
they were experienced at flexibly coordinating and solving 
problems with other team members and conduct their work 
“guerrilla  style”  (V8).  When  V8  was  asked  if  he  did 
submit  documents  for  progress  reports,  he  answered,  “No 
not  in  a  document,  I  just  message  my  boss  through  chats. 
Guerrilla style, that’s how we do things.” 
However,  while  vendors  perceived  that  they  had  a  great 
deal of flexibility and informality with regards to how they 
set  up  coordination  tools,  they  realized  that  the  client 
ultimately  set  the  deliverables.  Vendor  5  outlined  the 
process: “At the start of the week we look at our progress 
report  and  tasks  ahead.  But  the  report  is  for  compliance. 
What  needs  to  be  done  is  already  innate,  but  the  report 
helps remind us. We the team understood already.” 
The 
client-vendor 
communication  were  set  by  the  client.  The  vendors 
predominantly  used  instant  messaging  applications  and 
message  managing  support,  specifically  Skype,  Google 
Hangout, Slack.com and HipChat.com to name a few. Chat 
was 
to  resolve 
ambiguities  and  issues  in  conducting  their  work.  Email, 
either  company  email  or  Gmail,  was  used  for  formal 
document exchanges or informal lengthy correspondence.  
Specialized tools for coordination, as presented in table 3, 
were underutilized. 
Specialised Tools 
PagerDuty provides alerting, on-call 
scheduling, escalation policies and incident 
tracking, web/availability monitoring, 
customer support, collaboration, application 
performance management, API management, 
infrastructure monitoring [54]. 
Team Foundation Server is the 
collaboration platform at the core of 
Microsoft's application lifecycle management 
(ALM) solution. TFS supports agile 
development practices, multiple IDEs and 
platforms locally or in the cloud [44]. 

Vendor’s Usage 
For schedules, task and 
emergency notification. 

the  main  means  of  communication 

communication 

tools  used 

for 

For task list, task 
assignment, task progress 
and mainly monitor bugs 
and bug resolution 
explanation. Constantly 
check application for 
updates. 
Post tasks and task updates. 
Linked to email. 

Asana.com is a web and mobile application 
designed to enable teamwork without email. 
Can create tasks for work the user and his 
teammates. Organize tasks into shared 
projects. Keep conversations with tasks, 
instead of scattered across email" [3] to name 
a few of its features. 

Specialised Tools 
BaseCamp.com  is  a  web-based  project-
management  tool  keeps  all  their  project 
communication  in  one  place,  send  status 
reports to the right people, to name of few 
of its features [5]. 
Trello.com  is  a  collaboration  tool  that 
organizes your projects into boards. It tells 
you what's being worked on, who's working 
on  what,  and  where  something  is  in  a 
process [65]. 
Bitbucket.org  is  a  Git  and  Mercurial 
based 
source  code  management  and 
collaboration solution in the cloud [6]. 

Vendor’s Usage 
To manage tasks (see and 
update tasks) and see who 
is assigned to a task.  

To view task backlogs and 
new tasks. Through the 
tool, decides task 
prioritization before 
proceeding. 
To check issues, user 
interface modifications and 
other client specific 
announcements. 
Managing tickets, task 
assignments. 

and 

issue 

is  a  proprietary 

JIRA 
tracking 
product  that  provides  bug  tracking,  issue 
tracking, 
project  management 
functions.[4] 
PivotalTracker.com 
is  a  collaboration 
tool 
that  simplifies  collaboration  and 
crystalizes priorities to help team focus on 
what’s essential [55]. 
Table 3. Specialised tools provided by clients and their use in 

To manage tasks (see and 
update tasks) and see who 
is assigned to a task.  

practice by the vendor  

least 

finally 

regularly  opened  at 

the  vendor  performed  her 

Ten of the eleven interviewees were provided with at least 
one  of  the  above  specialized  tools  by  their  clients.  These 
tools  were  mainly  used  to  distribute  and  monitor  tasks, 
which  helped  the  vendors  to  be  aware  of  their  task 
assignments. However, despite the fact that these tools were 
at  their  disposal,  most  vendors  preferred  and  used  third 
party  communication  and  messaging  tools.  One  of  the 
vendors 
five  applications 
simultaneously  to  perform  her  work  –  Slack.com  for 
teammates  and  client  chat,  Skype  for  the  company  chat 
room,  Asana.com  to  check  the  tasks,  Bitbucket.com  for 
the  development 
client’s  announcements  and 
environment  where 
tasks. 
Multiple  applications  were  used  not  only  to  accomplish 
tasks but also to facilitate team decisions and dynamics and 
to resolve work ambiguities. When ambiguities resulted in 
miscommunications,  vendors  were  adept  at  clarifying  and 
repairing  misunderstandings 
informal  written 
communication.  Remote  members  of  the  team  would  use 
technically mediated informal communication similar to the 
way 
informal 
conversations. If time in the chat room or a number of email 
exchanges  did  not  suffice  to  achieve  clarification,  a  voice 
call  was  used.  “Maybe  around  three  email  exchanges  of 
clarifying  about  something,  he  would  call,  'Hi  [name]!  I 
can’t  understand  also  what  you  are  confused  about.” 
Vendor  7  relayed.  Video  conferencing  was  not  seen  as  a 
viable option for communication with client as the quality 
of the video and audio connection could not be guaranteed. 
One  respondent  (V5)  identified  video  conferencing  as  a 
potential substitute for face-to-face meetings, however most 
participants  felt  that  the  reason  to  use  such  tools  was 
frequently  defeated  by  the  city’s  Internet  and  electricity 
problems.  Most  vendors  thus  relied  on  simple  written 
communications.  Vendor  5  detailed,  “We  have  group 

team  members  used 

that  co-located 

through 

324

SESSION: DISTANCE, COORDINATION, AND MOTIVATION

them 

for 

to  account 

they  adapted 

meetings  but  we  [local  team]  were  like,  ‘Why  are  they 
[clients]  laughing?’  We  can’t  understand  them…  The 
signal is too weak.  One time they projected something on 
the  screen.  We  can’t  see  it  clearly...    What  we  do  is  send 
files  [to  compensate].”  When  they  did  use  conferencing 
methods 
their 
circumstances. As V10 explained, “We just set it to mute so 
we  don’t  add  up  to  the  noise  –  the  dogs  barking,  my 
housemates chatting.” 
Monitoring  practices  among  the  vendors  varied  but  were 
always dependent on the clients’ preferences. For the home-
based vendors we interviewed, their clients were generally 
more  focused  on  outputs  and 
less  concerned  about 
monitoring the actual amount of time vendors worked, even 
if a specific number of hours had been agreed. For vendors 
based in an office, the time monitoring was stricter. When 
some clients suggested more rigid specialized coordination 
tools similar to oDesk’s system with task time monitoring 
progress,  screenshots,  keyboard  logs  and  screen  activities, 
the  interviewed  vendors  expressed  their  opposition.  Their 
clients  reportedly  acquiesced  in  their  desire  not  to  be 
monitored.  Our  vendors  reported  that  they  and  their 
colleagues love the degree of freedom afforded to them by 
this  industry.  Rigid  project  management  software  like  the 
one built-in in oDesk is seen as defeating the purpose and 
beauty  of  choosing  a  career  in  online  work.    Vendor  1 
strongly  expressed  his  opposition,  “It's  what  I  hate  the 
most.  To be monitored like oDesk.” V10 pointed out that 
monitoring can actually work against the client’s interests: 
“As for me, okay but he will be the one who will be in the 
losing  end  in  that  case  because  for  me  even  how  long  I 
work in a day, usually 12 hours, I bill him 8 hours.  He will 
be forced to pay me the actual hours if he will demand for a 
monitoring  system  –  overtime  [pay]…  Eventually  the  idea 
was not pushed through.” 
Client Relationship 
The client relationship theme juxtaposes the findings from 
the  coordination  practice  adhocracies 
theme  which 
highlighted  the  vendors’  partial  autonomy  with  regards  to 
choosing work practices and tools. The client relationship, 
by  contrast,  subsumes  how  vendors  perceive 
their 
relationship  with  their  clients  and  addresses  issues  of 
control and trust.  
Our thematic analysis revealed four central categories that 
were part of the client relationship theme: client’s control, 
client’s treatment, client’s trust and client’s investment. 
Our  vendors  reported  that  the  initial  contact  between  the 
interviewees  and  client 
through  a 
middleman  platform 
(i.e.  onlinejobs.ph,  oDesk.com, 
freelancer.com or elance.com) or direct referral. The client 
typically  decides  (client’s  control)  to  initiate  a  work 
relationship, sets work specifications, and negotiates wages. 
They determine the monitoring mechanisms as well as the 
conditions mentioned in the theme online work in practice. 
Client’s control emerged as the core category in our results, 

is  either 

initiated 

as it had the highest number of connections between themes 
and categories, 
All  interviewees  expressed  their  appreciation  of  their 
clients,  whom  they  described  as  good-natured,  generous 
and understanding. Six out of eleven interviewees had been 
working for their current clients without a contract and six 
of these eleven had been with their clients for at least two 
years.  One  client  showed  concern  for  the  welfare  and 
professional  development  of  the  vendor  by  paying  for  her 
online  training.  Clients  generally  provided  for  any  work 
requirements as well as offered perks in a form of bonuses 
and  gadgets.  In  the  long  run,  some  of  the  interviewees 
considered their clients to be friends or in some cases even 
family. The vendors overwhelmingly perceived the client’s 
treatment  as  positive  and  felt  that  it  was  fostered  by  their 
own  positive  attitude  and  good  performance,  which  the 
clients  appreciated  and  which  also  helped  vendors  to  gain 
the  client’s  trust.  “I  am  not  monitored.  They  trust  me.” 
(V1)  
Four of the study participants were trusted enough that they 
were tasked to hire other vendors and form their own teams. 
Another vendor was trusted with the client’s personal data 
such  as  credit  card  numbers,  tax  files  and  other  financial 
matters even though her job description was that of a web 
developer.  “On our initial contact, I have no details about 
him.  Just  a  name.  The  accounts 
to 
communicate  with  me  doesn’t  even  have  a  picture…  Then 
slowly, he would share more and now I have his credit card 
details,  I  do  his  taxes  and  other  important  financial 
statements.” (V7) Once trust was built, the clients willingly 
invested  in  the  work  relationship  by  attending  to  the 
vendor’s needs beyond salary (i.e. hardware needs, software 
needs,  expanding  the  team,  site  visits,  etc.).  Five  of  the 
participants  appreciated  the  face-to-face  (FTF)  encounter 
they  had  when  their  client  visited,  which  enabled  them  to 
establish  a  more  intimate  professional  relationship  as  they 
continued  to  work  at  a  distance.    “We  met  in  Makati  [an 
urbanised  city]  last  year  for  two  weeks.  They  rented  a 
conference room and we worked regular office hours, went 
out  at  nights  and  weekends.  It  was  fun!  They  are  very 
cool”, V3 shared. 
Online Work in Practice 
This  theme  describes  the  work  situation  of  the  vendors  in 
their virtual team, which determines many aspects in their 
work  life.  Working  conditions  were  to  a  large  extent 
determined by the clients.  
“Even though we have to go in the office, our boss is not 
very  strict.    Compared  to  when  we  are  in  the  formal 
company in the UK.  We can wear whatever we want. We 
can sleep when your job is done, play games… Yes [there is 
freedom.  Less  control].    As  if  compared  to  the  corporate 
life,  the  actual  corporate  life.  If  you  were  in  the  main 
branch  of  the  company,  it  is  very  liberating  in  here.    But 
our boss still demands it; that you’ll get results.  That’s all 
she cares about”, V2 relayed his work set-up.   

that  he  uses 

325

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

to 

freedom  (with  respect 

In this study, vendors are mostly programmers who possess 
high  analytical  skill.  The  job  title  of  “Programmer”  is 
highly regarded and coveted by peers (specialised skills as 
edge).  Programmers  are  among  the  highest  paid  technical 
workers  in  the  ITO  industry,  and  generally  attract  a  high 
starting  pay.  “I  let  my  output  speak  for  itself,”  V9 
confidently  answered  when  asked  about  his  continued 
employment  which  reflects  the  confidence  and  skills  he 
obtained while working in the industry for six years. 
Vendors  reported  that  the  duties  and  responsibilities, 
degree  of 
the  monitoring 
mechanism),  work  arrangements  (home-based  or  office-
based,  full  time  or  part-time)  and  work  hours  were  set  by 
their clients. For example, work hours were determined by 
the client’s base country; for USA clients, vendors worked 
from 9:00pm to 4:00am and for UK clients, from 4:00pm to 
midnight,  local  Pilipino  time.  The  schedule  was  also 
adjusted if the client’s country switched to daylight savings 
time.  Vendors  addressed  time  zone  issues  by  flexibly 
adjusting their work hours as required by their client. While 
vendors  we  interviewed  were  generally  satisfied  with  the 
work  hours  and  work  location  arrangements,  they  did 
perceive  that  the  hours  “took  their  toll”.  For  instance,  V8 
reported,  “Even  if  I  am  used  to  overnight  work  during 
college days, I believe night shift makes me ‘off’ sometimes. 
Most of the time I can cope, but there are still moments that 
I wonder how it would be if my work was in the morning.” 
Irregular  work  hours  were  one  of  the  many  compromises 
study  participants  accepted  when  they  chose  to  become 
online  workers.  The  results  showed  several  examples  for 
the type of risks vendors took when they decided to change 
careers  and  work  as  independent  online  vendors  full-time. 
For instance, one participant, with no career opportunity in 
the  city,  took  a  significant  risk  and  paid  for  an  expensive 
Internet  connection  during  the  year  2000,  when  Internet 
connections  were  not  commonly  available  and  were 
expensive.  Another  participant  lost  his  scholarship  in  his 
senior year and took a chance to take up online freelancing 
to support his studies. In these cases, the risks paid off for 
both  participants  as  they  became  part  of  a  flourishing 
industry  (risks  and  payoffs).  Another  potential  risk  we 
identified  was  the  risk  to  vendors  when  they  decided  to 
unsubscribe  from  an  online  job  middleman  platform,  that 
they  previously  had  used.  .  Middleman  platforms  (i.e. 
freelancer.com  or  oDesk.com)  provide  protections  to  both 
parties,  clients  and  vendors, 
through  work  progress 
monitoring,  output  delivery  and  payment.  However,  our 
interviews  showed  that  a  majority  of  vendors  seem  to 
eventually  abandon  these  platforms  and  instead  rely  on 
trusted  relationships  with  existing  clients  as  they  continue 
to  negotiate  and  work  outside  the  platforms.  None  of  the 
vendors  we  interviewed  any  longer  worked  through  a 
middleman  platform  and  all  reported  to  have  established 
good relationships with their clients. 

326

From  the  vendor’s  perspective  the  personal  relationship 
between  clients  and  vendors  played  an  important  role  in 
shaping  the  overall  work  relationship.  For  instance,  V4 
opined: “The company is informal in nature. Like a family, 
I  can  easily  talk  to  the  clients.  They  are  very  cool.”  As 
stated in the client relationship theme, clients and vendors 
commonly  established  friendships.  This  had  an  impact  on 
the  vendor’s  work  practice  as  vendors  felt  that  they  were 
being  treated  as  equals.  This  relationship  was  reinforced 
when clients financed the interviewed vendors’ work needs 
(e.g. by fulfilling hardware requirements) and asked them to 
form and hire their own teams.  
Our  participants  reported  that  clients  tended  to  give  more 
opportunities  and  responsibilities  to  vendors  as  their 
trust  grew.  The  vendor’s  positive 
confidence  and 
characteristics in practice (including good ethics, excellent 
outputs,  flexible,  adaptable,  reputable  and  trustworthy) 
directly impacted on the client relationship. “He [boss] is 
very  good  to  me.  In  return,  I  do  good  work,  give  loyalty, 
show commitment and honesty. I just do my best.” (V7). 
Our  vendors  perceived 
this  social  phenomenon 
positively impacted on their performance and output. Their 
clients  demonstrated  appreciation  for  their  efforts  through 
verbal  praise,  enthusiasm, 
the  acknowledgment  of 
successful projects and provision of continued employment. 
As  highly  specialized  skilled  workers  in  the  online  job 
industry, these programmers felt that their work ethics and 
quality  of  outputs  spoke  for  themselves.  Our  participants 
felt that when a client realized the potential of the offshore 
programmer,  that  client  would  continue  to  work  with  that 
specific  vendor  and  even  extend  the  terms  of  the  original 
agreement,  to  a  larger  extent  than  they  would  if  they 
considered  vendors  to  be  mere  subcontracted  employee. 
However, the interviewed vendors realized that the quality 
of  the  work  output  remained  the  central  currency  of  their 
relationship with vendors. For instance V9 shared, “At the 
end  of  the  day,  it  is  all  about  the  output…  They  can  be 
generous but they are not stupid. ‘I will be good to you, but 
you are not doing what you are supposed to be doing, then I 
don’t need you.’ Some bosses are like that – generous but 
not stupid.” 
Effects on work-life balance 
The theme titled effects on work-life balance describes how 
the  vendors’  online  work  in  practice  affected  their  life 
beyond work. The interviewees reported that they adjusted 
their  work,  family  and  social  life  around  their  work 
this  difficult 
schedule.  Although 
the 
beginning, 
their  schedule  had 
advantages  that  were  beneficial  to  family  life.  The  home-
based vendors perceived that their work situation afforded 
them  with  a  larger  degree  of  freedom  compared  to  a 
standard  office  job.  For  example,  their  flexible  work 
arrangement allowed them to accept more than one client or 
simply run important errands. “The work hours allow me to 
go  to  the  bank,  process  papers  in  government  offices  and 

they  found 
that 

they  considered 

that 

in 

SESSION: DISTANCE, COORDINATION, AND MOTIVATION

most  especially  attend  to  my  kids.”  (V5)  However,  these 
vendors  also  experienced  negative  issues  associated  with 
shift  work  [21].  Issues  included  the  disturbance  of  the 
sleep/wake  cycle  and  a  general  deterioration  of  health, 
linked  to  boredom  of  their  routine  and  sedentary  lifestyle. 
Male  home-based  vendors  reported  to  have  gained  weight 
since  starting  their  jobs,  one  participant  developed  a  mild 
ulcer  and  was  hospitalized  at  one  point  (health  issues),. 
Further reported issues included difficulties in maintaining 
social  relationships,  (participants  missed  out  on  some 
family  and  friend’s  gatherings  –  limited  social  life)  and 
difficulties  in  maintaining  family  relationships  (spouses 
demanded time, children had to stay quiet in the morning as 
the vendor slept - unique home family/home setup). Home-
based participants reported that the issue they perceived to 
be the worst was the feeling of distance they developed to 
their families despite the fact they were at home. “You are 
home, but it seems that you are not… That’s why I devote 
my  weekend  to  my  family  and  kids.  That’s  the  time  I  can 
make up to them with my full attention.” (V1) 
Despite these challenges our interviewed vendors reported 
that  they  juggled,  performed  and  produced  the  output  on 
schedule. They  kept their clients satisfied  with  hard-work, 
discipline,  flexibility,  good  personal  relationship  skills, 
good  communication  and  outputs  that  went  beyond  their 
client’s expectations and expressed pride in doing so.  
Expressed concerns 
One  of  the  biggest  problems  faced  by  the  interviewed 
vendors  that  affected  both  their  career  and  coordination 
practices  with  clients  were  infrastructure  problems,  in 
particular  problems  with  unreliable  Internet  connections, 
power  failures  and  brownouts.  The  city  commonly 
experiences  frequent  and  unanticipated  brownouts 
in 
addition to problems related to limited Internet speeds and 
reliability.  Home-based  vendors 
the 
problem  by  working  in  Internet  cafés  that  provided  more 
stable  electricity  and  Internet  connections.  When  asked 
about  this  situation,  V8  responded,“  I’m  paying  too  much 
for this kind of service.  So, hello telco companies, what’s 
going on with you?... Usually, I go out go to coffee shops. I 
work there… The same with brownouts [blackouts], I will 
look  for  areas,  coffee  shops  or  hangout  place  that  has 
power.”  The worst case scenario was a citywide blackout, 
which  would  cause  vendors  to  cease  work.  Participants 
reported that this was a major cause of stress especially if 
problems  occurred  during  scheduled 
task  deliveries.  
Vendor  7  described  her  experience,  “I  get  very  annoyed. 
What  happened  is,  especially  if  it’s  a  long  time  already 
[without  Internet  connection],  I  quarrel  with  the  internet 
service  provider  [laughs]…  Especially  if  your  deadline  is 
that day.” If any of these problems occurred, vendors were 
forced to apologize and explain the reason for the delay to 
their clients. While long term clients were generally aware 
of this problem it remained a source of embarrassment and 
stress  to  vendors.    “The  moment  the  Internet  or  power  is 

to  address 

tried 

327

back,  I  inform  him  [client]  asap,  and  ask  for  [give]  big 
apologies.” (V8)   
A further source of concern was the rapid rate with which 
the  ITO  industry  in  the  Philippines  is  developing.  One  of 
the  side  effects  of  this  growth  is  that  due  to  increased 
competition  other  ITO  vendors  might  sell  their  services 
cheaply,  and  threaten  the  financial  viability  of  their 
profession. 
DISCUSSION 
This study aimed to understand coordination of distributed 
software  development  from  the  ITO  vendor’s  perspective, 
using  thematic  analysis.    In  this  section,  we  discuss  our 
findings and frame the discussion using Olson and Olson’s 
framework  on  the  sociotechnical  conditions  in  distance 
work as a lens.  
Assertive and Proactive Collaboration 
Olson  and  Olson’s  concept  of  collaboration  readiness 
addresses  the  question  to  what  extent  co-workers  “have  a 
culture  of  sharing  and  collaboration”  [51,  p.164]  and  are 
ready  to  effectively  use  collaborative  technologies.  Their 
thinking  related 
to  collaboration  within  organisations 
spanning distance.  
Our study highlighted a more complex relationship between 
parties  who  were  not  of  one  organisation.  Participating 
vendors  were  required  to  be  not  only  collaboration  ready 
but to have a very proactive attitude towards ensuring that 
collaboration  succeeded.  Despite  the  fact  that  six  of  the 
eleven respondents worked without a signed contract, they 
felt  to  be  of  value  to  the  companies  that  employed  them. 
We observed that our participants took pride in their work, 
but also felt a sense of responsibility with regards to their 
clients’  success  beyond  their  immediate  scope  of  work,  a 
sentiment expressed through statements such as “Our client 
are real people... I feel embarrass if they will be humiliated 
presenting products that we created. That's why we do our 
best. They do not fail us in anyway.” (V3)  
The  vendors  willingly  complied  with  the  fact  that  their 
work  setup  was  determined  by  their  client’s  needs,  for 
instance  by  working  within  the  client’s  time  zone.  The 
schedule  was  adjusted  in  the  event  that  daylight  savings 
time  was  practiced  in  the  client’s  country.  Although  the 
vendors  were  generally  compliant, 
their 
opinions  when  it  mattered  to  them,  for  example,  in  their 
opposition to a stricter monitoring system.  
Even if getting a job done meant sending multiple message 
exchanges to clarify items, this was not seen as a big issue 
by  the  participants.    As  V2  put  it,  “The  usual  problem 
encountered  when 
is  online...  Miscommunication. 
Misunderstandings…  I  think  it  is  not  really  a  problem 
because it is part of the job.  It is the nature of the job to 
have this miscommunication when it is online.” 
The principal finding with regards to coordination practices 
was that vendors use very flexible, adaptable and informal 

they  voiced 

it 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

to  be  sufficient 

coordination practices and simple reliable technologies, that 
they  were  able  to  manage  and  still  deliver  the  required 
outputs.  Vendors  were  flexible  with  regards  to  which 
coordination  technology  was  used  and  whether  it  was 
synchronous  or  asynchronous  in  nature.  Even  if  they 
experienced  delayed  responses,  basic  technologies  such  as 
email  and  chat  proved 
to  resolve 
ambiguities in managing shared resources, schedules, tasks 
and decisions.   
Technology Sophistication and Technology Breakdown 
Technology  readiness  is  the  condition  pertaining  to  the 
technological  competence  of  the  individuals  involved  in  a 
team and the organization; its capability to provide a good 
technical  support  system  [49].  The  study  shows  that  the 
vendors are generally highly trained IT or computer science 
professionals  with  experience  in  the  ITO  industry.  The 
study  participants  were  all  highly  adept  with  regards  to 
recent  technological  trends;  new  technologies  were  easily 
learned and used. 
The  study  revealed  that  more  sophisticated  coordination 
technologies  such  as  project  management  software  are 
underutilized by ITO vendors. Although these coordination 
technologies  are  designed  to  support  the  majority  of 
coordination  processes,  in  the  context  of  our  study  they 
were  only  used  to  access  assigned  tasks  and  tasks 
schedules.  These  results  are  reflected  in  other  studies  that 
looked  at  coordination  practices  in  distributed  software 
development  more  broadly.  Boden  and  Avram  found  that 
specialised  tools  were  considered  complex  for  daily  use 
[12].  Boden  et  al  [11,14]  described  how  companies 
involved in distributed development did not use specialized 
coordination  and  communication,  but  instead  used  chat  or 
voice calls because they were more flexible and easy to use.  
These less formal means of communication are core to the 
everyday  coordination  of  dispersed  team  members  [7,25]. 
When  formal  systems  are  important  in  coordination, 
informal communication is still essential to make sense of 
information  in  the  formal  system  [13].  However,  in  the 
context  of  our  study,  the  choice  of  coordination  and 
communication tools was not driven solely by convenience 
or  efficiency  but  rather  reflected  attitudes  regarding  the 
distribution of power and control. Olson et al stressed that 
the key to understanding the actual needs of the user is not 
to push “cool” technologies on them [52]. The interviewed 
vendors didn’t seem to mind opening multiple applications 
to do their job. However, they opt to communicate in third 
party  software  instead  of  through  channels  built-in  to 
specialised  management  tools.  Communication  features 
built into such tools tend to  add an element of control and 
monitoring that belies the trust developed with their clients 
and  reduces  the  level  of  control  and  informality  that  they 
consider central to their coordination practices. 

lessen 

Due to Internet reliability problems within the city, vendors 
rarely used synchronous high bandwidth technologies such 
as  video  conferencing.  However,  clients  accept 
that 
(Internet  and  electric  power 
technology  breakdowns 
infrastructure)  are  beyond 
the  vendor’s  control.  The 
vendors  comment  that  clients  continue  to  work  with 
vendors  because  of  the  value  that  they  deliver,  .Thus 
“technology  readiness”  reflects  not  so  much  the  ability  to 
use  the  latest  technology,  but  the  ability  to  work  around 
circumstances  in  order  to  deliver  value  with  whatever 
technology is available and appropriate.  
Work Ambiguity and Vendor Resiliency 
The degree of work division of the team with respect to the 
amount of communication needed to accomplish the work 
is  Olson  and  Olson’s  concept  of  nature  and  coupling  of 
work [51]. Having been abstracted from the larger network 
of other development teams, the vendors have a degree of 
independence  which  would 
communication 
demands;  modular  project  management  style  according  to 
[38].  “The  more  modularized  the  work  at  the  different 
locations, the more likely is success”, according to Olson et 
al  [52,p.79].  This  abstraction  from  other  loosely  coupled 
teams  allowed  vendors  to  engage  in  tightly  coupled  tasks 
within  their  small  team  and  to  commonly  use  shared 
information repositories.  
The vendors belonged to development teams consisting of 2 
to  8  team  members,  comprising  both  vendors  and  clients. 
They  perceived  that  they  were  part  of  a  tightly  integrated 
small  team.  However,  they  expressed  that  they  are  well 
aware that their client manages more than their own team, 
and that they are part of a bigger network of teams. Vendor 
7,  a  web  developer  and  database  administrator  explained, 
“He  [client]  would  ask  ‘What  are  the  things  that  you 
need?’  When  I  need  a  video,  he  sends  it  to  me  after 
sometime. Meaning there's someone making the video but I 
don't  know  who  is  the  one  making  the  video....  I  think  he 
also has a graphic artist.  And maybe a writer too."  The 
vendors  perceived  that  this  abstraction  made  collaboration 
and  coordination  among  teams  and  clients  manageable.  
The  interplay  of  coordination  and  abstraction  is  central  to 
the vendor’s work.  
What  was  striking  in  our  study  in  relation  to  Olson  and 
Olson’s concept of the nature and coupling of work was 
the  evidence  of  vendor  resiliency.  Vendors  were  very 
accepting  of  and  willing  to  cope  with  sometimes  extreme 
demands  of  coordination  where  needed,  while  accepting 
abstraction, where little information was available.  
Literature  on  the  dispersion  of  global  software  teams  has 
highlighted how dispersion can have a negative impact on 
team’s  output  and  performance  as  a  whole 
the 
[41,47,48,53].  Given 
the  well-established  challenges 
associated with remote collaboration we were surprised to 
find  that  the  vendors  we  studied  reported  coordination 
issues but were able to overcome them even if their work 
was  tightly  coupled  with  those  in  another  remote  location 

328

SESSION: DISTANCE, COORDINATION, AND MOTIVATION

these 

there  were  differences 

to  an  agreement.  Similar 

(RQ2:  What  are  the  issues  associated  with  coordination?). 
Vendors  did  report  that  there  was  an  initial  adjustment 
period,  especially  with  regards  to  their  family  life,  social 
life and health, in relation to the work hours and nature of 
work  but  generally  felt  that  they  were  coping  with  the 
conditions  of  work.  As  for  the  experience  of  V6,  “It  took 
me  awhile  to  figure  out  their  system…    I  had  difficulty 
grasping  the  system…  For  the  first  week,  I  really  don’t 
know what to do, where to start… I do tests only to find out 
it was tested already. Only in my second week did I learn 
what  to  do…  If  I  don’t  ask,  I  wouldn’t  understand.  Self-
study  basically.”  Their  work  hours  were  dictated  by  the 
office  hours  in  the  client’s  country.  Vendor  11  whose 
Canada-based  company’s  operating  hours  is  afternoon  to 
midnight, she reports 4:00 am to 12:00 noon.  “I am not like 
this before but now I sleep early. I wake up at 3 am or so.  
And because I don’t want to take a bath after long hours of 
straining my eyes using the computer, I take a bath before 
work starts.” It took some adjusting to the change.  
Vendors felt that improved information and communication 
technology allowed them to lessen ambiguities in their line 
of  work.  When 
in  software 
development  culture  or  organizational  behaviour,  vendors 
commonly  followed  the  lead  of  their  clients,  but  made 
suggestions about particular aspects of the work routine and 
eventually  came 
to  other 
coordination  work, 
types  of  negotiations  were 
conducted through chats, emails, voice calls or video calls. 
When asked whether she was a successful ITO vendor, V3 
exclaimed,  “Of  course!”    She  went  on  answering  the 
question about what will it take to be successful, “The skills 
are given [English proficiency and programming skills] but 
as a person, you need to be flexible.  You need to adapt with 
different  types  of  persons…  or  your  clients.  They  vary  in 
nationality.    You  need  to  adjust.    Be  disciplined.  Meet 
deadlines.  Live up to how you sell yourself.” This shows 
pride and resiliency in belonging to a challenging industry 
that is at times opaque and mysterious. 
Compatible Goals Lead to Common Ground 
Common  ground  was  an  important  concept  for  both  the 
interviewed  vendors  and  their  clients.  Vendors  and  clients 
both  took  big  risks  while  engaging  a  remote  work 
relationship.  The  clients  relied  on  the  vendors’  skills  to 
conduct quality work to maximize their profit. The vendors’ 
similarly offered skills, good work ethics and quality output 
to maintain their professional relationship with clients. This 
shared  interest  became  the  common  ground  that  tied 
vendors to clients and vice versa. 
The  vendor-client  relationship  is  a  good  example  of  the 
phenomena  of  “people  working 
in  a  concerted  and 
coordinated fashion and yet might have a slightly different, 
but compatible, goals” as stated in [39,p.183]. Vendors are 
interested in financial security and job opportunities while 
clients  are  interested  in  affordable  and  high  quality  work 
outputs.  

329

their 

lead 

location,  and 

With regards to RQ3 (What are the attitudes of the vendors 
with  respect  to  their  work  and  coordination  set-up?), 
common ground influences this answer. While the vendors’ 
work  setup  is  substantially  driven  by  client  demands 
regarding  work  hours, 
interaction  and 
coordination  approaches,  vendors  generally  are  very 
appreciative  and  satisfied  with  their  profession.  They 
perceived that they were able to develop professionally and 
establish good relationship with their clients. Pride in their 
in their work and gratitude towards their employer played a 
critical  role  in  this  context.  Vendors  reported  that  they 
client’s 
frequently  delivered  outputs  beyond 
expectations.  The  following  statement  from  V10 
is 
indicative  of  this  attitude:  “Given  a  module  specification, 
we  always  try  to  deliver  something  even  better,  to  our 
client’s amazement.” The interviewed vendors marked their 
place in the ITO industry and display a professional work 
ethic. They were proud of their success which brings along 
benefits such as the purchasing power that their pay affords 
them  in  the  provincial  part  of  the  Philippines.  Overall, 
client satisfaction is seen as the central indicator of success 
and  vendors  are  appreciative  of  the  relationships  they 
establish  with  clients  and  the  recognition  they  receive  for 
their work. 
In our study, common ground is more than common base of 
shared knowledge and vocabulary [49], for the participating 
vendors did not work together nor did they share a common 
management  and  working  style  prior 
their  current 
relationship. Their different and yet compatible goals [that 
are  continually  met] 
to  develop  a  rich 
professional  relationship.  One  of  the  reasons  that  such 
meaningful relationship with the client were built is due to 
the  fact  that  remote  team  members’  expectations  were 
managed in terms of relationship with remote stakeholders. 
“Distance  tempered  expectations  of  social  relationships 
[30,p.484]”, which in turn lead to highly valuing the good-
natured  clients’  offered  friendship  which  they  did  not 
expect.  Site  visits  and  FTF  meetings  were  found  to  be  a 
successful  method  for  developing  lasting  relationship  [16] 
with clients and vice-versa which was experienced by five 
of the interviewed vendors. 
Common ground is no longer about how each other dresses 
or what each other looks like, as long the work is done from 
the  client’s  perspective;  and  as  long  as  there  is  sufficient 
control and autonomy over how the work is done from the 
vendor’s perspective: The vendors’ feeling of being valued 
and rewarded through friendship or being part of the family, 
having a good job, working with a reputable company; The 
client  looking  after  the  vendor  who  delivers  well,  which 
makes the client’s life less complicated. 
A notable point of interest in terms of common ground was 
how  V10  and  his  teammates  increased  awareness.  Unlike 
other vendors who settled for chat rooms and purposefully 
designed discussion threads, V10 who is part of a team of 
five,  went  above  and  beyond  those  established  means  of 

them 

in 

lieu  of 

communication and decided that all team members were on 
Skype voice call while they are on duty. “It’s something we 
just recently tried. Instead of listening to music, we decided 
to listen to each other work... It is as if you are all in the 
same  room  and  they  are  at  the  back  chatting.”  Team 
members were not required to talk, but hearing the presence 
of other team members gave them a feeling of comfort and 
shared presence.  This type of awareness may open a more 
spontaneous  communication 
serendipity 
encounters  among  co-located  workers;  something  that  is 
lacking among distributed teams [58].  
Autonomy and Control in the Postcolonial Era 
According  to  [49],  the  concept  of  management  and 
decision making in essence, means that “collaboration at a 
distance requires good leadership, and a sense by all of the 
participants that decisions are made fairly and clearly.” The 
interviewed  vendors  perceived  that  their  clients,  in  their 
role  as  employers,  were  generally  doing  a  good  job  in 
managing  their  teams,  and  on  the  whole  they  appreciated 
their client’s monitoring practice and managerial style.. The 
answer  to  RQ4  (How  do  coordination  practices  affect 
vendor  attitudes?)  has  a  relation  to  management  and 
decision  making.  The  study  revealed  that  being  able  to 
influence the coordination workflow (coordination practice 
adhocracies) was a critical point for vendors. Vendors felt 
that the flexibility to conduct and coordinate their work in a 
flexible manner gave them a degree of freedom that made 
them  feel  trusted,  valued  and  counted  on  by  management, 
their client. As a result, this feeling of work satisfaction led 
to improved work practices and client relationship. 
Vendor  4  was  delegated  as  the  project  manager.    His 
managerial  style  is  similar  of  that  his  client’s,  “I  don't 
monitor  the  people  I  manage,  because  I  am  not  also 
monitored.  But I expect output." The gratitude that vendors 
feel  with  regards  to  their  clients  can  be  explained  by  the 
fact that the client’s management behaviour defies expected 
norms with regards to the distribution of power within the 
Philippines.  When  asked  how  to  be  successful  in  the 
profession, V1 stated, “Work hard. Don't complain.” 
In  Olson  and  Olson’s  Distance  Matters in year 2000 [50], 
culture  is  a  category  referred  to  in  terms  of  Hofstede’s 
power distance [35] relation.  However, Olson and Olson’s 
How  to  Make  Distance  Work  of  2014,  acknowledge  that 
increasingly 
national 
boundaries, within nations there are different cultures as is 
the case of organisations [53].  Postcolonial computing [36] 
argues to move away from colonial tropes to offer a more 
nuanced  lens  and  generative  models  of  emerging  cultures 
and  personal  histories.  We  reflect  on  this  in  our  data 
gathering and findings. Cultural factors are complex and go 
far  beyond  national  identity  to  local,    personal,  dynamic 
concerns  [10]. Over time, teams and people learn to adapt 
in  their  continuous  collaboration  and  work  cultures  shift 
[11]; 

collaborations 

crossing 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

themselves  differently.  On 

Our  study  focused  on  an  educated  group  of  software 
developers. Typically vendors in the Philippines are either 
tertiary educated or have dropped out of education because 
they  have  sufficient  software  skills  to  make  a  living  in 
global  market.  The  tech  savvy  entrepreneur  vendor  is  an 
emerging work culture in the Philippines. From the point of 
view of Olson and Olson’s work it is important to recognize 
that  culture  is  dynamic,  evolving  and  personal.  Power 
difference  in  Olson  and  Olson’s  Distance  Matter  work  in 
2000  was  only  addressed  in  the  context  of  “power 
distance”, a colonial era concept introduced by Hofstede. In 
their follow-up work in 2014 (How to Make Distance Work 
Work) the mention of power difference was about those in 
the know and not in the know among and in-between teams 
[53]. 
In  our  study,  in  a  postcolonial  era,  power  relations  also 
manifested 
the  one  hand 
distance  allowed  vendors  to  have  much  greater  autonomy 
and  control  over  their  own  work  practices,  however  in 
certain respects they were still very beholden to the wishes 
of  their  clients,  who  generally  appeared  to  them  to  be  in 
larger  organisations  and  who  were  the  source  of  their 
livelihood. People are willing to accept working conditions 
that  aren’t  ideal,  because  they  get  autonomy  over  other 
aspects  of  their  lives  and  work.  Level  of  autonomy  and 
acceptance of control is a moving feast related to local and 
international circumstances.  People trade level of control in 
one aspect of life for greater autonomy in other aspects of 
their life. 
However,  overall  our  results  point  to  a  more  complex 
relationship. Venders generally appreciative and are aware 
of the privileged position that their jobs affords them within 
the Filipino society. However, they only value this as long 
as  they  perceive  to  be  trusted  and  appreciated  by  their 
clients.  They  accept  difficult  working  conditions,  such  as 
working outside of regular office hours and the impact this 
has on their family and health as long as they are given a 
degree  of  autonomy  when  it  comes  to  the  choice  and 
manner in which they conduct their work, and in particular 
how they coordinate their work informally. 
CONCLUSION 
Olson  and  Olson’s  framework  has  been  a  helpful  lens  to 
reflect on distance collaboration in the context of offshore 
outsourcing. In our study of vendors in the Philippines, we 
have  highlighted  how  aspects  of  worker  autonomy  and 
acceptance  of  control  emerged  as  a  major  factor  in  the 
success of the vendors’ distance work. 
This study aimed to add a new perspective to coordination 
studies  by  considering  coordination  practices  from  the 
perspective  of  offshore  contractors  /  vendors  in  newly 
industrialized countries. As this is an exploratory study, we 
do  not  claim  that  the  study  result  are  generalizable,  but 
instead  aim  to  provide  deeper  insights  into  the  role  of 
offshore vendors which is rarely considered.  

330

are 

SESSION: DISTANCE, COORDINATION, AND MOTIVATION

Our thematic analysis of the interview data revealed a set of 
themes  and  categories  that  reflect  different  facets  of 
vendors’  working  conditions,  coordination  practices  and 
attitudes towards collaboration. Client relationship emerged 
as  a  critical  theme  in  our  analysis.  The  relationship  was 
characterised  by  a  complex  interplay  between  the  client’s 
control of the overall work arrangements and the vendors’ 
ability  to  establish  a  level  of  autonomy  in  their  work 
practices  and  their  flexible  use  of  coordination  tools.  This 
approach was instrumental in ensuring that the relationship 
was  mutually  beneficial  to  both  clients  and  vendors.  In 
addition,  values  like  respect,  trust,  appreciation  or  even 
friendship were seen as central prerequisites to a functional 
working relationship by vendors.  
Coordination  technology  plays  a  vital  role in  the  vendors’ 
coordination practice. An offshore vendor has no choice but 
to  rely  on  available  technology  for  sharing  resources, 
communication,  problem  solving,  building  relationships, 
task  schedules  and 
task  accomplishments.  Vendors 
preferred simple coordination tools (e.g. instant messenger, 
email  and  voice  calls)  that  afforded  them  a  degree  of 
flexibility and informality with regards to their coordination 
practice and were less impacted by slow or patchy internet 
connections.  Specialized  tools  were  used  for  specific 
aspects  of  the  work  routine,  such  as  task  assignment  and 
monitoring purposes. Vendors we studied had established a 
good  reputation  and  gained  their  clients’  trust.  However, 
more 
tools  were  generally  not 
appreciated  by  vendors.  Vendors  felt  that  these  tools 
defeated  one  of  the  reasons  they  chose  their  profession  in 
the first place, the fact that their online job offered them a 
degree of freedom. 
Literature  on  the  role  of  coordination  in  dispersed  teams, 
highlights  how  distance  introduces  significant  challenges 
[8,41,47–50].  In  this  study,  we  found  that  vendors  were 
able to accommodate various dispersion challenges, such as 
differences in time zones, by adjusting their working hours 
and making other personal sacrifices. Despite this, the study 
showed that vendors were overall comfortable and satisfied 
with their work conditions.  
It has been established that clients generally benefit from a 
better 
in 
communication and coordination processes [19]. Based on 
our finding we believe that addressing inclusion in the ITO 
industry requires a better understanding and management of 
power imbalances and the acknowledgment that power is a 
critical  dimension  of  analysis  in  distance  work.  Tools 
people  use  to  collaborate  have  changed  significantly  since 
the  days  of  “groupware”  and  there  is  much  greater 
internationalization  of  labour  since  Olson  and  Olson  first 
introduced  their  work  on  distance  collaboration.  We  hope 
that  our  work  offers  a  new  perspective  on  distributed 
collaboration  across  different  cultural  and  economic 
contexts  and  can  help  to  develop  strategies  to  further 
integrate ITO service vendors into the coordination process.  

intrusive  monitoring 

inclusion 

and 

contractors 

of 

vendors 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We  would  like  to  thank  the  participating  ITO  vendors  for 
their time and valuable input during the data collection. To 
our  fellow  ITO  vendor  research  enthusiast  Mr.  Rabby  Q. 
Lavilles,  our  thanks  for  sharing  his  knowledge  and  time 
during  the  study.  Thanks  to  all  volunteers,  publications 
support  and  staff,  who  provided  helpful  comments  on 
previous versions of this document. 
REFERENCES 
1.  M. Adenfelt. 2010. Exploring the performance of 

transnational projects: Shared knowledge, coordination 
and communication. International Journal of Project 
Management 28, 6: 529–538. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijproman.2009.10.004 

2.  O. Zeynep Aksin and Andrea Masini. 2008. Effective 

strategies for internal outsourcing and offshoring of 
business services: An empirical investigation. Journal of 
Operations Management 26, 2: 239–256. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jom.2007.02.003 

3.  Asana. Email is holding your team back. Get organized 

with Asana. Asana Website. Retrieved May 18, 2015 
from https://asana.com/product 

4.  Atlassian. 2015. JIRA product page. Atlassian Webpage. 

Retrieved July 14, 2015 from 
https://www.atlassian.com/software/jira 

5.  Basecamp. Basecamp Homepage. Basecamp Website. 
Retrieved May 18, 2015 from https://basecamp.com/ 
6.  Bitbucket. Bitbucket Homepage. Bitbucket Website. 
Retrieved May 18, 2015 from https://bitbucket.org/ 

7.  Pernille Bjørn, Jakob Bardram, Gabriela Avram, et al. 

2014. Global software development in a CSCW 
perspective. CSCW’14 Companion: 301–304. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2556420.2558863 

8.  Pernille Bjørn, Morten Esbensen, Rasmus Eskild Jensen, 
and Stina Matthiesen. 2014. Does Distance Still Matter  ? 
Revisiting the CSCW Fundamentals. 21, 5. 

9.  Loraine Blaxter, Christina Hughes, and Malcolm Tight. 

2001. How to Research. Open University Press, 
Philadelphia, USA. 

10. Alexander Boden, Gabriela Avram, Liam Bannon, and 

Volker Wulf. 2009. Knowledge Management in 
Distributed Software Development Teams - Does 
Culture Matter? 2009 Fourth IEEE International 
Conference on Global Software Engineering: 18–27. 
http://doi.org/10.1109/ICGSE.2009.10 

11. Alexander Boden, Gabriela Avram, Liam Bannon, and 
Volker Wulf. 2012. Knowledge sharing practices and 
the impact of cultural factors: reflection on two case 
studies of offshoring in SME. Journal of Software: 
Evolution and Processes 24: 139–152. 

12. Alexander Boden, Bernhard Nett, and Volker Wulf. 
2007. Coordination Practices in Distributed Software 
Development of Small Enterprises. International 

331

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Conference on Global Software Engineering(ICGSE 
2007), Icgse: 235–246. 
http://doi.org/10.1109/ICGSE.2007.18 

13. Alexander Boden, Frank Rosswog, Gunnar Stevens, and 

Volker Wulf. 2014. Articulation spaces: Bridging the 
Gap between Formal and Informal Coordination. 
Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer 
supported cooperative work & social computing - 
CSCW ’14: 1120–1130. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2531602.2531621 

14. Alexander Boden. 2007. Coordination Practices in 

Distributed Software Development of Small Interprises. 
IEEE 2nd International Conference on Global Software 
Enginnering (ICGSE ’07). 

15. Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2008. Using 

thematic analysis in psychology. School of Psychology 
Website of The University of Auckland, New Zealand 3, 
2: 77–101. 

16. Marcelo Cataldo, Matthew Bass, James D Herbsleb, and 
Len Bass. 2007. On Coordination Mechanisms in Global 
Software Development. International Conference on 
Global Software Engineering(ICGSE 2007), Icgse. 

17. Marcelo Cataldo, James D. Herbsleb, and Kathleen M. 
Carley. 2008. Socio-technical congruence: a framework 
for assessing the impact of technical and work 
dependencies on software development productivity. 
Proceedings of the Second ACM-IEEE international 
symposium on Empirical software engineering and 
measurement - ESEM ’08: 2 – 11. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1414004.1414008 

18. Jovan Cerda. 2014. University rankings  : Find out how 

your school does! The Philippine Star Website. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.philstar.com/campus/2014/05/26/1327524/u
niversity-rankings-find-out-how-your-school-does 

19. Chung Yang Chen, Pei Chi Chen, and Yeh Er Lu. 2013. 

The coordination processes and dynamics within the 
inter-organizational context of contract-based 
outsourced engineering projects. Journal of Engineering 
and Technology Management - JET-M 30, 2: 113–135. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jengtecman.2013.01.001 
20. Gerry Coleman and Rory O’Connor. 2007. Using 
grounded theory to understand software process 
improvement: A study of Irish software product 
companies. Information and Software Technology 49, 6: 
654–667. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2007.02.011 
21. Giovanni Costa. 1996. The impact of shift and night 

work on health. Applied Ergonomics 27, 1: 9–16. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/0003 

22. Chun Ping Deng, Ji Ye Mao, and Guo Shun Wang. 
2013. An empirical study on the source of vendors’ 
relational performance in offshore information systems 
outsourcing. International Journal of Information 

332

Management 33, 1: 10–19. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2012.04.004 

23. Louella D. Desiderio. 2014. IBPAP to expand list of 

Next Wave Cities. The Philippine Star Website. 
Retrieved July 21, 2015 from 
http://www.philstar.com/business/2014/09/23/1372004/i
bpap-expand-list-next-wave-cities 

24. DOST. 2015. Online jobs to fuel employment growth in 

Mindanao. Department of Science and Technology 
Website. Retrieved April 9, 2015 from 
http://icto.dost.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/PR-
ICT-Office-Online-jobs-to-fuel-employment-growth-in-
Mindanao.pdf 

25. Kate Ehrlich and Marcelo Cataldo. 2012. All-for-one 

and one-for-all? A multi-level analysis of 
communication patterns and individual performance in 
geographically distributed software development. 
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work CSCW: 945–954. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2145204.2145345 

26. Ezra Ferraz. 2015. The online freelancing industry in the 

Philippines is bullish and shows no signs of slowing. 
TECH IN ASIA Website. Retrieved April 24, 2015 from 
https://www.techinasia.com/elance-odesk-online-
freelancing-philippines/ 

27. Cathy Rose A. Garcia. 2014. How Pinoy earned P7.5-M 

from freelance work in just 1 year. ABS-CBN News. 
Retrieved April 9, 2015 from http://www.abs-
cbnnews.com/business/07/27/14/how-pinoy-earned-p75-
m-freelance-work-just-1-year 

28. Jahyun Goo, Rajiv Kishore, Kichan Nam, H. Raghav 

Rao, and Yongil Song. 2007. An investigation of factors 
that influence the duration of IT outsourcing 
relationships. Decision Support Systems 42, 4: 2107–
2125. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2006.05.007 

29. Penelope Sue Greenberg, Ralph H. Greenberg, and 

Yvonne Lederer Antonucci. 2007. Creating and 
sustaining trust in virtual teams. Business Horizons 50, 
4: 325–333. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2007.02.005 

30. Julia Katherine Haines, Judith S. Olson, and Gary M. 

Olson. 2013. Here or there? How configuration of 
transnational teams impacts social capital. INTERACT 
2013 8118 LNCS, PART 2: 479–496. 
http://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-40480-1_32 

31. Hyun S. Han, Jae N. Lee, and Yun Weon Seo. 2008. 

Analyzing the impact of a firm’s capability on 
outsourcing success: A process perspective. Information 
and Management 45, 1: 31–42. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2007.09.004 

32. Jussi Hätönen and Taina Eriksson. 2009. 30+ years of 

research and practice of outsourcing - Exploring the past 
and anticipating the future. Journal of International 

SESSION: DISTANCE, COORDINATION, AND MOTIVATION

Management 15, 2: 142–155. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.intman.2008.07.002 

33. J Herbsleb and D Moitra. 2001. Global software 

development. IEEE software 18, 2: 16–20. 
http://doi.org/10.1109/52.914732 

34. Pamela Hinds, Lei Liu, and Joachim Lyon. 2011. 

Putting the Global in Global Work: An Intercultural 
Lens on the Practice of Cross-National Collaboration. 
The Academy of Management Annals 5, 1: 135–188. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/19416520.2011.586108 
35. G. Hofstede. 1997. Cultures and organizations: 

software of the mind. Mc Graw Hill, London. 

36. Lilly Irani, Janet Vertesi, Paul Dourish, Kavita Philip, 
and Rebecca E. Grinter. 2010. Postcolonial computing: 
a lens on design and development. Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, ACM, 1311–1320. 

37. David Kitchen and Douglas McDougall. 1999. 

Collaborative learning on the Internet. Journal of 
Educational Technology Systems, 27: 245–258. 

38. Benjamin Koehne, Patrick C. Shih, and Judith S. Olson. 

2012. Remote and Alone: Coping with Being the 
Remote Member of the Team. Proceedings of the ACM 
2012 conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work - CSCW ’12: 1257. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2145204.2145393 

39. Charlotte P Lee and Drew Paine. 2015. From The 

Matrix to a Model of Coordinated Action ( MoCA ): A 
Conceptual Framework of and for CSCW. Framing 
Collaboration: Systems and Analysis, 179–194. 

40. Chad Lin, Craig Standing, and Ying Chieh Liu. 2008. A 

model to develop effective virtual teams. Decision 
Support Systems 45, 4: 1031–1045. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2008.04.002 

41. J.S. Lurey and M.S. Raisinghani. 2001. An empirical 
study of best practices in virtual teams. Information & 
Management 38, 8: 523–544. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-7206(01)00074-X 
42. Thomas W Malone. 1988. What is Coordination 

Theory  ? Cambridge, MA. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/99332.99367 

43. Thomas W. Malone and Kevin Crowston. 1994. The 

interdisciplinary study of coordination. ACM Computing 
Surveys 26: 87–119. 

44. Microsoft. Team Foundation Sever. Visual Studio 

Website. Retrieved May 18, 2015 from 
https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/vstudio/ff637362.aspx 

45. Raja Mikael Mitra. 2013. ADB Economics Working 

Paper Series The Information Technology and Business 
Process Outsourcing Industry  : Diversity and 
Challenges in Asia The Information Technology and 
Business Process Outsourcing Industry  : Diversity and 

333

Challenges in Asia. Retrieved from 
http://adb.org/sites/default/files/pub/2013/ewp-365.pdf 

46. Newsbytes. 2015. DOST, Freelancer.com conduct 
online job workshop in Mindanao. Newsbytes.ph. 
Retrieved April 9, 2015 from 
http://newsbytes.ph/2015/03/16/dost-freelancer-com-
conducts-online-job-workshop-in-mindanao/ 

47. Anh Nguyen-Duc, Daniela S. Cruzes, and Reidar 
Conradi. 2014. The impact of global dispersion on 
coordination, team performance and software quality - 
A systematic literature review. Information and 
Software Technology 57: 277–294. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2014.06.002 

48. John Noll, S. Beecham, and I. Richardson. 2011. Global 

software development and collaboration: barriers and 
solutions. ACM Inroads 1: 66–78. 

49. Gary M Gm Olson, Js Judith S Olson, and Gina Venolia. 
2009. What still matters about distance. Proceedings of 
HCIC. Retrieved from 
http://research.microsoft.com/pubs/78697/Olson9370.pd
f\nhttp://msr-waypoint.com/pubs/78697/Olson9370.pdf 
50. Gary Olson and Judith Olson. 2000. Distance Matters. 

Human-Computer Interaction 15, 2: 139–178. 
http://doi.org/10.1207/S15327051HCI1523_4 

51. J. S. Olson, E. Hofer, N. Bos, et al. 2008. A Theory of 

Remote Scientific Collaboration. In Scientiﬁc 
Collaboration on the Internet. MIT press, Cambridge, 
MA, 73–97. 

52. Judith S. Olson, Erik C Hofer, Nathan Bos, et al. 2005. 
A Theory of Remote Scientific Collaboration. Scientiﬁc 
Collaboration on the Internet: 73–99. 

53. Judith S. Olson and Gary M. Olson. 2014. How to make 
distance work work. IX Interactions Website 21, 28–35. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2567788 

54. PagerDuty. PagerDuty Homepage. PagerDuty Website. 

Retrieved May 18, 2015 from 
http://www.pagerduty.com/ 

55. PivotalTracker. 2015. Simple, Collaborative, Powerful. 
PivotalTracker Website. Retrieved July 14, 2015 from 
http://www.pivotaltracker.com/why-tracker 

56. Rafael Prikladnicki, Alexander Boden, Gabriela Avram, 
Cleidson R. B. de Souza, and Volker Wulf. 2013. Data 
collection in global software engineering research: 
learning from past experience. 
http://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-012-9240-x 

57. Narayan Ramasubbu, Marcelo Cataldo, Rajesh Krishna 
Balan, and James D. Herbsleb. 2011. Configuring global 
software teams: a multi-company analysis of project 
productivity, quality, and profits. 2011 33rd 
International Conference on Software Engineering 
(ICSE): 261–270. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1985793.1985830 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

58. David Redmiles, Andre van der Hoek, Ban Al-Ani, et al. 

2007. Continuous Coordination: A New Paradigm to 
Support Globally Distributed Software Development 
Projects. Wirtschaftsinformatik, Special Issue on the 
Industrialization of Software Development 49(Special: 
S28–S38. 

59. April H. Reed and Linda V. Knight. 2010. Effect of a 
virtual project team environment on communication-
related project risk. International Journal of Project 
Management 28, 5: 422–427. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijproman.2009.08.002 
60. Gery W. Ryan and H. Russell Bernard. 2003. 

Techniques to Identify Themes. Field Methods 15, 1: 
85–109. http://doi.org/10.1177/1525822X02239569 

61. Carolyn B. Seaman. 1999. Qualitative methods in 

empirical studies of software engineering. IEEE 
Transactions on Software Engineering 25: 557–572. 
62. Ravi Sharma, S R Apoorva, Venkata Madireddy, and 
Varun Jain. 2008. Best Practices for Communication 
between Client and Vendor in IT Outsourcing Projects. 
Journal of Information, Information Technology, and 
Organizations 3. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/1080569903262045 

63. Anselm L. Strauss and Juliet M. Corbin. 1998. Basics of 

Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for 
Developing Grounded Theory. Springer, Berlin. 

64. Jc Tang, Chen Zhao, Xiang Cao, and Kori Inkpen. 2011. 
Your time zone or mine?: a study of globally time zone-
shifted collaboration. Proceedings of the ACM 2011 
conference on Computer supported cooperative work: 
235–244. 
http://doi.org/http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1958824.19588
60 

65. Trello. 2015. What is Trello.com. Trello Help. Retrieved 

May 18, 2015 from http://help.trello.com/article/708-
what-is-trello 

66. Joseph B. Walther and Ulla Bunz. The rules of virtual 

groups: Trust, liking and performance in computer-
mediated communication. Journal of Communication 
55: 828–846. 

67. William Youngdahl and Kannan Ramaswamy. 2008. 

Offshoring knowledge and service work: A conceptual 
model and research agenda. Journal of Operations 
Management 26, 2: 212–221. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jom.2007.02.007  

 

 

334

