CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Impoverished Visions of Sustainability: Encouraging 

Disruption in Digital Learning Environments 

Eric M. Meyers and Lisa P. Nathan 

School of Library, Archival and Information Studies 

University of British Columbia 

Vancouver, BC, Canada 

eric.meyers; lisa.nathan@ubc.ca 

ABSTRACT 
Through this paper we step away from the proposition that 
there  is  one  universally  accepted  notion  of  sustainability. 
We introduce the CSCW community to the scholarship of 
Anthony  Weston,  a  philosopher  who  offers  a  way  to 
acknowledge  and  leverage  the  plurality  of  values  that 
inform  conceptualizations  of  environmental  sustainability. 
We  use  key  themes  from  Weston’s  philosophy  to  analyze 
three  social  computing  applications  that  employ  tropes  of 
sustainability, and explore their potential as sites of critical 
and  disruptive  discourse.  Our  focus  is  on  openly  or 
commercially  available  digital  tools,  simulations,  and 
experiences  that  support  the  broader  public,  including 
children, learning about the environment and sustainability 
concepts.  We  posit  that  Weston’s  work  provides  an 
innovative  framework  for  Sustainable  HCI,  one  that  is  in 
alignment  with  the  growing  diversity  of  approaches  to 
design  in  Sustainable  HCI,  alternatives  to  designing  for 
tightly bounded problems and anticipated solutions. 
Author Keywords 
Sustainability; learning applications; design. 
ACM Classification Keywords 
K.4.2 [Computing Milieux]: Computers and Society--- 
Social Issues; H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and 
Presentation]: User Interfaces  
INTRODUCTION 
Through this paper we step away from the proposition that 
there  is  one  universally  accepted  notion  of  sustainability. 
We  posit  that  sustainability—what  it  is  people  want  to 
sustain—is  an 
inherently  ethical  question,  pressing 
individuals  and  communities  to  articulate  what  they  value 
and  seek  to  cultivate.  We  argue  that  this  concept  is 
contested, situated, and ever-changing. 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work 
for  personal  or  classroom  use  is  granted  without  fee  provided  that 
copies  are  not  made  or  distributed  for  profit  or  commercial  advantage 
and that copies bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page. 
Copyrights  for  components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  the 
author(s)  must  be honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To 
copy  otherwise,  or republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to 
lists,  requires  prior  specific 
fee.  Request 
permissions 
CSCW 
USA 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to 
ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819987 

'16,  February  27-March  02,  2016,  San  Francisco, CA, 

permission 
from(cid:3)Permissions@acm.org.

and/or 

a 

Over the years calls for enriching the sustainability research 
have gained depth and nuance; yet, the underlying message 
remains  strikingly  consistent.  Bill  Tomlinson,  in  his  2010 
book  Greening  Through  IT,  proposed  that  researchers  and 
practitioners expand the horizons of human thinking about 
sustainability  by  incorporating  broader  notions  of  time, 
space,  and  complexity  into  sustainability-oriented  human 
computer 
small-scale, 
sustainability-oriented  projects  he  described  underscored 
the  need  for  longer-term  projects,  a  broader  range  of 
expertise,  and  alternative  indicators  of  success.  Five  years 
later,  reporting  on  deliberations  from  a  sustainability 
workshop  at  the  CHI  ‘14  conference,  Silberman  and 
colleagues  [38]  echoed  the  call  for  breadth.  In  a  write-up 
based  on  the  workshop  they  argued  that  Sustainable  HCI 
(SHCI) scholars needed to:  

interaction  design 

[43].  The 

Commit to research that considers longer time frames;

•
• Draw from and support relevant work outside HCI;
•

Build  and  support  systems  people  use  in  their
everyday  practices,  and  do  studies  that  inform  the
design and operation of such systems;

• Address the full diversity of sustainability issues;
• Move beyond simple models to grapple with the full
multi-scalar  complexity  of  “wicked”  sustainability
problems. ([38] p.67-68).

Inspired  by  these  aspirations  we  offer  an  inquiry  into 
sustainability-oriented  digital  learning  environments.  We 
draw  upon  the  philosophical  work  of  Anthony  Weston 
[47,48],  whose  scholarship  supports  our  goal  of  working 
generatively  with  the  plurality  of  values  that  inform 
conceptualizations of sustainability. Our focus is on openly 
or  commercially  available  digital  tools,  simulations,  and 
experiences  that  support  the  broader  public,  including 
children, learning about the environment and sustainability 
concepts.  Grounded  by  Weston’s  scholarship,  we  analyze 
three  social  computing  applications  that  have  an  explicit 
focus on issues of sustainability.  We seek to unpack select 
tensions in this design space, and demonstrate that the need 
for  expanding,  broadening,  and  reorienting  extends  far 
beyond  SHCI  research.  Here  we  join  others  whose  work 
aims to support critical engagement, particularly those who 
recognize the roles of disruption [e.g., 10], discomfort [e.g., 
21],  and  contested  civic  discussion  [e.g.,  24],  rather  than 
emphasizing and designing for existing norms with tightly 

222

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

in  unmediated  experiences  with 

bounded  problems  and  anticipated  solutions.  We  contend 
that 
the  challenges  and  opportunities  of  designing 
interactive  spaces  for  non-homogenous  social  groups—
welcoming  difference—leads  to  innovative  and  diverse 
lines of inquiry and insight.  
BACKGROUND 
In  recent  years,  we  have  witnessed  a  growing  body  of 
research  addressing  the  use  of  contemporary  information 
technologies  and  issues  of  sustainability.  Along  with  the 
increasing sophistication of this work, a close reading of the 
scholarship  reveals  a  contested  space.  Some  researchers 
direct attention towards the potential for positive outcomes 
through  our  use  of  contemporary  information  tools  (e.g., 
[1,16,17]),  while  others  point  towards  the  grim  ecological 
costs  of  the  manufacture,  use,  and  disposal  of  these  tools 
(e.g., [7,8,20]).  There are also cultural (e.g., [12]), physical 
(e.g.,  [36,45])  and  psychological  (e.g.,  [39])  concerns 
related  to  our  engagements  with  information  technologies. 
As  an  example,  some  propose  that  more  time  interacting 
with digital information tools means less time for people to 
engage 
the  natural 
environment,  affecting  psychological  aspects  of  their  lives 
(e.g.,  [9,26,29])  including  their  ability  to  recover  from 
stress.  Considered  together,  this  body  of  work  points  to  a 
plurality  of  values,  differences  in  what  scholars  consider 
important  in  life  as  it  is  increasingly  mediated  by  and 
through  our  engagements  with  interactive  technologies 
[46]. 
As  many  have  noted,  a  large  portion  of  SHCI  work  has 
focused  on  making  digital  devices  more  sustainable  either 
through  “green” 
the  devices 
themselves or by designing devices that encourage users to 
adopt what are framed as more sustainable behaviors (field 
overviews found in [6,28]). A ground swell of work in the 
latter area resulted in countless projects attempting to lower 
resource 
and 
implementation  of  sensor  interfaces  (similar  to  [17]), 
community monitors (described in [34]), social networking 
sites (building upon [30]), or various other “design-a-tool” 
approaches  (e.g.,  [1]).  Follow-on  critiques  called  attention 
to  the  limitations  of  this  strategy,  characterizing  the 
approach  as  dogmatic,  behaviorally  manipulative,  and  of 
limited proven benefit [11,44]. Scholars are recommending 
approaches  beyond  designing  and  producing  new  tools 
(e.g., [6,44]; in alignment with the work of [2]).  
More recently, Knowles and her colleagues [e.g., 28] argue 
for alternatives to the dominant research paradigm, among 
them  the  development  of  pattern  languages  and  shared 
definitions.  Taken 
these  critiques  provide 
evidence that many disagree with what (they frame) as the 
dominant  approach  to  sustainability  within  SHCI  research 
and  practice.  While  we  agree  with  many  points  made  in 
these  critiques,  we  wish  to  avoid  demonizing  behavioral 
change-oriented work. Rather, we point to promising areas 
for enriching the conversation. 

features  embedded 

use,  whether 

together, 

through 

design 

the 

in 

or 

cultural, 

perceived 

economic, 

efficiency, 

ecological, 

usefulness, 

THEORETICAL  FRAMEWORK:  TOWARD  A  RADICAL 
ENVIRONMENTAL PHILOSOPHY 
Responding to the need to draw from and support relevant 
work  outside  the  field  of  HCI  for  inspiration  [38],  we 
propose  an  orientation  grounded  in  the  philosophy  of 
Anthony  Weston  [47,48].  We  preface  our  discussion  of 
Weston’s  philosophy  by  acknowledging  our  positionality: 
we  are  academics  working  from  positions  of  privilege  in 
North America who are asserting our opinion, not facts. We 
do not support the view that there is an end goal, a state of 
sustainability,  which  is  universally  shared  or  achievable. 
Rather,  we  hold  that  deliberations  of  sustainability—
whether 
social,  or 
personal—are  ethical  negotiations  concerning  what  is 
desirable and worth trying to sustain [9]. We do not accept 
the idea that there is a single foundational value, nor an end 
goal (e.g., sustainability), that all peoples around the world 
are  striving  towards.    Hence,  in  this  paper  we  concentrate 
on  how  discourses  frame  sustainability,  asserting  what 
should  be  valued,  including  value  propositions  that  defy 
traditional  evaluation  models  (i.e.,  evaluation  metrics  of 
energy 
user 
satisfaction).  
Anthony Weston’s work fits well with our position. He is 
an  environmental  philosopher  whose  scholarship  offers 
radical  alternatives  to  dominant  sustainability  approaches. 
Leveraging arguments from the pragmatic tradition, Weston 
argues  convincingly  that  there  are  webs  of  values  that 
through  interaction,  re-alignment,  and  conflict  help  us 
iterate  on  the  ongoing  process  of  sustaining.  Weston’s 
scholarship  frames  value  systems  as 
intertwined;  he 
emphasizes the multiplicity of "adjacencies" of values.  As 
an  example,  today  we  might  value  our  walk  along  a 
northwest coastline for the exhilaration of breathing in brisk 
sea air; tomorrow we might value seeing a humpback whale 
break  the  surface;  while  during  a  fierce  winter  gale  we 
value the experience of witnessing the vast energy released 
by  the  storm.  Rather  than  a  static  hierarchy  of  values, 
Weston  suggests  a  shifting  mosaic  of  values.  Indeed, 
“…we  may  think  of  multiple  circularities  and  feedback 
loops,  multiple  arcs  returning  to  completion,  so  that  the 
summation  of  those  arcs  is  a  rough  map  of  one's  whole 
system  of  values"  ([47],  p.  329).  We  would  add  to  this 
description that the map Weston describes is neither static, 
nor internally consistent. Values change with time, context, 
and experience. 
In  other  words,  Weston  rejects  grounding  environmental 
concerns in a foundational value or truth (e.g., sustainability 
or stewardship).  He argues that we have "… an irreducibly 
pluralistic  system  of  desires.  Some  are  straightforwardly 
biological,  others  culturally  rooted,  others  more  personal, 
and  many  are  mixtures  of  all  three.  If  anything  we  are 
doomed  to  hopelessly  conflicting  desires.  Neither  our 
biological predispositions nor our cultural heritage are even 
self-consistent,  let  alone  fully  compatible  with  the  other" 
([47]  p.  331).  Considerations  and  deliberations  of  valuing 

223

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

the 

is  how 

literature, 

first  step 

information 

transformation) 

learning 
(i.e.,  perspective 

can only be understood while in relation to the supporting 
situation. 
In  alignment  with  Westin’s  position,  we  posit  that  people 
need to develop their capacity to critically reflect on what is 
being  valued  within  different  contexts,  particularly  in 
situations  of  disagreement  or  conflict.  Disruption  and 
conflict  are  a  part  of  sustainability  discussions.  It  is  here 
that  we  advance  Weston’s  scholarship.  Whereas  he  talks 
about  the  importance  of  reorientation  as  a  first  step  to 
sustainability  discussions, we  propose  that  the  first  step  is 
actually disruption (or conflict). As is well supported in the 
in 
transformative 
transforming 
is  a 
disruption; we cannot shift our ways of being in the world, 
reorient, unless we are jarred enough to recognize that our 
current situation is not working well [33]. A disruption (or 
conflict) creates a context in which we are motivated to take 
action  because  what  we  find  consequential  is  either 
threatened or not present at all. 
SUSTAINABILITY AND PUBLIC PEDAGOGIES 
While  much  of  the  SHCI  work  to  date  has  focused  on 
designing  information  tools  to  affect  user  behaviors,  a  no 
less  pressing  concern 
tools  can 
influence  public  understanding  of  sustainability  issues 
through  education.  The  ability 
to  critically  analyze 
ecological  problems  at  the  human,  social  and  global  scale 
will  be  an  important  cognitive  capacity  in  the  coming 
decades 
[35].  The  multi-lifespan,  global  nature  of 
environmental  concerns  suggests  the  need  to  bring  people 
of all ages and social groups into identifying the challenges 
and  envisioning  possible  ways  forward.  Nurturing  these 
capacities  will  require  lifelong  (across  the  entire  lifespan) 
and life-wide learning (across the many places people learn) 
to be truly effective. Tomlinson [43] suggests that informal 
learning  resources  (including  feature  films, 
television 
documentaries, 
library  collections,  museum  exhibits, 
websites)  may  facilitate  learning  about  sustainability  in 
ways  that  formal  education  is  challenged  due  to  the  rigid 
nature of school curricula. We might regard these resources, 
information  tools,  and  media  as  public  pedagogies:  media 
that teach outside the classroom [18,22]. 
Mass  media  can  be  effective  tools  in  directing  behavior, 
modeling  social  norms,  or  distributing  information  that 
affects individual and cultural practices. The Story of Stuff 
[14],  a  documentary  film  project  distributed  via  YouTube 
that  critiques  Western  consumerism  and  its  impact  on  the 
environment,  is  an  example  of  an  informal  learning 
resource  designed  to  build  awareness  of  environmental 
issues and the connection to everyday consumer behavior. 
Contemporary  Hollywood  films,  such  as  An  Inconvenient 
Truth [19], The Day After Tomorrow[13], and WALL-E [40] 
facilitate  discussions  on  climate  change  and  the  impact  of 
man  on  the  natural  environment  outside  classroom  walls. 
While mass media can be a powerful and engaging way of 
facilitating  environmental  awareness,  sparking  debate,  and 

to 

involves  systems 

thinking  –  exploring 

destabilizing current thinking, it is important to view such 
work  with  a  critical  eye.  The  characterizations  in  these 
media artifacts are often highly simplistic, rigid depictions 
of  environmental  problems.  As  a  result,  scholars  have 
called  for  more  nuanced  approaches  to  sustainability  that 
promote critical thinking, problem solving, and “ecological 
intelligence,”  not  simply  awareness  or  sensitivity  to  the 
issues  [15].  Most  importantly,  thinking  about  ecological 
concerns 
the 
interconnected nature of environmental challenges that may 
appear  on  the  surface  to  be  less  complex  than  they  really 
are [9,35].  
An  emerging  approach 
teaching  people  about 
sustainability concepts and practices is the use of immersive 
game spaces, simulations, and virtual environments. These 
spaces  have  been  used  for  modeling  environmental 
problems,  conditioning  current  conceptualizations  of 
sustainable behaviors (e.g., recycling, energy conservation), 
or  disseminating  information  that  might  affect  a  player’s 
choices  regarding  the  real  environment  after  the  game  is 
over. Often these spaces are informal learning contexts that 
are  socially-oriented  and  highly  motivating:  children  and 
adults use such gameful experiences to have fun and engage 
with peers (whether real or virtual), or explore a particular 
interest or hobby. Scholars in education, literacy, and media 
studies have suggested that virtual worlds have the potential 
to be transformative educational spaces [37,41], but there is 
still a great deal yet to be understood about their use and the 
messages they contain [3,31]. 
Virtual environments focused on environmental issues offer 
players  a  distinct  assemblage  of  affordances  to  enrich 
understandings  of  sustainability,  diverse  communities, 
ubiquity, discovery, and simulation as argued by [32]. 
•  Diverse  Communities:  Virtual  worlds  have  broad 
appeal  and  multi-age  audiences,  facilitating  cross-
generational  and  cross-cultural  engagement  with 
environmental  issues.  Parents,  teachers,  and  children 
can  engage  in  these  spaces  together.  Persons  from 
distant parts of the world can discuss issues without the 
challenges of temporal or special proximity. 

•  Ubiquity:  Since  the  site  of  learning  is  online  and 
accessible  via  contemporary  computers  or  mobile 
phones,  commercial  games,  apps  and  worlds  can  build 
formal/informal-learning  communities 
that 
place-dependent  learning  tools  (i.e.,  museum  exhibits, 
or school science labs) cannot.  

in  ways 

•  Discovery:  The  current  game-based  experiential 
learning paradigm is to limit direct instruction on “how 
to  play”  and  encourage  discovery.  This  keeps  a 
community of players engaged longer than more rigidly 
structured 
environments. 
Sustained engagement, and sharing insights with others, 
facilitates working on more complex problems than one-
off lessons or displays. 

learning 

didactic 

and 

224

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

•  Simulation:  Virtual  worlds  and  immersive  games  can 
model  environmental  problems  and  compress  time 
scales  to  illustrate  long-term  affects  in  a  way  that 
school-based  laboratory  exercises  are  unable  to  do. 
Simulations can give a community of learners access to 
problems 
representations  of  varying 
complexity to build understanding over time. 

in  multiple 

a 

social 

through 

constructionist 

We  call  these  aspects  of  game-based  public  pedagogies 
“potential  affordances”  because  both  designers  and  users 
must  choose  to  take  advantage  of  them.  While  virtual 
worlds  and  simulations  can  encourage  these  kinds  of 
interactions,  there  is  no  guarantee  that  the  developers  will 
incorporate  them,  or  that  users  will  engage  with  games  in 
ways that will enhance their understanding of sustainability. 
We approach the design of and interaction with information 
technology 
lens: 
environmental  values  may  be  instantiated  in  a  technology 
through its design, but communities of users construct their 
own meaning from engagement with technology. Similarly, 
each reader engages the implicit and explicit messages in a 
digital  text  differently;  like  persons  whispering  to  each 
other  in  a  game  of  “telephone”,  messages  are  not  always 
received exactly as they are intended. 
REPRESENTATIONS OF SUSTAINABILITY 
Public pedagogies, and we place sustainability game worlds 
and  simulations  among  these,  have  enormous  potential  to 
move beyond nudges: to engage communities of players in 
informed  discourse  about  the  environment,  to  disrupt 
existing patterns of thinking and behavior, and to foster the 
kind of systems thinking that would help them analyze the 
myriad  challenges  of  sustainability.  However,  like  any 
pedagogy, they may be fraught with ideology, too complex 
for  general  understanding,  or  over-simplified,  creating 
dangerous misconceptions that are difficult to correct. Like 
any pedagogy, these technologies may benefit from analysis 
and  redesign  to  stimulate  new  ways  of  teaching  and 
learning.  
To  explore  discourses  of  sustainability  embedded  within 
contemporary  digital  learning  applications  we  analyzed 
three 
experiences: 
EcoBuddies,  a  virtual  world  for  young  children  with  an 
explicit  focus  on  environmental  education;  Little  Green 
Island,  an  iOS  game  or  iPad  “app”  that  challenges  young 
people to solve environmental problems through play; and 
World  Without  Oil,  an  open  multiplayer  alternate  reality 
game  (ARG)  simulating  an  oil  crisis.  The  details  of  these 
applications  are  summarized  in  Table  1  and  explicated  in 
the  descriptions  below.  While  each  experience  is  an 
informal,  playful  approach  to  sustainability  issues,  they 
each claim the goals of education and behavior change. In 
selecting  these  three  from  among  myriad  games  and 
simulations  that  focus  on  the  environment,  we  sought  to 
identify  a  diverse  set  of  games  along  these  dimensions: 
game mechanics and rhetorics [5], platforms for play, levels 
of  sociality,  levels  of  online/offline  engagement  with 

social 

computing 

environments/ 

introduce  brief  portraits  of 

sustainability, temporal framing, and target audience. Each 
game  was  analyzed  using  a  combination  of  participant 
observation[27], content analysis[23], and close reading[4]. 
First  we 
the  selected 
environments/  experiences.  We  follow  these  descriptions 
with  an  analysis  based  in  key  themes  from  Weston’s 
manifesto [48], proposing alternative game scenarios.  
These  analyses  suggest  that  there  is  room  to  develop 
contexts that support exploration of an ecology of values - 
not  just  one.  Otherwise  we  end  up  with  rigid  and  fragile 
conceptualizations of sustainability that will break down at 
the  first  sign  of  conflict  in  problematic,  non-idealized, 
situations. 
Case Example – EcoBuddies.  
The name of the virtual world EcoBuddies proposes explicit 
social relationships between players and the natural world. 
Players are framed as friends of the environment as well as 
friends  with  others  who  share  their  concern  for  the 
environment.  EcoBuddies  players  adopt  Hamster  avatars, 
which  they  use  to  navigate  a  park-like  virtual  space. 
Hamsters bound through lush, green landscapes with trees, 
rivers,  rocks  and  gardens.  Small  shops  are  nestled  among 
the trees, where the hamsters can buy electric cars, clothing, 
costumes, pets, treats, and other hamster necessities. Users 
can  visit  the  beach,  complete  with  lounge  chairs  and  a 
hotdog stand; or take the gondola up to the ski chalet in the 
mountains with a hot cocoa machine; or take a submarine 
for  an  underwater  tour.  Your  hamster  may  own  her  very 
own house on a private wooded lot, complete with a small 
garden.  Most  of  the  activities  for  users,  aside  from 
socializing with fellow hamsters and exploring the several 
interconnected  landscapes,  come  in  the  form  of  mini-
games. These games include bowling, memory games, and 
bouncing  on  the  clouds;  they  provide  users  with  coins  to 
exchange at the shops to augment your hamster’s lifestyle. 
From  this  description  you  might  think  this  world  sounds 
just like many other virtual worlds for children in terms of 
its features and activities, and you would be largely correct. 
There  are,  however,  explicit  environmental  connections 
within the game world that make it unique. Blue recycling 
bins  are  scattered  across  the  landscape;  clicking  on  them 
provides recycling trivia, such as “It takes 4000 years for a 
glass bottle to decompose,” or “5 plastic bottles are enough 
to  make  stuffing  for  a  ski  jacket”.  There  are  quizzes  on 
environmental  behaviors,  and  videos  that  document  the 
impact of humankind on the environment placed throughout 
the  site  for  users  to  “bump  into”  during  their  adventures. 
The  videos  feature  themes  such  as  climate  change,  ocean 
pollution,  global  warming,  and  saving  the  rainforest. 
Hamsters  may  go  on  quests  to  rescue  injured  animals,  or 
play the restoration-focused “Deep Sea Clean-up” game, in 
which  they  dredge  plastic  bags,  bottles,  newspapers,  and 
other  detritus  from  the  bottom  of  the  ocean  with  a 
submarine.  Engaging 
these  activities  earns  users 

in 

225

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

landmass)  and  Folksville 

additional coins for buying more hamster swag, or badges 
that illustrate a hamster’s status. 
Case Example – Ansel & Claire: Little Green Island.  
 Among  a  growing  number  of  app-based  adventure  games 
for children, the Ansel & Claire series for the iPad presents 
a  “gamified”  learning  experience  for  elementary  age 
children ages 6-12. Developed by Cognitive Kid, an award-
winning  developer  of  touch-screen  media,  the  app  is 
designed to introduce children to environmental issues with 
an emphasis on the effects of pollution. Over the course of 
18 game levels, players are invited to develop and nurture 
the “Green Island” into an ecological utopia, in contrast to 
islands,  Smokey  Island  (a  heavily 
two  neighboring 
industrialized 
(a  crowded 
residential  suburb)  where  mismanagement  has  disastrous 
consequences. Players advance through tasks of preventing 
or  mitigating  man-made  ecological  catastrophe:  clearing 
trash,  planting  trees,  replacing  chemical  pesticides  with 
“good” bugs, cleaning oil spills, or putting scrubbers on the 
coal-burning  power  plant.  Although  the  app  is  not  a 
“connected”  experience  to  facilitate  social  play  with  other 
humans,  non-player  agents  in  the  game  (e.g.,  Ansel  the 
Alien)  provide  directions  and  social  feedback,  or  pose 
threats 
tasks,  reinforcing  and 
rewarding  select  behaviours.  Along  the  way,  players  are 
treated  to  short  songs  about  methane,  facts  and  figures 
about  renewable  energy,  as  well  as  tips  for  keeping  their 
carbon  footprint  to  a  minimum.  Cognitive  Kid  claims  the 
content for this game was developed using “books, articles 
and  scientific  journals”,  but  also  provides  an  email  where 
the  game 
scientific 
developers 
earn 
greenbucks, the in-game currency, by successfully averting 
man-made disasters. Using their wealth to buy trees, solar 
panels,  or  a  sack  of  nematodes  allows  players  to  address 
future  ecological  mishaps,  support 
the  greening  of 

(science@cogntivekid.com).  Players 

inaccuracies  can  be  reported 

the  completion  of 

to 

to 

and 

(Creative  Director) 

neighboring islands, or further embellish the Little Island. 
Case Example – World Without Oil. 
World Without Oil is a massively collaborative imagining 
of the first 32 weeks of a global oil crisis. Designed by Ken 
Eklund 
Jane  McGonigal 
(Participation  Architect),  the  game  aims  to  bring  people 
together  around  a  shared  concern,  namely  getting  them  to 
reflect and share insights about oil dependence with the aim 
of  devising  plausible  and  effective  courses  of  action  in 
response to it. The design team sought to elicit this response 
by  posting  the  news  of  an  imaginary  oil  crisis  on  their 
website  for  the  period  of  32  days  starting  April  30,  2007. 
Each day represented a week of the crisis. Players engaged 
with the game by imagining how such news might change 
their  life  and  local  environment  as  well  as  the  steps  they 
were taking to respond to this imaginary crisis. Two aims 
are  central  to  the  design  of  World  Without  Oil.  One,  that 
individuals  can  initiate  change  if  they  are  motivated;  two, 
that difficult problems can be solved by a diverse group of 
people  coming 
individual 
perspectives  and  come  up  with  innovative  solutions,  the 
sum of which leads to a kind of collective intelligence [25]. 
The game played out as a series of individual “reports from 
the field” as well as responses to the puppetmasters’ (game 
designers) challenges and prompts. Players could phone or 
email  their  contributions,  submit  responses  on  a  blog  or 
online journal, or send images, videos or links for posting 
on the WWO homepage. The original game included over 
1500 contributions from 330 players, including stories from 
around  the  world.  Thousands  more  participated  through 
lurking  and  reading  the  narrative  aggregated  on  the  site. 
WWO  is  also  replayable  in  localized  instantiations,  and 
classroom  educators  have  adopted  this  ARG  for  use  in 
schools;  however,  our  analysis  focused  exclusively  on  the 
public game contributions. 

together 

share 

their 

to 

 

World Without Oil 

Little Green Island 

Ecobuddies 

Premise 

Game Type 
Platform 

Sociality 

Players engage online and 

offline with a “peak oil” event 

that doubles the cost of 

gasoline in the U.S. 

Players must protect and 
nurture an island in the face 

of man-made ecological 

damage. 

Alternate Reality Game 

Phone, email, Web 

App 

iPad OS 

Collaboratively generated 

game narrative 

Single-player application with 

NPC- based support 

Temporal Framing 

32 weeks that simulated 8 

months 

Target Audience 

Teens and Adults 

18 levels of play, approx. 3 

hours of playing time 
Children ages 6-12 

URL 

http://worldwithoutoil.org 

http://cognitivekid.com 

Table 1. Properties of Sustainability-Oriented Environments 

226

Players learn about science 
and ecology through play-

based interaction, movies and 

mini-games. 
Virtual World 

Flash-enabled Webpage 
Multi-player virtual world 

(2D sprites) 

Continuous and evolving 

Children ages 3-8 
http://ecobuddies-
b.appspot.com/ 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

The primary challenge of the game was to imagine what it 
might be like for people to wake up to a world where the 
price of gasoline tripled overnight (at the time, to roughly 
$7/gal). In response, players put forth descriptive vignettes 
of  immediate  changes  in  everyday  activities,  long-term 
scenarios  of  chaos,  or  scenarios  of  hope  and  resilience. 
Other submissions to the game narrative were more action-
oriented, describing ways in which people might cope with 
or counter such a crisis through positive individual activity. 
The  majority  of  entries  focused  on  the  effects  of  an  oil 
shortage in terms of commute options and transportation of 
goods  such  as 
food.  Biking  and  other  alternative 
commuting  options  emerged  often,  as  well  as  local  food 
access  and  actions  such  as  starting  a  garden.  The  game 
designers  “featured”  select  entries  each  day  to  provide 
motivation  and  to  spark  player  imagination.  At  the  end  of 
the  simulation,  the  top  100  players  were  ranked  based  on 
their contributions to the narrative. 
ANALYZING THE REPRESENTATIONS 
Below  we  explicate  themes  from  Weston’s  work  that  are 
particularly generative for CSCW researchers interested in 
supporting  engaged  learning  on  the  topic  of  sustainability 
specifically:  Acceptance/  Openness,  Positivity,  Patience, 
Connectedness,  and  Ambition.    We  apply  these  themes  to 
the  three  examples  we  developed  above  to  posit  enriched 
alternatives.  We  are  not  exhaustive  in  this  analysis,  but 
instead  to  pull  out  key  examples  from  these  designed 
environments 
representing 
sustainability,  as  well  as  generative  recommendations  for 
designers and researchers in this space.  
Acceptance and Openness 
Throughout  Weston’s  work  threads  an  argument  that 
dominant  Western  approaches  to  contemporary  human 
relationships  with  the  natural  world  can  broadly  be 
characterized  through  resistance  and  fear  (pp.xi-xiv,[48]). 
Nature is something for humankind to tame and control. He 
argues that rather than making things that nature eventually 
tears  or  wears  down,  our  designs  and  patterns  should  be 
modeled on acceptance and embracing the continuous shifts 
of the natural world. He develops this idea by considering 
the city of New Orleans’ rising sea levels and the increasing 
severity of tropical storms. He proposes that New Orleans 
city  planners  should  embrace  the  rising  waters  (e.g., 
developing a floating infrastructure) rather than continuing 
the Sisyphean task of controlling rising tides (p.26,[48]). 
Looking at our example game environments, EcoBuddies is 
a static paradise, filled with green grass, trees, beaches, and 
snow-capped  mountains.  The  colors  are  bright  and 
attractive and nothing appears in a state of decay, with the 
exception that bright blue bodies of water are always filled 
with  trash  that  needs  removal.  But  in  this  game  the 
environment  is  merely  a  backdrop,  an  idealized  world 
where  nothing  changes.  Trees  do  not  grow,  tides  do  not 
shift  coastlines.  Patterns  and  rhythms  of  the  natural  world 
do  not  exist:  it  is  always  day,  bright  and  beautiful  in 

illustrate 

that 

tensions 

in 

EcoBuddies,  no  clouds  form  and  (re)form  in  the  sky.  
Curiously,  it  is  only  the  man-made  elements  of  the  world 
that  are  interactive  (e.g.,  one  has  to  use  the  submarine  to 
remove refuse from the lagoon).  
In  Little  Green  Island,  rather  than  accepting  a  dynamic 
Earth, the focus is on correcting a nearly constant state of 
imbalance.  Change  only  results  from  human  activity.  The 
damage humans wreak on the environment is only resolved 
through  consumption,  ultimately  equating  sustainability 
with  commercialism.  For  every  task  (i.e.,  environmental 
catastrophe aversion) that permits users to progress through 
the  game,  something  must  be  purchased.  After  each 
ecological disaster is mitigated, the player is rewarded with 
in-world  currency  to  support  more  purchasing,  creating  a 
conceptual commercial dependency. 
Using  Acceptance  and  Openness  as  a  design  inspiration, 
these  game  experiences  could  further  emphasize  new 
modes  of  interacting  with  the  environment,  in  particular 
modeling a world that is dynamic and constantly changing 
in ways that may not benefit all life forms. A sustainability-
oriented  digital  world  might  better  represent  lived  reality, 
including  diverse  weather,  climate  change,  and  active 
geography, rather than an unrealistic, static utopia. Such a 
dynamic earth would place human activity in nature, rather 
than outside it and acting on it. For example in Ecobuddies, 
a  player  might  need  to  learn  to  gather  certain  types  of 
shellfish  when  the  tide  goes  out  or  to  plant  select  seeds 
under a new moon. Extreme drought might wipe out food 
sources  and  players  would  have  to  investigate  alternative 
growing scenarios. With Acceptance/Openness as a design 
strategy, play would resemble a sandbox to design and test 
shifting  environmental  scenarios  rather  than  finding  the 
“correct” solution to a constrained ecological problem. 
Positivity – Humans are Part of the Beauty of Nature 
Most  of  the  rhetoric  surrounding  green  programs  and 
initiatives is wrapped in negative terms: we must reduce our 
carbon emissions, limit our consumption of fossil fuels, and 
stop  polluting  our  waters.  But  Weston  contends  that  our 
imaginations are limited by the system which supports our 
current society, and that we can do much better. We must 
reimagine  ourselves—not  merely  as  parasites  that  slowly 
consume  the  resources  of  our  planet,  but  as  beings  that 
share  it  with  others—before  we  can  create  positive  net 
benefits for our world (pp.17-21,[48]).  
The  Little  Green  Island  app  explicitly  positions  human 
civilization  as  a  destructive  force;  hence  the  goal  is  to 
nurture  the  island  as  a  kind  of  leave-no-trace  utopia.  The 
“green” utopia is presented as a place of ecological purity, 
free  of  mankind’s  influence.  In  contrast  to  places  where 
humans  work  (Smokey  Island)  or  live  (Folksville),  Green 
Island  is  at  its  best  when  unsullied  by  these  day-to-day 
aspects  of  human  living.  It  represents  the  “ecological 
preserve” notion of sustainability, where human damage is 
fought and mitigated (or suffered through); technology and 
behavior change are combined to repair the effects of other 

227

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

technologies  and  behaviors;  and  true  beauty  is  only  found 
in the absence of humans. 
Although  EcoBuddies  by  its  very  name  attempts  to  build 
positive relationships between users and the natural world, 
the games and activities within the virtual space are limited 
in how they support this vision. That is not to say that the 
messages  are  subtle;  rather,  that  the  connections  between 
play  in  the  world  capacity  to  build  positive  relationships 
with nature are exceedingly constrained. For example, some 
of the environmental knowledge-building activities require 
a  “premium”  membership  of  $4.99  per  month,  suggesting 
that participation in ecological activities is only available to 
those able and willing to pay for it.  
Shifting away from hierarchical reward systems, including 
financial barriers to full player participation, would reduce 
the impression that sustainability is only for those who can 
afford  it.  Facilitating  player  engagement  with  alternate 
economies,  such  as  barter  systems,  cooperatives  and 
mondragons would allow players to explore creative human 
alternatives  to  the  consumption/extraction  orientation  of 
contemporary capitalism though their game-based labor. 
Patience  
Part of accepting and embracing the natural world involves 
becoming  sensitive  to  its  rhythms,  and  above  all  not 
reaching  beyond  those  activities  that  are  beneficial  to  our 
environment: broadly speaking, we must learn that merely 
because we can do something does not mean that we should 
do it. Weston speaks particularly poignantly about the need 
to pause and concentrate on understanding the complexities 
of  Earth  before  we  look  to  space  exploration,  lest  we 
destroy that which we find (pp.142-144,[48]).  
We  observed  a  distinct  lack  of  patience  in  the  worlds  we 
analyzed  that  were  designed  for  children.  In  fact,  Little 
Green Island is inflected with a sense of panicked urgency, 
a  need  to  rectify  ecological  situations  with  immediate 
human  action.  While  some  cause  and  effect  situations  are 
presented in the game space, the representations are shallow 
and  the  equations  are  simplistic.  For  example,  the  game’s 
mechanics do not address how the ratio of “good” to “bad” 
insects on the farm got that way (good and bad defined as 
what would benefit human farm production); rather, it sets 
up  a  situation  that  is  perilously  out  of  balance.  The 
resolution  is  to  buy  the  right  kind  of  insects  with  your 
greenbucks,  a  move  that  has  immediate  benefits  and  no 
interaction effects. 
World Without Oil, on the other hand, is about simulating a 
much longer and evolving situation, albeit by compressing 
the  time  of  8  months  into  32  days.  Part  of  the  narrative 
involves  documenting  how  people  adapt  to  a  new  way  of 
living,  including  changes  in  their  daily  routines,  but  also 
longer-term  efforts  (e.g.,  neighborhood  gardens,  alternate 
transportation,  communal  efforts 
to  share  dwindling 
resources). The puppetmasters hoped to promote innovative 
solutions, 
and 

“hacking” 

including 

how 

cities 

neighborhoods run. Jane McGonigal, writing as the player 
mpathytest, wrote, “Shock helps solve problems we would 
otherwise ignore. Shock turns us into innovators. And that’s 
what  I’m  exited  about.”  Yet,  much  of  the  conversation  in 
players’  posts  is  about  immediate  concerns  and  direct 
solutions to short-term problems, not redesigning lifestyles 
or systemic changes, perhaps in part because these personal, 
short-term responses were the types of posts rewarded and 
featured by the game designers [25]. 
Patience as a design goal would emphasize time in a variety 
of scales, and enable new ways of approaching longer term 
challenges. A patient interface might also provide tools for 
thinking through problems that we may not yet recognize. 
A  patient  game  rhetoric  might  even  reward  players  for 
taking time away from the game to reflect and observe. 
Connectedness 
Rather than seeing ourselves as masters of the world, with 
other creatures and even nature itself under our dominion—
somehow set apart from every other species that dwells on 
the  planet—Weston  claims  that  we  must  learn  to  embrace 
our interconnectedness with other living things. We should 
learn  how  to  live  peacefully  alongside  them  to  the 
enrichment  of  all  species,  and  this  strengthening  of  bonds 
should  inform  all  aspects  of  our  lives:  our  designs  and 
patterns  of  habitation,  even  our  relationships  with  other 
human beings (pp. 108-110[48]).  
In contrast to this, we found that many of the environmental 
messages  of  EcoBuddies  were  decontextualized  from 
ecological systems and relationships. They appear as trivia 
or fun facts to know and tell, but are not connected to user’s 
lived  experiences,  explicit  connections 
to  everyday 
activities outside the virtual world are absent. For example, 
there  are  abundant  recycle  bins,  but  nothing  the  hamsters 
purchase  requires  recycling;  this  is  merely  a  vehicle  for 
delivering  recycling  facts,  which  you  can  ignore  by  never 
clicking  on  the  bins.  Electric  cars  are  available  for 
purchase,  but  have  no  impact  on  the  buyer  or  the 
environment  (except  as  status  symbols).  Users  may  be 
pulling  digital  debris  from  the  ocean,  but  there  is  no 
discussion about how the debris got there, nor is there any 
reason given for why cleaning it up would benefit anyone, 
real or imagined. 
Connectedness can be employed by engaging players both 
with  each  other  and  the  context  of  play,  facilitating  new 
levels of interactivity. For example, the housing choices for 
users  of  the  analyzed  worlds  were  highly  constrained  or 
unconsidered. Games could provide users with community 
planning opportunities through which they could weigh and 
debate sustainable choices. What if they could select from 
among  several  density  or  location  options,  and  these 
choices  affected  play?  This  would  facilitate  thinking 
critically  about  how  housing  interacts  with  other  systems, 
like work, transportation, and commerce.  

228

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

the  common  narrative 

imaginatively  engage  with 

Transformational 
The  changes  we  make  in  efforts  to  support  sustainability 
cannot  merely  be  piecemeal  efforts:  these  token  changes 
have little effect and serve to reinforce our reliance upon a 
system that is problematic. Weston argues that change must 
be complete and systemic (pp. xv-xvii[48]). 
The  worlds  we  examined  focused  almost  exclusively  on 
individual behavior, rather than systemic approaches to the 
challenges  of  sustainability.  Little  Green  Island,  for 
example,  follows 
that  human 
civilization  is  a  blight  on  the  Earth,  but  the  planet  can  be 
saved and restored to utopic conditions if we invest heavily 
in  existing  technological  and  behavioral  “magic  bullet” 
solutions.  Ansel  the  Alien,  as  a  model  of  technocratic 
guidance, nudges players toward “green behaviours” that is 
hoped will translate to real-world action, but may be just as 
likely to prompt misconceptions, or promote the notion of 
sustainability as “crisis management.” 
Our analysis of WWO highlights the challenges of creating 
an  environment  that  is  cooperative  and  at  the  same  time 
cultivates critical and creative engagement with issues. The 
game  as  a  whole  creates  a  flexible  space  enabling 
participants to easily communicate and exchange ideas. The 
mechanics of the game, such as the challenges and rewards 
set  by  the  designers,  succeed  in  getting  the  participants  to 
actively  and 
thought 
experiment.  At  the  same  time,  our  sampling  of  players’ 
responses  indicates  that  most  of  the  player  narratives 
focused inward, on their own behaviour and the situation in 
their immediate surroundings. It was a predominantly North 
American  perspective. 
several  European 
contributors  noted  that  gasoline  prices  in  Europe  were 
already higher than the “disaster” scenario proposed by the 
game.  Noticeably  lacking,  if  not  absent,  from  the  WWO 
discourse  are  tightly-related  discussions  of  social  justice, 
health and wellness, and security and governance. 
With  transformation  as  a  design  goal,  games  would  focus 
more  on  process  and  less  on  outcomes.  Most  game 
mechanics  emphasize  quick, 
to 
challenges,  emphasizing  micro-behaviors,  trial-and-error 
processes, and discrete reward and play levels. More open-
ended  game  structures  with  ambiguous  goals  are  more 
difficult  to  design  and  program,  but  promise  longer  and 
more nuanced engagement with the problem. Sustainability 
is not a puzzle to be solved, but an ongoing dialogue about 
what kind of world we want to inhabit. 
In sum, by employing Weston’s philosophy, we found these 
game-based  engagements  with  sustainability  issues  to  be 
impoverished,  by  which  we  mean  that  they  largely  fail  to 
represent the complexities of, and in particular the plurality 
of perspectives on, sustainability. However, we can use the 
themes in Weston’s work to envision how these games may 
be  more  complex,  dynamic,  and  impactful  on  the  lives  of 
players.  By 
strategies  of 
Acceptance/Openness,  Patience,  Positivity,  Connectivity 

iterative  approaches 

fact, 

employing 

the  design 

the 

In 

those 

the  overall 

and  Transformation,  we  would  expect  games  that  focus 
more  on  discourse 
than  discrete  problem  solving, 
emphasizing  negotiation  and  engaging  in  defining  issues 
and approaches rather than solutions. 
DISCUSSION  
SHCI scholars, like everyone else, are influenced by public 
discourse.  Weston  helps  us  identify  and  articulate  the 
impoverished  nature  of 
sustainability 
conversation.  We  propose  that  public  pedagogy  initiatives 
are  a  way  to  enhance  the  conversation.  It  isn’t  just  about 
awareness building and consciousness raising, but how we 
understand that sustainability is, at its heart, a negotiation of 
what we value and what kind of world we want to strive to 
create.  
Our analysis enables us to offer the following insights for 
the design of interactive systems for sustainability, with an 
emphasis  on 
that  educate  users  and  facilitate 
negotiations with conceptualizations of sustainability. 
Plurality of Perspectives: We live in a diverse, pluralistic, 
and dynamic world. Each of us constructs a unique web of 
values  through  our  interactions  with  the  world  and  with 
other beings. Designed experiences that only represent one 
uncontested perspective on sustainability run the risk of not 
only  diminishing  the  conversation,  but  also  handicapping 
individuals  in  developing  a  richer,  more  nuanced,  and 
durable approach to the challenges of living together on an 
ever-changing planet. 
Discomfort and Destabilization: A plurality of perspectives 
invariably generates conflict and disruption. Individuals and 
societies 
through  confronting  different  values 
systems,  where  naïve  simplistic  conceptions  of  the  world 
are broken and remade. We can only move the conversation 
forward  by  surfacing  the  areas  where  we  disagree,  rather 
than  focusing  on  mitigating  conflict  and  sublimating 
confrontation.  
Negotiation  of  Ideas  and  Experience:  disruption  makes 
space for change. Tools that bring debate to the fore, rather 
than  offer  a  homogenous  and  uncontested  perspective  are 
more likely to prompt growth and innovation. 
We  acknowledge  that  gameful  experiences  that  treat 
sustainability as a process instead of an end goal will likely 
prove to be more challenging to develop, and more difficult 
to assess using conventional measures. Open-ended games 
that  encourage  player  discourse  on  the  goals  of  the  game 
itself  will  be  necessarily  more  complex,  time  consuming, 
and challenging to design and play. However, we argue that 
such  games,  similar  to  Hirsch’s  [24]  notion  of  “civic 
games”, will lead to thoughtful engagements with relevant 
concepts,  as  well  as  promote  reflection  on  the  values 
espoused by individuals and communities. Games inspired 
by  Weston’s  philosophy  would  seek  not  only  to  shift 
behavior  but  also  to  challenge  perspectives.  In  doing  so, 
these games will help players pose and answer the question, 
“What are we playing for?” 

learn 

229

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

hold 

deeply 

everyone  knows  what 

CONCLUSION 
We  propose  that  the  dominant  assumption  of  SHCI 
research—that 
sustainability 
means—is limiting. This assumption suggests that there is 
agreement  and  consistency  amongst,  between  and  within 
individuals  concerning  what  they  value  overtime.    As 
Weston indicates, "[i]t is wiser to accept the fact that many 
thoughtful 
of  our  contemporaries,  even  our  most 
contemporaries, 
different, 
probably 
irreconcilable,  visions  of  the  ideal  world."  ([47]p.339)  In 
addition, these visions are neither static nor permanent. 
Through this work we address each of the goals for SHCI 
research  set  forth  by  Silberman  et  al.  [38]  albeit  with 
varying  degrees  of  explicitness.  Our  selection  of  learning-
focused  technologies  that  operate  outside  the  classroom 
highlight the life-long and life-wide aspects of learning. We 
emphasize widely available technologies, rather than niche, 
experimental  designs,  as  these  systems  are  more  likely  to 
contribute to the broader public discourse on sustainability. 
We draw attention to how these designed experiences offer 
limited  visions  of  sustainability,  and  point  towards  the 
possibility  for  richer  representations  that  celebrate  the 
diverse  potential  within  the  concept  of  sustainability. 
to  contemporary 
Finally,  we  apply  and  contribute 
environmental  philosophy, 
engaging 
refreshingly 
exuberant voice.  
to  Weston’s 
By 
introducing 
provocative ideas, we join others who acknowledge that the 
concept  of  sustainability 
is  contested.  However,  we 
recognize 
that  calling  for  radically  shifting  research 
agendas,  towards  more  innovative  and  diverse  lines  of 
inquiry  is  the  easy  part.  Designing  experiences  that 
facilitate  enriched  discourse,  of  how  we  wish  to  adapt  to 
our  diverse  and  ever-changing  world  is  a  formidable,  and 
we argue, worthwhile task. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors wish to thank Nassim JafariNaimi and Maggie 
Castor  for  inspiration  and  the  three  anonymous  reviewers 
whose feedback motivated a stronger paper.  
REFERENCES 
1.  Magnus Bang, Anton Gustafsson, Cecilia Katzeff, et al. 

the  CSCW  community 

a 

2007. Promoting new patterns in household energy 
consumption with pervasive learning games. Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science 4744, 55–63.  

2.  Eric P.S. Baumer and M. Six Silberman. 2011. When 

the implication is not to design (technology). 
Proceedings of the 2011 Annual Conference On 
Human Factors In Computing Systems - CHI ’11, 
ACM Press, 2271-2274.  

3.  Rebecca Black. 2010. The language of Webkinz: early 

childhood literacy in an online virtual world. Digital 
Culture and Education 2, 1, 7–24. 
Jim Bizzocchi and Joshua Tanenbaum. 2011. Well 
read: applying close reading techniques to gameplay 

4. 

5. 

experiences. In Well Played 3.0: Video Games, Value 
and Meaning, Drew Davidson (ed). ETC Press, 
Pittsburg, PA.  
Ian Bogost. 2008. The rhetoric of video games. In The 
Ecology of Games: Connecting Youth, Games, and 
Learning, Katie Salen (ed.) MIT Press, Cambridge, 
MA, 117–140. 

6.  Hronn Brynjarsdottir, Maria Håkansson, James Pierce, 
Eric Baumer, Carl DiSalvo, and Phoebe Sengers. 2012. 
Sustainably unpersuaded. Proceedings of the 2012 
ACM Annual Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems - CHI ’12, ACM Press, 947-956. 
7.  Aimin Chen, Kim N Dietrich, Xia Huo, and Shuk-mei 
Ho. 2011. Developmental neurotoxicants in e-waste: an 
emerging health concern. Environmental Health 
Perspectives 119, 4, 431–438.  

8.  Gary Cook and Jodie VanHorn. 2011. How Dirty Is 

Your Data? A Look At The Energy Choices That 
Power Cloud Computing. Greenpeace Inter., 
Amsterdam. 

9.  Aidan Davison. 2001. Technology and the Contested 
Meanings of Sustainability. State University of New 
York Press, Albany. 

10.  Carl DiSalvo. 2012. Adversarial Design. MIT Press, 

Cambridge MA. 

11.  Carl DiSalvo, Phoebe Sengers, and Hrönn 

Brynjarsdóttir. 2010. Mapping the landscape of 
sustainable HCI. Proceedings of the 28th International 
Conference On Human Factors In Computing Systems 
- CHI ’10, ACM Press, 1975-1984.  

12.  Ann Doyle. 2013. Naming, Claiming, and 

(Re)Creating: Indigenous Knowledge Organization at 
the Cultural Interface. Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation. University of British Columbia. 

13.  Roland Emmerich. 2004. The Day After Tomorrow. 
14.  Free Range Studios. The Story of Stuff. Video. (22 

April 2009). Retrieved May 21, 2015 from 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9GorqroigqM,  
15.  Joshua Farley, Jon Erickson, and Herman E. Daly. 

2005. Ecological Economics: A Workbook For 
Problem Based Learning. Island Press, Washington, 
DC. 

16.  Jon E. Froehlich. 2015. Gamifying green: gamification 

and environmental sustainability. In The Gameful 
World: Approaches, Issues, Applications, Steffen P. 
Walz and Sebastian Deterding (eds.). MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA. 

17.  Jon Froehlich, Leah Findlater, and James Landay. 
2010. The design of eco-feedback technology. In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
factors in Computing Systems -CHI ’10, ACM Press, 
1999–2008.  

230

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

18. Henry A. Giroux. 2004. Cultural studies, public

pedagogy, and the responsibility of
intellectuals. Communication and Critical/Cultural
Studies 1, 1, 59–79.

19. Al Gore. 2006. An Inconvenient Truth.
20. Elizabeth Grossman. 2006. High Tech Trash: Digital

devices, hidden toxics, and human health. Island Press,
Washington.

21. Helen Halbert and Lisa P. Nathan. 2015. Designing for

discomfort: Supporting negative affect and critical
reflection through interactive tools. Proceedings of the
2015 ACM Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work - CSCW ’15, ACM Press, 349-360.

22. Elizabeth Hayes and James Paul Gee. 2011. Public

pedagogy through video games. In Handbook of Public
Pedagogy: Education and Learning Beyond Schooling.
Jennifer Sandlin, Brian D. Schultz and Jake Burdick
(eds.). Routledge, New York, 185–193.

23. Susan Herring. 2001. Computer-mediated discourse. In

Handbook of discourse analysis, Deborah Tannen,
Deborah Schiffrin, and Heidi Hamilton (eds.), 612-634.
Blackwell, Oxford, UK.

24. Tad Hirsch. 2010. Water wars: designing a civic game

about water scarcity. Designing Interactive Systems,
ACM Press, 340–343.

25. Nassim JafariNaimi and Eric M. Meyers. Collective
intelligence or groupthink? Engaging participation
patterns in World Without Oil. Proceedings of the 2015
ACM Conference on Computer Supported
Collaborative Work - CSCW '15, ACM Press, 1972-
1881. 

26. Peter H. Kahn Jr., Rachel L. Severson, and Jolina H.
Ruckert. 2009. The human relation with nature and
technological nature. Current Directions in
Psychological Science 18, 1, 37–42.

27. Barbara Kawulich. 2005. Participant observation as a

data collection method. Forum: Qualitative Social
Research 6, 2.

28. Bran Knowles, Lynne Blair, Mike Hazas, and Stuart

Walker. 2013. Exploring sustainability research in
computing: where we are and where we go next. In
Proceedings of the 2013 ACM International Joint
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing -
UbiComp ’13, ACM Press, 305–314.

29. Richard Louv. 2005. Last Child In The Woods: Saving

Our Children From Nature-Deficit Disorder.
Algonquin Books, Chapel Hill, NC.

30. Jennifer Mankoff, Deanna Matthews, Susan Fussell,

and Michael Johnson. 2007. Leveraging social
networks to motivate individuals to reduce their
ecological footprints. IEEE, 87.

31. Jackie March. 2010. Young children’s play in online

virtual world. Journal of Early Childhood Research 8,
1, 23–39.

32. Eric M. Meyers and Robert Bittner. 2013. Playing

virtually with sustainability: Exploring “green” virtual
worlds for children. In Children’s play worlds:
Culture, learning and growth in virtual spaces, Anne
Burke and Jackie Marsh (eds) Peter Lang, London,
172-190.

33. Jack Mezirow. 1990. Fostering critical reflection in

adulthood: A guide to transformative and
emancipatory learning. Jossey-Bass Publishers, San
Francisco.

34. Lisa Nathan, Batya Friedman, and Dave Hendry. 2009.

Information system design as catalyst: human action
and environmental sustainability. Interactions 16, 4, 6–
11.

35. David W. Orr. 1992. Ecological Literacy: Education

and the Transition to a Postmodern World. State
University of New York, Albany, NY.

36. Raija-Leena Punamäki, Marjut Wallenius, Clase-

Håkan Nygård, Lea Saarni, and Arja Rimpelä. 2007.
Use of information and communication technology
(ICT) and perceived health in adolescence: the role of
sleeping habits and waking-time tiredness. Journal of
Adolescence 30, 4, 569–85.

37. David W. Shaffer, Kurt R. Squire, Richard Halverson,
and James Paul Gee. 2005. Video games and the future
of learning. Phi Delta Kappan 87, 2, 104–111.

38. M. Six Silberman, Lisa Nathan, Bran Knowles, et. al.,
2014. Next steps for sustainable HCI. Interactions 21,
5, 66-69.

39. Betsy Sparrow, Jenny Liu, and Daniel M Wegner.

2011. Google effects on memory: cognitive
consequences of having information at our fingertips.
Science (New York, N.Y.) 333, 6043, 776–8.

40. Andrew Stanton. 2008. WALL-E.
41. Constance A. Steinkuehler. 2007. Massively

multiplayer online gaming as a constellation of literacy
practices. ELearning 4, 3, 297–318.

42. Constance A. Steinkuehler and Sean Duncan. 2008.

Scientific habits of mind in virtual worlds. Journal of
Science Education and Technology 17, 6, 530–543.

43. Bill Tomlinson. 2010. Greening Through IT:

Information Technology for Environmental
Sustainability. MIT Press.

44. Bill Tomlinson, Eli Blevis, Bonnie Nardi, Donald J.

Patterson, M. SIX Silberman, and Yue Pan. 2013.
Collapse informatics and practice: Theory, method, and
design. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction – TOCHI 20, 4, 24.

231

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

45. Corneel Vandelanotte, Takemi Sugiyama, Paul

Gardiner, and Neville Owen. 2009. Associations of
leisure-time internet and computer use with overweight
and obesity, physical activity and sedentary behaviors.
Journal of Medical Internet Research. e28.
http://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.1084.

46. Peter-Paul Verbeek. 2006. ACTING ARTIFACTS:

The technological mediation of action. In User
Behavior and Technology Development: Shaping

Sustainable Relations Between Consumers and 
Technologies, Peter-Paul Verbeek and Adrian Slob 
(eds.). Springer, 53–60. 

47. Anthony Weston. 1985. Beyond intrinsic value:

pragmatism in environmental ethics. Environmental
Ethics 17, 1, 321–339.

48. Anthony Weston. 2012. Mobilizing the Green

Imagination: An Exuberant Manifesto. New Society
Publishers, Gabriola Island, BC, Canada.

232

