CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Understanding Energy Consumption at Work:

Learning from Arrow Hill

Ben Bedwell*
*Horizon Digital Economy Research

The University of Nottingham

Nottingham, UK

benjamin.bedwell@nottingham.ac.uk

Enrico Costanza†

Michael O. Jewell†

†Electronics and Computer Science

The University of Southampton

Southampton, UK

{E.Costanza, M.O.Jewell}@soton.ac.uk

ABSTRACT
Most work around technological interventions for energy
conservation to date has focussed on changing individual be-
haviour. Hence, there is limited understanding of communal
settings, such as ofﬁce environments, as sites for interven-
tion. Even when energy consumption in the workplace has
been considered, the emphasis has typically been on the indi-
vidual. To address this gap, we conducted a study of energy
consumption and management in one workplace, based on a
combination of workshops with a broad range of stakehold-
ers, and quantitative data inspections. We report and discuss
ﬁndings from this study, in light of prior literature, and we
present a set of implications for design and further research.
In particular, three themes, and associated intervention oppor-
tunities, emerged from our data: (1) energy wastage related to
“errors”; (2) the role of company policies and the negotiation
that surrounds their implementation; and (3) the bigger en-
ergy picture of procurement, construction and travel.

Author Keywords
Sustainability; Public Displays; Buildings; Energy;
Workplace; Error

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.m. Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g. HCI):
Miscellaneous

INTRODUCTION
Climate change is a global threat: reducing the energy con-
sumed by living and working in buildings is one signiﬁcant
opportunity to reduce the greenhouse gas emissions that fuel
this threat. The CSCW, HCI and Ubicomp communities have
been addressing this challenge in terms of reducing energy
demand, mostly focussing on understanding and changing in-
dividual behaviour, yet there is a gap in the understanding of
communal settings, such as an ofﬁce environment, as sites for
intervention. A signiﬁcant portion of the population spends
most of their time in ofﬁces, hence that is where a large share

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW ’16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819993

of our energy consumption takes place. In shifting our fo-
cus, we believe that it is necessary to reassess our understand-
ing of energy consumption, which has been informed mostly
through studies of the home [8, 12, 43].
Even the smaller set of prior work addressing energy con-
sumption in the workplace still focuses mostly on the indi-
vidual: it concentrates on the electrical appliances over which
single employees, or very small groups, have control. Exam-
ples include personal computers, task lights, and telephones
(e.g., [30, 44, 47]); individually controlled machines in in-
dustrial workshops (e.g., [41]); or individual apportionment
of shared resources, such as how many pages each employee
prints [35].
In contrast, we draw attention to consumption
that is intrinsically difﬁcult, or impossible to apportion pre-
cisely, such as that related to building and domestic water
heating, network servers, and appliances used for services
beneﬁcial to everyone in the building, such as cleaning and
maintenance. Closely related to heating is the notion of com-
fort, which is well understood to be a driver of consumption
[9, 40]. What opportunities and barriers to energy savings ex-
ist around these issues? How are responsibility and decision-
making around energy shared? Such analysis is relatively ab-
sent from the literature, but we argue it is critical to support
the design of novel, appropriate technologies to reduce en-
ergy consumption.
To explore this gap in understanding, and look for concrete
opportunities for intervention, we conducted a study of en-
ergy consumption and management in one particular building
– Arrow Hill1 – used by a UK district council (a regional gov-
ernment body). We conducted two workshops with a broad
range of stakeholders from the council, from energy and fa-
cilities managers to employees working in the building; one
workshop was structured to an extent around visualisations of
quantitative data from the building monitoring systems, while
one focused on unpacking workplace comfort. We comple-
mented the workshops by subsequently collecting evidence
of reductions in consumption through follow-up data inspec-
tions. In this paper we present the data we collected, its dis-
cussion, and a set of implications for design and further re-
search that we derived. In particular, three themes, and asso-
ciated intervention opportunities, emerged from our data: (1)
energy wastage related to “errors”; (2) the role of company
policies and the negotiation that surrounds their implementa-
tion; and (3) the bigger energy picture of procurement, con-
struction and travel. These themes go beyond what prior lit-

1an invented name to protect the privacy of our participants

1337

erature addressed, hence their deﬁnition and the implications
they lead to constitute the contribution of this paper.

RELATED WORK
There is now a signiﬁcant body of work that describes studies
of energy consumption in the home (e.g. [8]) and interven-
tions that seek to reduce domestic energy consumption (see
[16]). Reviews of such work for national policy makers have
asserted potential for reductions in electricity consumption
ranging up to 15% as a result of feeding back house-level
energy proﬁles to domestic occupants [11]. In comparison to
domestic research, there have been fewer studies that focus
on energy use in the workplace, as noted by recent reviews
(e.g. [34]), despite it being known that organisations are typi-
cally poor at identifying and addressing energy inefﬁciencies
[45].
Designing appropriate interventions for other environments
requires an understanding of their characteristics. Some work
has recently been carried out to this end by other researchers.
Jain et al. provide an insight into the attitudes and concerns
of ofﬁce staff, revealing barriers that prevent efforts to con-
serve [22], while Schwartz et al. highlighted the controver-
sial nature of revealing energy data out of context of situated
practices (e.g. to a distant manager) [37]. Foster et al. con-
ducted workshops with a range of staff to explore perceptions
of energy use in the workplace, also emphasising the need
for workplace interventions to be particularly sensitive to spe-
ciﬁc organisational cultures [17]. Through a set of interviews
Castelli et al. note that there are differences between indus-
trial and ofﬁce-based work settings [7], and propose that en-
terprise information systems should present energy consump-
tion information according to different users’ roles. This re-
lated work calls for further studies that reveal unique char-
acteristics of workplaces – our paper extends such work by
contributing empirical evidence and identifying speciﬁc is-
sues that confound attempts to save energy in workplaces, in-
cluding the scattered knowledge of context of consumption;
the ever-evolving nature of workplace architecture, layouts,
occupancy and infrastructure; political tensions around hier-
archy and organisational change; and the difﬁculty of com-
munication across organisations.
Examples of existing interventions into workplaces provide
useful insights into what may or may not create energy sav-
ings. Building certiﬁcation schemes such as LEED2 address
energy consumption in the workplace. While mostly focus-
ing on guiding sustainable building management, the LEED
system also recommends a digital display (the LEED Dy-
namic Plaque3) providing summative measures of the build-
ing’s performance to staff. However, research has shown that
these schemes tend to deliver negligible impact [28, 39].
Existing research interventions in the workplace adopt a vari-
ety of approaches. An early study by Siero et al. [41] found
that comparative feedback given to staff in an industrial set-
ting results in energy efﬁciency gains. Katzeff et al. report
ﬁeld studies of two design probes to investigate employees’

2http://www.usgbc.org/leed
3https://www.leedon.io/faq.html

1338

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

interpretation of eco-feedback, highlighting the challenges of
deﬁning best practice around effective workplace interven-
tions [25]. Pousman et al.
[35] proposed Imprint, a sys-
tem that tracks the documents people print in the work en-
vironment, and provides a visualisation of the resources con-
sumed in this way on a semi-public display. Jentsch et al.
[23] presented an energy-saving support system for work en-
vironments that leverages a variety of sensors (temperature,
electricity, light, contact) to provide workers with suggestions
about how to act in an environmentally friendly way, however
no real-world evaluation is reported. A number of other inter-
ventions in ofﬁce environments take the form of games. Cli-
mate Race [42] used sensors to track players’ energy-related
behaviour (e.g., switching off lights when not in) awarding
positive or negative points as appropriate.
In the Energy
Chickens game [30], virtual pets represent the energy con-
sumed by individual devices; their visual aspect is designed
to encourage staff towards lower consumption. The IdleWars
game [44] targets a speciﬁc wasteful individual behaviour:
leaving personal computers on when not in use. The game
design aims at curtailing such phenomenon, but evaluation
revealed mixed results. Beyond games, Yun et al. present a
study of an “intelligent dashboard” which allows ofﬁce work-
ers to monitor, remotely control and schedule the power-off
times of a number of personal devices [47]. Their evaluation
results indicate that remote control and automatic scheduling
are effective in delivering energy savings.
These interventions suggest that it is possible to make an im-
pact, but they also highlight research gaps. For example, a
common focus of these interventions is that they target en-
ergy consumption related to individual employees. Recent
critiques and meta-reviews of sustainable HCI have suggested
that a tight focus on individual behaviour is limiting the HCI
community’s impact on global environmental issues [31, 26].
The community has been encouraged to shift away from con-
sidering sustainability purely as a resource management is-
sue [43], to question whether new technology can be the an-
swer to sustainability issues [2], and to think more holisti-
cally about where consumption happens and why [31, 26].
As detailed in our discussion section, our ﬁndings strongly
resonate with some of the arguments put forward in these cri-
tiques. However, our work is original in that it grounds the
discussion in empirical data, opening up discussion around
underexplored aspects of sustainability. Our research speciﬁ-
cally addresses consumption that goes beyond the individual,
such as space heating, and issues relating to consumption that
are shared, such as thermal comfort.
Thermal comfort has an important link to energy consump-
tion: Shove describes the convergence of factors that has
led to the goal of maintaining “room temperature” [40].
Milenkovic et al. have demonstrated that, as a result, staff
typically feel low levels of control over their personal com-
fort [27]. Smart heating systems have been explored in recent
ubicomp research. For example, PreHeat leverages presence
sensors and machine learning to optimize heating energy efﬁ-
ciency [21]. Clear et al. suggest that ubicomp can contribute
towards allowing building occupants to pursue personal com-
fort goals and use less energy collectively as a result [9]. In-

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

deed, Feldmeier and Paradiso presented a control system to
allow individual occupants to customize their ofﬁce climate
[15]. While such technology could have considerable impli-
cations on workplace sustainability, the system has reportedly
been tested only in one speciﬁc building (where the system
was developed), and over one speciﬁc season (cooling). So
it is unclear how well its beneﬁts may generalize, leaving the
problem of negotiating communal thermal comfort open.
Our research method – data exploration workshops, bringing
together multiple stakeholders – was deliberately chosen to
tackle these shared issues.
In addition, it also focuses our
attention on what value existing data generated by the work-
place has in engaging staff, rather than relying on the deploy-
ment of costly new sensing and control technology.

DATA GATHERING
Our research took place in Arrow Hill (AH), a ﬂagship build-
ing of the Southshire4 Council. Here we gathered build-
ing monitoring data, then directly engaged staff through two
workshops. We maintained a relationship with the Council to
allow for follow-up activities to explore issues raised as a re-
sult of the workshops; our aim was to learn not just from the
workshop proceedings, but also from subsequent reactions to
them.

Arrow Hill
AH combines a restored Grade II* listed house from the 18th
century with a new section completed in 2010. The new
section contains 2600m2 of open plan ofﬁces; the original
building retains a largely traditional ofﬁce layout of many
rooms housing small groups of staff, as well as several larger
public function rooms. The new construction was originally
commissioned in 2002 by a different local authority, merged
in 2009 into the current Southshire council, as a result of a
nation-wide administrative reorganization.
Approximately 500 staff are based at AH, performing a va-
riety of roles from on-site marriage registration to highly
sensitive social services. While the building has been de-
signed with the ambition to achieve high energy efﬁciency
(the BREEAM’s5 ‘excellent’ rating), it has performed below
expectations, and the council has been keen to explore means
of realising the efﬁciency potential of the building in real-
world conditions.

Building Data Monitoring
The operation of AH is recorded via an energy monitoring
system (which collects consumption data from the building’s
gas and electricity supplies) and a building management sys-
tem (BMS, which monitors internal and external conditions,
such as temperature). Gas and electricity consumption is
monitored separately in the original and new parts of the
building, and electricity consumption is also monitored per
ﬂoor.
It is worth noting that, while the systems are capa-
ble of collecting half-hourly data and storing it indeﬁnitely,
the provided UI has very limited visualization capabilities.
4also an invented name
5BREEAM is an internationally recognised benchmarking method
for building sustainability; see http://www.breeam.org/

In line with observations of other workplaces by researchers,
e.g. [24], monitoring was deployed in AH without a proactive
strategy for making use of the data.
Six months’ worth of half-hourly data from the AH monitor-
ing systems was retrieved as background information. This
data provided the researchers with a history of the workplace
from which to create visualisations as prompts for workshops.

Workshops
Two workshops were run in AH, targeting strategic “energy
decision-makers” within the organisation and ofﬁce staff. We
engaged these two communities separately to minimise the
chances of hierarchy affecting the accounts given by partic-
ipants. We also intended to engage the communities differ-
ently, based on our hypothesis of their concerns, i.e. of energy
decision-makers around cost and efﬁciency, and ofﬁce staff
with a comfortable and supportive working environment. In
both cases, the workshops were introduced as a collaboration
between the Council and a University, to understand how en-
ergy can be saved in workplaces; beyond providing lunch, no
explicit incentives were provided for attendance. Although
the content of the workshops differed, both were structured
around activities designed to elicit accounts of energy (and
related resource) management. Both workshops were facili-
tated by four researchers, three of whom were subsequently
involved in analysis. Conversations during the workshops
were audio-recorded and later transcribed for analysis. Par-
ticipants were also asked to provide their job title.
Energy decision-makers
The ﬁrst workshop (W1), lasting approximately a full work-
ing day, was attended by 14 managers (12 male, 2 female)
with varying stakes in the operation of AH. Participants were
selected and invited directly by the leader of the council en-
ergy team, involving a wide range of stakeholders. Their re-
sponsibilities included savings and efﬁciency within the or-
ganisation; development and implementation of sustainability
strategy; facilities management and support; facilities main-
tenance; and IT management, as well as the surveyor of the
“new” build. A number of these attendees are not physically
based at AH on a daily basis, even though the building falls
under their direct responsibility.
W1 was structured around instances of the data collected
from the building. We analysed the six month long dataset
to generate a series of visualizations, with the aim to provide
a wide range of options that would encourage participants to
explore the data without overwhelming them. The choice of
initial visualizations was informed by our own exploration of
the data in advance of the workshop and included: a compar-
ison of the electricity consumption per square metre of ﬂoor
space in various parts of the building; the changes in con-
sumption across the seasons; and the variation between work
and non-work days in the week. All visualizations were de-
signed to be appropriate to the technical background of par-
ticipants, rather than being novel in visualisation terms. Fur-
ther analyses highlighted characteristic features of the typi-
cal daily consumption proﬁle, and pinpointed the days of the
year with highest and lowest energy consumption. To prompt
critique and support discussion, large paper print-outs of the

1339

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Figure 1. Three examples of the plots used in the ﬁrst workshops. Each was shown to participants as A3 colour print-out. Top: two weeks of gas
consumption data, internal and external temperature. Bottom: electricity consumption over time, plotted for an example weekday when the overall
electricity consumption was exceptionally low (left) and exceptionally high (right).

visualisations were given to the participants to mark-up, and
the potential insights spotted by the researchers were brieﬂy
presented. The participants were then also allowed to directly
explore the data behind the visualisations in more detail, as-
sisted by the research team during the workshop (who had the
data and query tools on a laptop).

Ofﬁce staff
The second workshop (W2) took place several months after
W1 and was shorter in duration – lasting approximately two
hours over lunch provided as compensation by the researchers
– to ﬁt around staff working schedules, and was attended by
11 staff (6 male, 5 female) with varying ofﬁce roles within
AH, including business development, ﬁnance, and market-
ing. The participants were split randomly into two groups and
given a series of discussion tasks. The tasks were designed
to encourage participants to explore the notion of comfort
by ranking factors that contribute to a comfortable and pro-
ductive environment, the degree and mechanisms by which
they could control those factors, and how they could measure
them. We note that participants for W2 volunteered their time
in response to an advert posted by AH managers on internal
email lists and so may exhibit certain self-selection biases;
where appropriate, we reﬂect on this in our ﬁndings. Given

the focus on perceived comfort (rather than directly on en-
ergy savings) and the limited time availability of participants
in W2, no data visualisations were presented.

FINDINGS
Using transcriptions of the workshop discussions, we carried
out a thematic analysis [4]. This analysis started by categoris-
ing the material at the sentence level through open codes. Ini-
tially 126 open codes were used, later iteratively grouped into
4 broad categories, described in the following subsections.
Quotes are labelled with the pseudonym of the speaker, their
job family, and the workshop that they attended.

The Difﬁculty of Understanding the Building Operation
Where energy goes
During W1, participants attempted to make sense of the elec-
tricity and gas consumption in the building using the data vi-
sualizations and ﬁgures we showed them. Speciﬁc pieces of
equipment were pointed at as causes of energy consumption:
from printers and monitors to vacuum cleaners, to mobile air
conditioning units, to servers. The group tried to infer in-
formation from the technical speciﬁcations of appliances to
explain the consumption on speciﬁc electrical circuits.

1340

External Air Temperature

Internal Temperature (RBS_01_WE)

Total Gas Consumption

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

G
a
s
 
c
o
n
s
u
m
p

t
i

o
n

 
(

K
W
h
)

)

C
 
s
e
e
r
g
e
d
(
 

e
r
u

t

a
r
e
p
m
e
T

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

-5

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Contextualising consumption
Participants in both workshops tried to explain consumption
using their various understandings of their workplace context.
Consumption was related to causes such as health concerns,
for example: “[heating the water is] a way of managing le-
gionella [...] heat it above 60 degrees and that’ll kill every-
thing off.” [Scott (Engineering), W1] Health also came up in
W2, as a justiﬁcation for an employee using a fan “the policy
is you wouldn’t have a fan without a medical reason” [Dennis
(Ofﬁce staff), W2] Speciﬁc patterns of building occupancy –
relating to the activities in AH as well as seasonal conditions
– were linked to consumption, e.g. “more people get married
in the lighter months of the year. So you can have up to three,
four, ﬁve weddings a day, whereas in the winter months they
might not have any at all.” [Paul (Facilities management),
W1]

Interrogation and explanation
The data visualisations prompted some participants to raise
questions about the heating settings in AH, such as the fact
that it is turned on from the early hours of the day: “..we think
because staff start at seven, that the boilers have to come on
at six, so at seven this building has reached 19 degrees, but is
that a presumption or do we know we have to have those boil-
ers on that long before a member of staff arrives?” [Jimmy
(Energy management), W1]. In some cases, the group agreed
that further investigation was necessary around speciﬁc issues
(“Jimmy (Energy management): There’s something about the
gas, but in terms of the proﬁle it looks right ... Scott (En-
gineering): The dodgy base load I think needs investigation
...” [W1]) Some of this analysis, especially when comparing
day and night consumption, was focussed on understanding
“always-on” consumption6: where it comes from, and its size
in comparison to the daytime consumption.

An ever-evolving system
Energy consumption was also related to the complex process
of commissioning, designing and constructing the building.
Participants highlighted that the building project was orig-
inally commissioned by one organization, which was later
merged into the current council, and this transition affected
the ﬁnal design of the building. Even the position of furni-
ture in the open space ofﬁces was suggested to inﬂuence the
air ﬂow and hence the building thermal performance: “if you
look at some of the very early drawings, the layout of furni-
ture and storage cabinets, it’s no resemblance to what we’ve
got in the building today, which is obviously affecting the nat-
ural ventilation, so I think what seems quite minor detail [...]
it’s what seems an innocent change is having long term ef-
fects” [Walter (Property operations), W1]. The building is
perceived by our participants as a system in evolution, then,
with thermal performance that has changed over time.
Brought together, these elements point towards a complex
system of appliances, routines, architectural and infrastruc-
tural features, people and physics. In particular, it was clear
that no single participant had a clear understanding of all
these factors, or of how they interact. Bringing the groups to-
gether allowed them to pool their individual understandings,
6energy consumed by devices that are never turned off

and also led to the identiﬁcation of issues that needed further
investigation (leading to follow-up events described later in
this paper).

Heating Perception and Adjustments for Comfort
From W1 we learned that heating was considered a major
cause of consumption and that the council has a temperature
policy that limits temperatures to 19-21◦C (66-70◦F). How-
ever, such policy is not always strictly enforced, partially as
a result of staff complaints. Indeed the management group
seems to be quite aware of staff complaints about the build-
ing comfort and temperature.

The subjective nature of thermal comfort
In W2, participants ranked temperature as a key factor in de-
termining their productivity and comfort. However, part of
the discussion in both workshops focussed on the subjective
perception of temperature and its conﬂict with the tempera-
ture policy. Participants mentioned a variety of factors that
inﬂuence thermal comfort, ranging from age, to doing phys-
ical activity, to the appearance of outdoors elements. In both
workshops various anecdotes were reported to demonstrate
how subjective the matter is, for example: “You can’t satisfy
everybody, [...] I’ve been to sites where people have said,
let’s get the heating down to 18, it’s far too hot here. [...] So
if you shifted the heat to 22, you’d have more people com-
plaining about it being hot” [David (Energy management),
W1] While, one of the building occupants said: “One of our
colleagues [...] likes to have fresh air and so she opens the
door, the whole rest of the ofﬁce is like... sitting in scarves.”
[Nicholas (Ofﬁce staff), W2]

Sanctioned adjustments for comfort
This previous quote points also at the use of clothing to ad-
just the individual thermal comfort, and to conserve energy.
Indeed, we learned that the council implements an explicit
policy around this matter: it distributes branded ﬂeece jackets
to employees as a measure against cold. Participants directly
related a change in dressing style to energy conservation: “if
we tell the reception staff to put on thicker socks and trousers,
then we can turn those heaters off under their desk as well”
[Scott (Engineering), W1], but also that dressing style may be
an obstacle: “I hear so many people going oh, I’m freezing.
They know they’re going to work on the reception on a Sat-
urday, [...] I’ll look at them and say how many layers have
you got on? They’re in a T shirt and a frilly cardigan” [Judith
(Ofﬁce staff), W2].

Personal adjustments for comfort
Besides clothing, we also heard about a number of other ad-
hoc, individual interventions and remedies that the occupants
of AH adopt to improve their own comfort at the ofﬁce. Many
of the efforts seem to be related to thermal comfort, whether
trying to cope with cold: “..everyone is bringing in hot wa-
ter bottles” [Paul (Facilities management), W2], “So that be-
comes really a part of your working day, making a nice warm
cuppa, which of course is going to help with the temperature”
[Lori (Ofﬁce staff), W2], or with heat: “some people brought
their own fans in, didn’t they?” [Walter (Property operations),
W1].

1341

Thermal comfort was a common topic in both workshops, and
the question of how to use AH’s heating systems to provide a
comfortable temperature for all remained unresolved. Some
participants raised a lack of control (echoed elsewhere [22]),
but we noted many adjustments to circumvent systems and
policy to regain control over participants’ personal environ-
ments (also noted by others [9]). Notably, the discussions
painted a picture of an uncertain political stance on whether
these individual adjustments for comfort are tolerated.

Cost and Organisation Changes
Issues of cost in relation to energy consumption came up in
the workshop with energy decision-makers, as they are di-
rectly responsible for the bills. However, ofﬁce staff also con-
sidered the issue, but from different perspectives.

Energy as an indirect ﬁnancial concern
Ofﬁce staff drew attention to their concerns as taxpayers as
well as employees: “we work for a local authority but we
also, you know, we’re ratepayers. I don’t want to be wasting.
Once again my council tax hasn’t gone up this year: how
lucky are we for that to have happened?” [Lori (Ofﬁce staff),
W2]. Moreover, the ﬁnancial issue was sometimes framed
into a wider picture of ﬁnancial cuts to the public sector in
the UK, and job security: “..that is a reasonable tempera-
ture, that’s how much it’s costing, one more degree will cost
that, that would cost x amount of jobs” [Adam (Ofﬁce staff),
W2] Indeed we learned that the employees of this council
had recently gone through a stressful voluntary redundancy
(VR) process: “..they’re all upset about stuff, not to mention
VR, not to mention pressure, loss of staff, everything is being
squeezed, so the management layer in the middle is getting it
from all sides.” [Walter (Property operations), W1]

Reorganising buildings and human resources
VR is just one measure adopted by the Council as an or-
ganization to adapt to recent changes. Small ofﬁces have
been closed down, with employees relocated: “a lot of peo-
ple [who] moved into this building have come from [ofﬁces]
around the city. They’ve come from small ofﬁces” [Jason (Sur-
veyor), W1]. Such a change appears to be part of a council
strategy of closing down buildings that are not energy efﬁ-
cient and moving to newly built ones rather than renovating:
“you could go bankrupt trying to make that site energy efﬁ-
cient” [Jimmy (Energy management), W1].
This drive to reduce reliance on older buildings has reduced
workspace, leading to a complementary “work from home”
policy: at the time of our workshops the AH building hosted
1.3 employees per desk, with a plan to reach “a two for one
desk policy” within the following 8 months. To make this
possible, a clear-desk policy and a hot-desk policy were also
being increasingly implemented: staff should be prepared to
work from any desk in the ofﬁce. Adherence to the hot-desk
policy, though, was reported to be low: individuals tend to
stick to the same desk. The energy decision-makers perceived
this behaviour to negatively affect the thermal comfort in the
building: “We’ve got people upstairs with coats on, because
that’s their desk; 50 desks will be empty, but they won’t move,
because that’s their desk” [Jason (Surveyor), W1].

1342

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

In summary, awareness of policy and policy changes in both
workshops seemed relatively high, although we note that the
ofﬁce staff who volunteered to take part in our workshop
may be particularly engaged with their organisation’s policy
and activities. The range of organisational changes occurring
within the council was notable, giving an impression of an
organisation (like the building itself) in ﬂux. Of particular
signiﬁcance was the continued focus by both sets of staff on
heating as both a major ﬁnancial and political concern, re-
vealing ways that the impact of energy consumption can be
made personal for decision-makers and ofﬁce staff.

Behaviour Change: Education and Communication
Across both workshops participants referred to behaviour
change, often in terms of education. Changes in behaviour
were explicitly related to changes in comfort, and energy sav-
ings, often in relation to clothing style (as described in the
previous subsection).

Skepticism of behaviour change
Some participants in W1, however, questioned the relevance
of behaviour change to their situation. In some cases, it was
pointed out that the level of automation in the building does
not leave much control to occupants: “in this building, there
isn’t a thermostat on the wall [that] I can go and whack up
and inﬂuence” [Walter (Property operations), W1]. In other
cases, the relative impact was questioned: “What’s the point?
What’s the point of even wasting somebody’s time to draft
some energy thing that says, switch your monitor off, we’re
trying to save energy. It’s negligible.” [Walter (Property op-
erations), W1].

(Lack of) communication
Communication was also suggested to be a possible strat-
egy to increase conservation and reduce complaints: display
how much the council spends or saves in energy (and what
that would correspond to e.g. in jobs saved, see above), and
remind everyone of the current temperature policy. At the
same time, we heard skepticism about an existing interven-
tion to address communication around comfort in the build-
ing: “building user group” meetings take place periodically,
but participants in both workshops appeared doubtful about
their effectiveness. Participants referred not only to internal
communication, but also to the public image of the council
around the issue of energy waste, and the impact it has on
taxpayers (see also the previous subsection).
Behaviour change is a commonly discussed option in HCI
and broader sustainability communities.
In the workshops
we found interest in behaviour change and education of col-
leagues, yet also skepticism about how to effectively integrate
these into strategy.

FOLLOW-UP DATA INSPECTIONS
Subsequent to W1, we received communication that the par-
ticipants had gone on to investigate anomalies in the data
visualizations they had discussed during the workshop, and
identiﬁed energy savings. They realized that the heating of
domestic water to prevent legionella (which was brieﬂy dis-
cussed at W1, see “Contextualising consumption” above) was
being carried out in an overzealous fashion. Reverting to a

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

more energy-conservative setting allowed the saving of ap-
proximately 20% of their total gas usage, while remaining
within safe guidelines.
Another opportunity to clearly identify energy wastage came
upon inspection of data from another council building: Dor-
ton House (DH). DH is managed by some of the attendees of
W1 and is an ofﬁce building considerably smaller than AH,
located approximately 30mi north of it. DH houses about
80 employees across two ﬂoors, both arranged into an open
space. The smaller size means that DH does not have a dedi-
cated facilities manager, but it is remotely managed by a per-
son responsible for several small buildings.
Visually comparing the electricity and gas consumption logs,
we noticed an inconsistency. As illustrated in Figure 2, the
electricity consumption pattern indicates that the building is
in use Monday to Friday, in accordance with the reports of
the occupants. However, gas, which is used mostly for heat-
ing, also appears to be consumed on Saturdays, for no appar-
ent reason. A few weeks after we reported this issue to the
appropriate energy decision-makers we noticed that the gas
consumption logs changed to the expected Monday to Friday
pattern, suggesting that the heating settings were amended
and there was truly no reason for the heating to be active on
Saturdays. The difference corresponds to 1/6th of the total
consumed gas, i.e. around 16.7%.

DISCUSSION
Reﬂecting on our ﬁndings, we see demonstrations of the en-
ergy consumption issues that make the ofﬁce workplace dis-
tinct from other contexts, such as the home or industrial set-
ting. For example, as in the home, staff do link changes in
energy consumption to their ﬁnancial situation, but we see
that this link is indirect via concerns over job security. On the
other hand unlike the home, we have seen that workplace en-
ergy decision-makers may not inhabit the building they man-
age, and that there are unique legal and ethical responsibilities
for consumption during remote working. Becoming familiar
with these nuances is important when considering designing
interventions for the workplace, and so we unpack them in
more detail here.

Figure 2. The change in gas usage patterns before (top) and after (bot-
tom) reporting that the building was being heated for an extra day, com-
pared to corresponding electricity usage.

1343

Supporting Understanding: Preventing and Fixing Errors
In W1 we found that visualising monitoring data enabled “in-
terrogation and explanation” of energy consumption. This led
to further follow-up investigation, after which we observed
concrete energy savings coming from two issues rectiﬁed by
the Council. We consider these two issues “errors”, in the
sense that they did not inﬂuence anyone’s comfort or con-
venience either before or after they were rectiﬁed, and did
not require substantial effort to correct. We have found that
such operational errors are apparently related to our theme
of the “difﬁculty in understanding the building operation”,
as highlighted by the efforts (or degree of assumption) en-
ergy decision-makers made in explaining the complexity and
opacity around “where energy goes”. It seems that such com-
plexity prevents facilities managers from having a concrete
expectation for what a “normal” energy bill should be, sim-
ilar reports from previous research on the domestic context
[38, 43].
Foundational work about errors was carried out by Don Nor-
man and James Reason in terms of cognitive psychology and
HCI [36, 29]. In particular Norman relates errors to his the-
ory of action – an error is a mismatch between intention or
goal and the result of action taken – and to an incorrect sys-
tem mental model. In our case the incorrect mental model
could perhaps be described for building occupants as: “the
heating is off when I am not in the building.” Arguably, this
is exacerbated by both the staff’s awareness of the many auto-
mated features of the building, and the absence of complaints
(during out-of-hours) that seem to drive in part the decision-
making of the management. According to Norman’s theory,
one way to try to avoid errors is to reduce the gulf of evalu-
ation by making the system status as clearly visible as possi-
ble. From a design perspective, then, what we need to make
the status of the building easily visible, not only in terms of
present status (since this would simply conﬁrm the occupants’
mental model of heating), but also historical. We shall return
to this point in our implications section.
The occurrence of errors related to energy waste can be no-
ticed in selected prior work, even though not always explic-
itly highlighted as such. For example, studies of domestic
heating have shown that misconceptions of heat and heating
systems can lead to constantly and inefﬁciently heating the
home, rather than heating on demand [33]. Moreover, a recent
study of a smart thermostat [46] found that participants had
air conditioning on when they are away from home, and that
this was noticed and recognized as a mistake only when they
reviewed the smart thermostat logs with researchers. Yun et
al. reported a study and intervention around the usage of in-
dividually controlled electrical appliances in the workplace
[47]. They observed waste related to appliances like phones
and task lights being left on out of ofﬁce hours, and that sav-
ings could be achieved by programmatically turning them off
on a schedule. Notably, behaviour change is an option that is
commonly discussed in HCI and broader sustainability com-
munities but difﬁcult to implement, yet our ﬁndings empiri-
cally demonstrate that signiﬁcant energy savings can also be
made by ﬁxing errors – an opportunity given less attention.

24

18

12

6

0

24

18

12

6

0

Before

Gas

Electricity

Mon

Tue 

Wed

Thu 

Fri 

Sat 

Sun

kW

After

Mon

Tue 

Wed

Thu 

Fri 

Sat 

Sun

Policy and Communication
Through the workshops we have learned about a number of
policies adopted by the council with implications on energy
consumption, namely the work from home and related hot-
desk policies, as well as the temperature policy and the ﬂeece
jackets distribution. As suggested through our “Heating Per-
ception and Adjustments for Comfort” theme, a strict tem-
perature policy and an array of “sanctioned adjustments for
comfort” limit the amount of control that individual employ-
ees can exert. At the same time, it is worth highlighting how
our data also indicates that policy implementation is not (or
not always) literal or straight-forward, and reveals the spec-
trum of strategies and negotiations that exist around it. At one
end of such a spectrum employees take advantage of sanc-
tioned strategies to improve their wellbeing, such as bringing
in extra clothing and drinking hot beverages – the policy is
adhered to. In other cases, employees’ complaints lead en-
ergy managers to relax the temperature policy. In other cases
still, employees contravene policy to make “personal adjust-
ments for comfort” or simply ignore the hot-desk policy, re-
turning always to the same location in the ofﬁce. All these ex-
amples indicate the potential for interventions that encourage
employees to understand and buy-in to policies; a potential,
we argue, that could be realized by interactive technology,
and that we return to later in the paper.
Our ﬁndings on the theme of “Cost and Organisation
Changes” suggest also that ofﬁce staff may ﬁnd it interest-
ing and motivating to see the relation of energy policies to
issues such as job loss (prevention) or tax. These issues link
the council’s cost of energy to their personal ﬁnancial sta-
tus, resonating to an extent with the domestic setting. Such
link is most likely rather speciﬁc to public sector organisa-
tions like Southshire Council (especially in a time of severe
job cuts), but it is interesting nonetheless. It contrasts with
previous research that suggests that employees (of a proﬁt-
making company) do not believe that they may gain personal
ﬁnancial beneﬁts from reduced workplace energy costs [22,
17].

The Bigger (Energy) Picture
In relation to sustainability, the CSCW – and related – re-
search communities have focussed mostly on electricity, fuel,
and water consumption [18]. Our participants made a num-
ber of comments that demonstrate that energy implications go
beyond the energy consumed by the AH appliances, lighting
and heating. Our theme of “Cost and Organisation Changes”
reveals the extent to which the Council’s resources are being
reorganised: the migration of staff from small ofﬁces to one
large building, the ﬂexible working policy that means staff
work remotely, the alternative strategies employees adopt to
keep themselves warm, to name but a few, all play a role. As
such, our data suggests that – especially in the context of the
workplace – it is necessary to look at a bigger energy picture.
Through the 2-to-1 desk policy, the council is encouraging
people to work from home 50% of the time and thus outsourc-
ing energy consumption. However, research has shown that
teleworkers actually tend to travel greater total distances than
conventional workers, and can consume signiﬁcant “home of-

1344

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

ﬁce” resources [19]. Heating one home for each employee is
also arguably less efﬁcient than heating one larger purpose-
built building. What is the overall balance? It may be impos-
sible to accurately calculate this for AH, but it is also overly
simplistic to simply assume that teleworking is environmen-
tally beneﬁcial.
Carbon embodied in buildings is also an issue that emerges
from our data: our participants reported that the council has
a strategy of closing buildings perceived as being energy in-
efﬁcient, and moving staff into new buildings. However, as
the experience of AH has shown, it is often the case that new
builds do not perform as expected (see “an ever-evolving sys-
tem”).
In addition, signiﬁcant amounts of energy are con-
sumed in replacing buildings (producing building materials,
transporting them to a site, actual construction, demolishing,
disposing, recycling) [3]. When the lifecycle of the build-
ing is considered rather than purely its operation, is the re-
placement of buildings (rather than refurbishment) energy ef-
ﬁcient?

IMPLICATIONS
Our ﬁndings and discussion paint a picture of buildings as
complicated energy-consuming systems of people, activities,
infrastructure and architecture. At a general level the main
implication of our work is that we need to go “beyond in-
dividual persuasion”. While such an argument had been put
forward before by others in the research community, based
mostly on reﬂection and meta-reviews [5, 21, 26, 31], we
corroborate such argument through data from our workshops
and observations. Moreover, and perhaps more importantly,
leveraging our ﬁndings from the ﬁeld, we propose three spe-
ciﬁc directions for the research community where we see op-
portunities for interactive interventions that complement and
go beyond existing interventions.
The ﬁrst two implications are largely around interactive,
ambient visualizations aimed chieﬂy at building occupants
(rather than energy and facility managers). Even though am-
bient displays have often been proposed in the context of sus-
tainable interactive technology, both in terms of research pro-
totypes (see e.g., [18, 13, 35]) and actual products (e.g., the
LEED Dynamic Plaque), the emphasis is generally on sum-
mative (usually aggregate) indicators, meant to capture the
energy performance of the buildings or its users, sometimes
in terms of monetary cost, sometimes in terms of comparison
with other buildings. However, as discussed in the previous
section, our data indicates that deﬁning metrics that can un-
ambiguously summarize the performance of a building, tak-
ing into account the complex context of usage may at times be
a difﬁcult, if not intractable problem. Therefore we propose
alternative applications of such technology.

Making Building Operation Visible
We see an opportunity in helping building inhabitants (e.g.
ofﬁce staff) better understand its operation, to promote the
development of a more accurate mental model, so that they
could more easily recognize the kind of errors discussed
above, and report them to the energy decision-makers. As
revealed by our data, decision-makers are often physically

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

distant from the buildings they are responsible for, and hence
they may lack detailed information about the building’s us-
age that is instead easily available to inhabitants. A concrete
example would be a display of the building internal temper-
ature traces over the past seven days, alongside information
about human activity in the building. The visual compari-
son of these two streams of information may reveal instances
where the empty building is heated (see e.g. Figure 2). Abun-
dant data about the building are often already available from
existing BMS installations; for example environmental infor-
mation such as internal and external temperature, humidity
and CO2. Activity data could be abstracted from presence
sensors, often already installed in buildings for security pur-
poses, or from electricity consumption logs. Such displays
will need to be made engaging, to attract attention, and easy
to understand for users who may not have technical training
– design challenges that our community is well positioned to
address [18, 13]. The participants in our W2 showed interest
and commitment to energy saving, suggesting that a well de-
signed intervention may have potential to attract the attention
of at least some employees, such as ‘energy champions’ [20].
While we argue that the topic of interactive systems that
illustrate the buildings operation to end-users is under-
investigated, it is worth highlighting that a limited number
of examples have already been published – these can pro-
vide inspiration for further development7. DoppelLab – a
platform to create representations of general sensor network
data – has been used to visualise and interrogate temperature
data in workplaces [14]. An initial deployment of the sys-
tem revealed malfunctions in the HVAC system, which had
previously gone unnoticed. Similarly, FigureEnergy is an in-
teractive system to annotate consumption logs, aimed at help-
ing users make sense of the information [10]. A deployment
of FigureEnergy with 12 households revealed that the sys-
tem can enable users to shed new light and make discoveries
around their own energy consumption. Finally, Yun et al. [47]
reported an intervention in the workplace where historical en-
ergy consumption is displayed, even though their emphasis is
on the automatic scheduling and the remote control of such
appliances (raising questions about the energy efﬁciency and
sustainability of such approach compared to a manual one).

Communicating and Contextualizing Policy
Having discussed the important role policy plays in relation
to energy consumption in the workplace, and how this aspect
is under-investigated, another important implication is to take
policy explicitly into account in the design of energy-saving
interventions. In particular, we see opportunities around re-
inforcing or enhancing policy communication, placing it in
relation to the current building operation. Local, situated dis-
plays may be a useful means of framing local working condi-
tions in terms of company policy. A speciﬁc example would
be to show building occupiers that the current temperature is
(or is not) within the policy range. Such display may reassure
them that if they felt cold or hot it would be due to subjective
perception. The display may also highlight the implications
7We exclude from this list papers that report the presentation of logs
to study participants only as a probe, rather than as a ﬁnal design,
such as [37, 46]

of adherence or deviation from policy, for example in terms of
monetary cost and equivalent job cuts. Even though our data
revealed that employees seemed generally aware of policy,
and skepticism has been expressed towards displays of the
current temperature, we believe that showing the two pieces
of information together has potential to generate reﬂection
and discussion about the policy, as well as to the more general
strategies embraced by the company. Indeed, local displays
(perhaps interactive) may be, more in general, a useful means
of engaging building occupants in two-way dialogue around
policy and organisational change.

Accounting for Energy Beyond the Building
Our research has emphasised the need to step back and con-
sider the “bigger energy picture” of the workplace. To make
it possible to design systems that reveal this picture, it is nec-
essary to look beyond the walls of the workplace. To eval-
uate embodied and outsourced energy related to workplace
activities, we must extend the reach of existing monitoring
systems to track data on consumption that is both physically
remote and temporally remote. For example, taking into ac-
count the energy consumed by staff working from home, but
also energy consumed in constructing and demolishing the
workplace, including the embedded energy costs of different
construction materials [1, 3]. To this end, it is good to see
that some certiﬁcation programmes, such as LEED, already
consider inhabitants transportation surveys to inﬂuence the
performance score of a building, yet our data suggests oppor-
tunities to extend the scope of analysis even further.
Information systems could be developed to integrate ele-
ments of life-cycle analysis into the organisation’s strategic
decision-making, not just in building certiﬁcation. However,
given the range of actors and length of time involved in a
building’s life, maintaining provenance of the data may be
difﬁcult, and developing effective UIs to query such data is
an open challenge [6]. Similarly, most life-cycle analysis is
based on approximations and projections, so additional chal-
lenges involve the truthful representation of such sources of
uncertainty, while still making the displayed information ac-
tionable.
It is important to question not just the extent to
which such systems might provide useful insights (how much
detail is it useful for energy decision-makers to know?), but
also the extent to which it is legal or ethical for an organisa-
tion to track an employee working from home. Researchers
have shown how it is possible to infer television-watching and
eating habits – among other personal insights – from domes-
tic energy data [32]. We question whether staff would ac-
cept such monitoring, and suggest that designers of systems
that harvest data from outside the workplace must consider
whether and how to do so while being privacy-preserving.

CONCLUSION
This paper has presented a study of energy consumption and
management in one particular building – Arrow Hill – used
by a UK district council. Our approach involved collabora-
tion with a broad range of stakeholders over two workshops,
maintaining a long-term relationship with the organisation,
as well as using real data from building systems as a prompt
for critical interrogation. Such a combination of techniques

1345

allowed us to extract a number of novel ﬁndings, validating
our approach. The usage of real building data led us to a dis-
cussion of how errors in building operation happen – such
as those observed during our study of Arrow Hill – and how
they might be detected. The involvement of different stake-
holders revealed inconsistencies in the way they understand
the building as a complex system, as well as the relationships
across policy, energy and comfort. Drawing upon these ﬁnd-
ings, our contribution is in highlighting the complexity that
surrounds energy consumption in the workplace, and putting
forward speciﬁc opportunities to design interventions, while
also emphasising the need for further research in this area.
At a more general level, our ﬁndings and subsequent themes
empirically corroborate the suggestions made by previous lit-
erature, but also extend this previous research. While prior
work reported interventions to address the (limited) control
available to individuals within an ofﬁce environment [30,
47], our engagement of both decision-makers and ofﬁce staff
demonstrated that both sets of stakeholders have distinct roles
to play in collaboratively managing the building, bringing to-
gether knowledge of context, how the building functions and
the ability to exert control. Little can be found in the literature
to date about the role that interactive technology may take
around policy to support sustainability. Even though others
have convincingly questioned or criticised the emphasis on
individual consumers found behind most sustainable HCI in-
terventions [5, 21, 26, 31, 43], it is rare to ﬁnd explicit and
direct references to policies, whether at a company or public
level. We consider this to be an important gap in the litera-
ture, given the central role that policy plays in the daily life
of the workplace as well as, more generally, in society.
Finally, we note that our implications touch a range of re-
search communities: designing sensing systems that capture
the bigger energy picture of transient workforces and full
building life-cycles draws on the expertise of the ubicomp
community, while such systems raise ethical implications that
will require the engagement of privacy researchers. We call
on the CSCW and HCI communities to design interventions
that encourage staff and decision-makers to collaborate on the
task of error-ﬁxing, and to consider how to incorporate repre-
sentations of policy directly into such interventions.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Southshire Council and the workshop participants
for their contributions. This work was supported by the EP-
SRC CTech project (EP/K002589/1), and approved by The
University of Nottingham Computer Science Ethics Com-
mittee. The data referred to in this paper can be found at
http://dx.doi.org/10.5258/SOTON/382356.

REFERENCES
1. Michael F. Ashby. 2013. Materials and the Environment

(second ed.). Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385971-6.
00025-7

2. Eric P.S. Baumer and M. Six Silberman. 2011. When the

Implication is Not to Design (Technology). In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human

1346

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’11). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 2271–2274. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979275

3. Mike Berners-Lee. 2010. How bad are bananas?: the
carbon footprint of everything. Proﬁle Books, London,
UK.

4. Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using

thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative research in
psychology 3, 2 (2006), 77–101.

5. Hronn Brynjarsdottir, Maria Hkansson, James Pierce,

Eric Baumer, Carl DiSalvo, and Phoebe Sengers. 2012.
Sustainably Unpersuaded: How Persuasion Narrows Our
Vision of Sustainability. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 947–956. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2208539

6. Lucian Carata, Sherif Akoush, Nikilesh Balakrishnan,
Thomas Bytheway, Ripduman Sohan, Margo Seltzer,
and Andy Hopper. 2014. A Primer on Provenance.
Queue 12, 3, Article 10 (March 2014), 14 pages. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2602649.2602651

7. Nico Castelli, Niko Sch¨onau, Gunnar Stevens, Tobias

Schwartz, and Timo Jakobi. 2015. Role-based Eco-info
Systems: An Organizational Theoretical View of
Sustainable HCI at Work. In ECIS 2015 Completed
Research Papers. AISeL, M¨unster, Germany, 1–8. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.18151/7217284

8. Marshini Chetty, David Tran, and Rebecca E. Grinter.

2008. Getting to Green: Understanding Resource
Consumption in the Home. In Proceedings of the 10th
International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing
(UbiComp ’08). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 242–251.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1409635.1409668

9. Adrian K. Clear, Janine Morley, Mike Hazas, Adrian

Friday, and Oliver Bates. 2013. Understanding Adaptive
Thermal Comfort: New Directions for UbiComp. In
Proceedings of the 2013 ACM International Joint
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing
(UbiComp ’13). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 113–122.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2493432.2493451

10. Enrico Costanza, Sarvapali D. Ramchurn, and

Nicholas R. Jennings. 2012. Understanding Domestic
Energy Consumption Through Interactive Visualisation:
A Field Study. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM
Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp ’12).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 216–225. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2370216.2370251

11. Sarah Darby. 2006. The Effectiveness of Feedback on

Energy Consumption. Technical Report. Environmental
Change Institute.

12. Tawanna R. Dillahunt and Jennifer Mankoff. 2014.
Understanding Factors of Successful Engagement
Around Energy Consumption Between and Among
Households. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
& Social Computing (CSCW ’14). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 1246–1257. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2531602.2531626

13. Carl DiSalvo, Phoebe Sengers, and Hr¨onn

Brynjarsd´ottir. 2010. Mapping the Landscape of
Sustainable HCI. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’10). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1975–1984.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753625

14. G. Dublon, L.S. Pardue, B. Mayton, N. Swartz, N.

Joliat, P. Hurst, and J.A. Paradiso. 2011. DoppelLab:
Tools for exploring and harnessing multimodal sensor
network data. In Sensors. IEEE, New York, US,
1612–1615. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICSENS.2011.6126903

15. M. Feldmeier and J.A. Paradiso. 2010. Personalized

HVAC control system. In Internet of Things (IOT), 2010.
IoT Conference, Tokyo, JP, 1–8. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IOT.2010.5678444

16. Corinna Fischer. 2008. Feedback on household

electricity consumption: a tool for saving energy?
Energy efﬁciency 1, 1 (2008), 79–104.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12053-008-9009-7
17. Derek Foster, Shaun Lawson, Jamie Wardman, Mark

Blythe, and Conor Linehan. 2012. ”Watts in It for Me?”:
Design Implications for Implementing Effective Energy
Interventions in Organisations. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’12). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
2357–2366. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2208396

18. Jon Froehlich, Leah Findlater, and James Landay. 2010.

The Design of Eco-feedback Technology. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’10). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 1999–2008. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753629

19. Christian Fuchs. 2008. The implications of new
information and communication technologies for
sustainability. Environment, Development and
Sustainability 10, 3 (2008), 291–309. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10668-006-9065-0

20. Tom Hargreaves. 2011. Practice-ing behaviour change:

Applying social practice theory to pro-environmental
behaviour change. Journal of Consumer Culture 11, 1,
Article 1 (2011), 21 pages. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1469540510390500

21. Mike Hazas, A. J. Bernheim Brush, and James Scott.

2012. Sustainability Does Not Begin with the Individual.
interactions 19, 5 (Sept. 2012), 14–17. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2334184.2334189

22. Mohit Jain, Ankit Agrawal, Sunil K. Ghai, Khai N.

Truong, and Deva P. Seetharam. 2013. ”We Are Not in
the Loop”: Resource Wastage and Conservation Attitude

1347

of Employees in Indian Workplace. In Proceedings of
the 2013 ACM International Joint Conference on
Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp ’13).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 687–696. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2493432.2493444

23. Marc Jentsch, Marco Jahn, Ferry Pramudianto, Jonathan

Simon, and Amro Al-Akkad. 2011. An Energy-Saving
Support System for Ofﬁce Environments. In Human
Behavior Understanding, AlbertAli Salah and Bruno
Lepri (Eds.). Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol.
7065. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, 83–92. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-25446-8_10

24. Phil Jones. 2012. Problems with sub-metering energy

consumption in UK non domestic buildings. In ASHRAE
Technical Symposium. CIBSE, London, UK, 11.
25. Cecilia Katzeff, Loove Broms, Li J¨onsson, Ulrika
Westholm, and Minna R¨as¨anen. 2013. Exploring
Sustainable Practices in Workplace Settings Through
Visualizing Electricity Consumption. ACM Trans.
Comput.-Hum. Interact. 20, 5, Article 31 (Nov. 2013),
22 pages. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2501526

26. Bran Knowles, Lynne Blair, Paul Coulton, and Mark

Lochrie. 2014. Rethinking Plan A for Sustainable HCI.
In Proceedings of the 32Nd Annual ACM Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’14). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 3593–3596. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557311

27. Milan Milenkovic, Ulf Hanebutte, Yonghong Huang,
David Prendergast, and Han Pham. 2013. Improving
User Comfort and Ofﬁce Energy Efﬁciency with POEM
(Personal Ofﬁce Energy Monitor). In CHI ’13 Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI EA ’13). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1455–1460.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2468356.2468616

28. Guy R. Newsham, Sandra Mancini, and Benjamin J.
Birt. 2009. Do LEED-certiﬁed buildings save energy?
Yes, but. Energy and Buildings 41, 8 (2009), 897 – 905.
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2009.03.014

29. Donald A Norman. 2013. The design of everyday things.

Basic books, New York, USA.

30. Brian Orland, Nilam Ram, Dean Lang, Kevin Houser,

Nate Kling, and Michael Coccia. 2014. Saving energy in
an ofﬁce environment: A serious game intervention.
Energy and Buildings 74 (2014), 43 – 52. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2014.01.036

31. Daniel Pargman and Barath Raghavan. 2014. Rethinking

Sustainability in Computing: From Buzzword to
Non-negotiable Limits. In Proceedings of the 8th Nordic
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Fun, Fast,
Foundational (NordiCHI ’14). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 638–647. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2639189.2639228

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

40. Elizabeth Shove, Gordon Walker, and Sam Brown.

2014. Material culture, room temperature and the social
organisation of thermal energy. Journal of Material
Culture 19, 2 (2014), 113–124. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1359183514525084

41. Frans W Siero, Arnold B Bakker, Gerda B Dekker, and

Marcel TC Van Den Burg. 1996. Changing
organizational energy consumption behaviour through
comparative feedback. Journal of environmental
psychology 16, 3 (1996), 235–246.

42. Jonathan Simon, Marco Jahn, and Amro Al-Akkad.

2012. Saving Energy at Work: The Design of a
Pervasive Game for Ofﬁce Spaces. In Proceedings of the
11th International Conference on Mobile and
Ubiquitous Multimedia (MUM ’12). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, Article 9, 4 pages. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2406367.2406379

43. Yolande A.A. Strengers. 2011. Designing Eco-feedback

Systems for Everyday Life. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’11). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
2135–2144. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979252
44. Evangelos Tolias, Enrico Costanza, Alex Rogers,

Benjamin Bedwell, and Nick Banks. 2015. IdleWars: an
Evaluation of a Pervasive Game to Promote Sustainable
Behaviour in the Workplace. In International
Conference on Entertainment Computing (ICEC).
Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, 14.
http://eprints.soton.ac.uk/378861/

45. Carbon Trust. 2007. Advanced metering for SMEs:
Carbon and cost savings. Technical Report. Carbon
Trust.

46. Rayoung Yang, Mark W. Newman, and Jodi Forlizzi.

2014. Making Sustainability Sustainable: Challenges in
the Design of Eco-interaction Technologies. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’14). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 823–832. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557380

47. Ray Yun, Azizan Aziz, Peter Scupelli, Bertrand

Lasternas, Chenlu Zhang, and Vivian Loftness. 2015.
Beyond Eco-Feedback: Adding Online Manual and
Automated Controls to Promote Workplace
Sustainability. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’15). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1989–1992.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702268

32. Shwetak N. Patel, Thomas Robertson, Julie A. Kientz,

Matthew S. Reynolds, and Gregory D. Abowd. 2007. At
the Flick of a Switch: Detecting and Classifying Unique
Electrical Events on the Residential Power Line. In
Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on
Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp ’07). Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 271–288. http:
//dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1771592.1771608

33. Therese Peffer, Marco Pritoni, Alan Meier, Cecilia

Aragon, and Daniel Perry. 2011. How people use
thermostats in homes: A review. Building and
Environment 46, 12 (2011), 2529 – 2541. DOI:http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2011.06.002
34. James Pierce and Eric Paulos. 2012. Beyond Energy
Monitors: Interaction, Energy, and Emerging Energy
Systems. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’12). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 665–674. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2207771

35. Zachary Pousman, Hafez Rouzati, and John Stasko.
2008. Imprint, a Community Visualization of Printer
Data: Designing for Open-ended Engagement on
Sustainability. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
(CSCW ’08). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 13–16. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1460563.1460568

36. James Reason. 1990. Human error. Cambridge

university press, Cambridge, UK.

37. Tobias Schwartz, Matthias Betz, Leonardo Ramirez, and

Gunnar Stevens. 2010. Sustainable Energy Practices at
Work: Understanding the Role of Workers in Energy
Conservation. In Proceedings of the 6th Nordic
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Extending
Boundaries (NordiCHI ’10). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 452–462. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1868914.1868966

38. Tobias Schwartz, Gunnar Stevens, Leonardo Ramirez,

and Volker Wulf. 2013. Uncovering Practices of Making
Energy Consumption Accountable: A
Phenomenological Inquiry. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum.
Interact. 20, 2, Article 12 (May 2013), 30 pages. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2463579.2463583

39. John H. Scoﬁeld. 2009. Do LEED-certiﬁed buildings

save energy? Not really... Energy and Buildings 41, 12
(2009), 1386 – 1390. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2009.08.006

1348

