CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Opportunities and Challenges Around a Tool for Social and

Public Web Activity Tracking

Amy X. Zhang

MIT CSAIL

Cambridge, MA

axz@mit.edu

Joshua Blum
MIT CSAIL

Cambridge, MA
joshblum@mit.edu

David R. Karger

MIT CSAIL

Cambridge, MA
karger@mit.edu

ABSTRACT
While the web contains many social websites, people are
generally left in the dark about the activities of other peo-
ple traversing the web as a whole. In this paper, we explore
the potential beneﬁts and privacy considerations around gen-
erating a real-time, publicly accessible stream of web activity
where users can publish chosen parts of their web browsing
data. Taking inspiration from social media systems, we de-
scribe individual beneﬁts that can be unlocked by such shar-
ing and that may incentivize users to publish aspects of their
browsing. We ask whether and how these beneﬁts outweigh
potential costs in lost privacy. We conduct our study of public
web activity sharing through scenario-based interviews and a
ﬁeld deployment of a tool for web activity sharing.

Author Keywords
web browsing; privacy; web tracking; sharing motivations;
activity traces; self-presentation; web analytics; social media

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.3. Group and Organization Interfaces: Web-based inter-
action; Computer-supported cooperative work

INTRODUCTION
The global record of people’s browsing activity on the web
is a treasure trove of valuable data. To see this, we need only
consider the tremendous amount of effort and money that cor-
porations put into tracking, collecting, analyzing, and selling
this data, often without users’ consent or even awareness [1,
29]. Arguably, this is one of the primary drivers of the Inter-
net market. It is notable, therefore, how little of this valuable
data is accessible to the end users who generate it.
In contrast to this involuntarily-shared and generally inacces-
sible data, social media tools like Facebook and Twitter help
users voluntarily share details about their whereabouts, inter-
ests, emotions, and other aspects of their day-to-day life, for
purposes such as building a public persona and interacting
with friends. This does not imply, however, that users do not

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise,
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW ’16, February 27–March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA
Copyright © 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02 $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819949

care about their privacy; rather, users are often very aware
and can tailor their sharing depending on the context [20].
If users could also publish chosen parts of their web activity
traces this way, then instead of only beneﬁting organizations,
shared data could directly beneﬁt its sharers. The information
could provide a wealth of new social opportunities that users
could leverage, much as with social media. For instance, ex-
troverts may welcome the opportunity to “nanoblog,” sharing
even more details about their daily browsing without needing
to construct tweets. Others may consume this information to
discover interesting new content, or may value encountering
and communicating with friends or strangers.
In this paper, we explore a variety of ways that sharing web
activity information to friends or to the public can offer direct
beneﬁts to the individuals involved. We describe a prototype
system, Eyebrowse, that uses a real-time global web log to
let people “bump into” their friends on the web, discuss what
they’re seeing in real time, see where crowds are gathering
and follow them to ﬁnd new places, blaze trails though the
web, and leave marks of their presence for others to see.
While appealing, these potential beneﬁts also potentially in-
cur a cost in lost privacy. Therefore, we devote a substan-
tial portion of this paper to exploring people’s privacy pref-
erences. While there is widespread revulsion for the involun-
tary surveillance imposed by corporations and governments
for their own beneﬁt, we focus here on exploring what kinds
of voluntary sharing people may wish to engage in to beneﬁt
themselves, their friends, or society. We do so ﬁrst through a
series of scenario-based inteviews that describe hypothetical
sharing features that people might ﬁnd appealing on the web.
We then present results of a preliminary ﬁeld deployment of
the Eyebrowse system.
While there has been substantial work studying attitudes to-
wards, methods for, and protections from the current adver-
sarial practices of involuntary web tracking, we have found
little work considering cost-beneﬁt tradeoffs around letting
end-users leverage the global web trace for their own beneﬁt.
We believe this work offers new insights into this opportunity.
Furthermore, a model where users explicitly choose to share
their data pushes back against the current assumption that the
only way to collect browsing data is to take it surreptitiously.

RELATED WORK
Our work is informed by three lines of research: the ﬁrst on
the issues of privacy that have arisen due to online surveil-

913

lance and ways to mitigate them, the second on the interplay
of privacy and publicity in social media, and the third on the
opportunities that lie in harnessing web activity.

Privacy, Surveillance, and the Web
In the domain of web browsing, researchers have shown
that many Internet users have little idea about the extent to
which and the nature of how they are tracked [29, 30], and
when questioned, reject the status quo of online tracking [17].
Some researchers posit that it is not so much the restriction
of access to personal information that users care about, but
that information moves appropriately according to the con-
text [25]. Studies have also shown that different aspects of
web activity data have different privacy levels depending on
the user and the content [1, 8]. This leads us to consider
whether there are areas on the web that users consider public
and are willing or even eager to share with others.
There is a great deal of research on designing for privacy in
technical systems [14], such as ubiquitous computing sys-
tems [10], mobile apps [26], location-based services [28], and
more. Work related to privacy and web browsing primarily
focus on restricting tracking or alerting users [7], or on how
to share browsing data, but only to researchers [21]. Our re-
search expands on this work by considering how to design for
sharing browsing activity in the cases where users may want
to share, while still respecting users’ privacy preferences.

Balance between Privacy and Publicity with Social Media
With the advent of social media, individuals now share large
amounts of information about themselves online and also
gather information about their peers, in a form of social
surveillance [19]. This type of sharing allows users to gain
social capital [4] and also relies on them to self-monitor their
actions and balance their levels of publicity and privacy [20].
There are a host of privacy issues related to social media,
including that users make decisions about sharing they re-
gret [32], that interfaces aren’t as nuanced in their controls
as necessary [20], and that a power imbalance exists between
users and companies that collect this data [2]. Yet a voluntary
model of self-disclosure can counter the hierarchical models
of power that come with traditional surveillance and poten-
tially put more control in the hands of users.
Many social media users care more about how and what in-
formation gets shared with peers than with corporations [20],
and thus privacy controls must be developed with this in
mind. From studying social media sites like Facebook, it is
clear that the design of privacy controls cannot be so cumber-
some that users ignore them entirely nor so one-dimensional
as to prevent sufﬁcient amount of personalization [11]. In-
stead privacy interventions succeed when they take into ac-
count the inherent design conﬂicts [34] and existing social
dynamics of how and why users share in the ﬁrst place [32].

Using and Sharing Web Activity
Previous attempts to release large repositories of web activ-
ity all involved anonymized logs. One infamous attempt was
the AOL Query Log Dataset, which showed that anonymity
is not enough to hide the identities of users. Other projects

914

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

collected web activity for the purpose of contributing to re-
search. Challenges there involved convincing users to con-
tribute if they were volunteering [9], inability to scale if they
were being paid [21], and complications around preserving
anonymity [31]. Our research aims to tackle motivation by
introducing social incentives that would beneﬁt users if their
data were released for peer and public consumption.
When it comes to the social beneﬁts of sharing activity
traces, researchers have demonstrated the advantages of hav-
ing a transparent activity stream within communities such as
Wikipedia [13] and Github [3], or for social recommenda-
tions [24]. Also, a long line of research has studied how
to make online spaces mimic those of real-life ones in order
to promote qualities like serendipity [12]. We use this prior
work to consider what social beneﬁts to study and build into
our web activity sharing tool. It also informs our choice of
participants and the use cases we envision.
Finally, researchers have studied and built tools that involve
sharing web activity traces for more niche purposes, such
as visualizing actions within a page [15], adding citations
within a technical post [6], or generating content recommen-
dations [16]. Some web browsing applications that are more
social in nature also exist, such as Flock, Torch, or Beamrise,
though none have been studied academically. However, most
of these browsers focus on interfacing with different social
media systems as opposed to harnessing browsing informa-
tion, and none have considered public sharing. Our research
builds upon this prior work by considering a general-purpose
use case for publicly sharing browsing data.

METHOD
We conducted a qualitative study with scenario-based inter-
views followed by a ﬁeld study of a web activity sharing tool.
The main goal of the interviews was to understand users’ per-
ceptions about sharing aspects of their browsing activity and
to assist in the design of said tool. The ﬁeld study then al-
lowed users to share aspects of their activity publicly and par-
ticipate socially while browsing.

Participants
Because we were interested in the social aspects of web
browsing, we chose to recruit small groups of friends or col-
leagues to participate in both the interviews and ﬁeld study.
The friend groups represent general Internet users that might
be interested in sharing primarily with other friends. We also
recruited professionals in the areas of news and technology,
where users may additionally be interested in the beneﬁts of
sharing with the public or with work colleagues. Our choice
of these ﬁelds draws from popular systems such as Twitter
or Github, where many users publicly share the articles they
read or the work they conduct, respectively. These kinds of
users may also be critical early adopters that draw in more
everyday users interested in their activity.

● FRIENDS is a group of 5 close friends and recent graduates

of a mid-sized U.S. university that currently live in differ-
ent areas of the world. They keep in touch via email to
share and discuss news and issues. Their occupations range
from non-proﬁt manager, to consultant, to business analyst.

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

FRIENDS
NEWS
TECH

5
7
4

Interviewed Average Age

22.6
35.4
28

Ratio of Females

2/5
4/7
0/4

Table 1. Number of people participating in the interviews and basic
demographics.

They were chosen in order to understand how friend groups
and people that use the Internet mostly for personal enter-
tainment might feel about sharing browsing information.

● FRIENDS-2 is a separate friend group of 11 undergraduate
● NEWS is a group of 7 mid-career acquaintances related to

and graduate exchange students at a university in Israel.
This group was not interviewed but participated in the ﬁeld
deployment. They were chosen as yet another friend group
to study but that was co-located.

the news industry, primarily journalists. They are an in-
ternational group, with members coming from 5 different
countries. During the study, they were all co-located in the
U.S. and enrolled in a seminar together. This group was
chosen as a set of people that are heavier news readers, in-
teract with the news on a professional basis, and maintain
active public personas.

● TECH is a group of 4 graduate students working together in

a computer science lab at an Israeli university. This group
was chosen as a set of technologically savvy individuals
that have an understanding of online tracking, contribute
to open source, and conduct most of their work online.

Interviews
The interviews were conducted with participants in 3 out of
the 4 groups during April and May of 2015. Demographic
information about each group is listed in Table 1. Each inter-
view took between 20 and 80 minutes, and interviewees were
compensated $10 for their time. In the interviews, we delved
into how users felt about a hypothetical tool that could share
aspects of their web activity with friends and with the pub-
lic. We were interested in the utility, interest, and privacy
concerns that a speciﬁc feature would generate for a user,
both as a consumer and a producer. The format of the in-
terviews took inspiration from prior research [18] that used
scenarios and hypotheticals to identify users’ privacy bound-
aries. The speciﬁc scenarios will be described in more detail
below. We chose to use interviews as opposed to surveys as
many of the hypotheticals necessitated further explanation by
the interviewee, and we were interested in users’ reasoning.
The interviews then concluded with a set of more open-ended
questions about interviewees’ opinions on surveillance on the
web and sharing web activity with third parties and peers.
The interviews were conducted in person by the 1st and 2nd
authors. They were recorded then transcribed and coded by
the 1st and 2nd authors using standard qualitative coding
techniques [22], which led to 74 codes after multiple itera-
tions. During the course of the interviews and coding process,
the codes as well as emerging themes were discussed among
members of the research team. Because of the small number
of interview participants, our interview ﬁndings should be re-
garded as indicative.

915

FRIENDS
FRIENDS-2

NEWS
TECH

4
11
5
4

Participants Average Age

22.5
22.6
35.2
28

Ratio of Females

2/4
5/11
3/5
0/4

Table 2. Number of people participating in the ﬁeld study and basic
demographics.

Field Study
Besides the scenario-based interviews, we also wanted to ob-
serve what users would do when it came to real-life situations.
For this reason, we designed and built Eyebrowse, an open
source social media tool for viewing people’s shared web ac-
tivity and a companion Chrome extension that allows users
to share certain aspects of their browsing and that provides
some social experiences. We describe the tool in more detail
further in the paper. We built the tool over the course of many
months and allowed people on the web to freely use it as we
iterated. Though we did not release it widely, we publicized it
at different times to various groups, including to a number of
the participants mentioned earlier. Thus several participants
were trying Eyebrowse voluntarily for different extended pe-
riods of time. While these users helped provide information
about what they were willing to share, the lack of peers using
the system meant that social features would be less useful or
interesting. Thus, at the conclusion of the interviews, we also
conducted a formal week-long ﬁeld study in order to ensure
greater adoption within peer groups.
We invited all interview subjects to participate in the ﬁeld
study and compensated the ones who agreed to participate
$10. In Table 2, we report their demographics. We asked all
participants to register for the Eyebrowse website and down-
load the extension. Participants were also asked to visit the
website at least once a day to see what other people shared.
They were not required to share anything, nor were they re-
quired to participate in any social activities. They were told
that all web activity they chose to share would be released on
the website and viewable publicly. For the purposes of this
study, we separately obtained consent to our collecting addi-
tional statistics about these users’ Eyebrowse activities, such
as links they clicked on from the Eyebrowse website. None
of this additional information was visible to any of the partic-
ipants. At the conclusion of the ﬁeld study, participants were
given an exit survey where they were asked about their expe-
rience with the tool. While we report numbers on the usage
of the system and some raw survey results, these do not hold
statistical signiﬁcance due to the small sample size. Further
discussion of the limitations of our ﬁndings can be found in
the Limitations section.

PRIVACY AND WEB ACTIVITY SHARING
We ﬁrst turn towards the potential privacy concerns around
sharing browsing activity and how to design a system so as
to alleviate these concerns. Following this section, we con-
sider potential social features that could incentivize users to
share aspects of their browsing data. Finally, we report the
results of the ﬁeld study, where we analyze what people actu-
ally chose to share and their reactions to using the tool.

Web Surveillance Today: Perception versus Reality
We begin by exploring the perceptions that interviewees had
about sharing their data with third parties. We were interested
in understanding how this might motivate a new method of
data collection as well as inform our design of a web activity
sharing tool. We found that interviewees had varying levels of
understanding of how they were tracked while browsing, as
well as perceptions that did not always align with reality. As
this topic is well covered in prior research [17, 29], we only
brieﬂy mention the main themes that went on to be relevant
in our consideration and design of Eyebrowse.
Ownership of Browsing Data. First, most interviewees
(11/16) expressed a strong sense of ownership over their
browsing data, including a right to know who was collecting
their data, as well as when, where, and for what purpose:

Companies that...track what you do and then sell it...[is]
analogous to theft because they are taking away from you
information that you produced yourself...without you know-
ing it to make money...that’s where the problem is, the not
knowing. You feel a bit like a fool you know? –NEWS

Ownership also suggests power to give the data away. Some
interviewees considered how if they had the ability to share
their data with others,
they could then decide who they
wanted to beneﬁt from their data:

If I’m getting the most relevant results from Google because
they have the most information about me? OK. If Bing had
the same amount of information about my behavior? Could
they actually be doing a better job and might they offer me
more controls? Being able to transfer that from one party
to another may be kind of cool. –NEWS

Differing Levels of Privacy. All interviewees expressed that
browsing was often a private activity. Interviewees believed
that some aspects of browsing were more sensitive and some
aspects less, with many of these considerations personal in
nature, echoing prior work [1, 8]. When asked, interviewees
cited examples of areas on the web where they preferred no
one knew they visited as well as areas where they would be
unhappy with strangers knowing, including medical websites,
dating, shopping, politics, banking, and more.
Expectation of a Trade. Most interviewees (14/16) had an
expectation that when releasing their browsing data to com-
panies, they would receive something in return. These inter-
viewees treated the choice to use a service as implicit consent
to be tracked while on that service [25]. It was because of this
expectation of a trade that many interviewees were affronted
by companies that tracked them without providing services in
return. Speaking about Facebook, one interviewee said:

Why should they be able to know what sites I’m going on
if I didn’t go there through them? It’s not through their
merit that I ended up on this site about blueberry pie. They
have no claim to that information, as far as I’m concerned.
–FRIENDS

In several cases, interviewees saw the trade as beneﬁcial to
them only so long as the data was used to improve their expe-
rience. Unfortunately, some interviewees expressed unhappi-
ness with some of the services their data was used to create,
such as personalized advertising or incorrect or limiting rec-
ommendations, with little recourse to rectify the situation.

916

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Summary. From the interviews, there was a stark differ-
ence between users’ perceptions and desires and the status
quo of web surveillance, which is arguably unethical [25, 29].
Though browsing data provides immense value to corpora-
tions, the people providing the data are not receiving much of
the beneﬁt. They cannot choose to give their data to services
they wish to support nor do they have a say in how the ser-
vices behave or what the services can and cannot track. It is
also apparent that far more data is being gathered than would
be if users were in charge.

Privacy Considerations when Sharing Web Activity
Based on these ﬁndings, we consider how a system for web
activity sharing with peers and the public would need to act in
order to be successful. In many ways, sharing information to
the public, including to friends or peers, is more fraught than
sharing to corporations or governments [20]:

I don’t really care as much about Big Brother or whatever
knowing, because I ﬁgure the internet companies already
know everything.
It’s more that I don’t want to have an
embarrassing instance with friends or family. –FRIENDS

Many of the concerns users had were similar to ones voiced
earlier about sharing with organizations, but were now ex-
acerbated due to the possibility that friends or acquaintances
would also know. We mention the most salient ones below.
Misrepresentation. Several interviewees (4/16) were con-
cerned with being misrepresented by others based on aspects
of their browsing behavior. Echoing prior work on context
collapse in social media [20], some interviewees mentioned
innocuous data that might be misinterpreted by loved ones or
friends when not understood in context.
Inadvertently Revealing Information. Other interviewees
(6/16) were concerned about revealing information about
themselves or about others. For instance, three journalists
were concerned about how they might leak information about
their work that they wanted to keep secret or about trusted
sources. Other people mentioned scenarios such as keeping
information away from bosses that were nosey or having a
secret love affair. Some people discussed how they were wor-
ried they or others might interpret the settings incorrectly and
accidentally share things they meant to keep private.
Concern About Judgement. Some interviewees (4/16) were
worried about being criticized for the pages that they visited,
such as a journalist concerned her audience might disapprove
of her research methods. One TECH interviewee mentioned
his worry that people might judge him for looking up answers
to simple questions on StackOverﬂow. Other interviewees did
not want to broadcast things such as how long they spend on
Facebook or how they read articles such as gossip columns.
Summary. From the interviewees’ overall responses, it is
clear a tool for web activity sharing with friends and with
the public needs effective and transparent privacy controls,
even if users are already giving away their data wholesale to
unknown corporations. Given users’ expectation of a trade for
data, there should also be obvious beneﬁts to users in return
for the use of their data.

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Ways to Control What to Share
Given the concerns voiced by interviewees, we turn to con-
sidering how users might want to control what they share.
Domain-Level Control. As we found earlier, interviewees
had differing acceptable levels of privacy for different web-
sites that were often content-based, echoing prior work [1][8].
This led us to consider whether an opt-in whitelisting ap-
proach at the domain level might work well. Many intervie-
wees (9/16) were receptive to the idea of sharing on a domain-
by-domain basis. Several interviewees felt that domains re-
lated to news would be for the most part uncontroversial and
perhaps also interesting to share. In addition, TECH users felt
it would be ﬁne to share programming-related websites. One
interviewee explained why he would whitelist news websites
and share with his friends or even the public:

...I don’t think there any domains for which I would be
sometimes okay and sometimes not okay. If it were some-
times not okay, I would just not whitelist the domain...I
can’t think of a situation in which I would read an article
and not want my friends to know. And then, as a separate
question, not want the public to know. –FRIENDS

Time-Based Toggling. Some interviewees wanted the ability
to be able to hide the time or to turn sharing on and off during
certain parts of the day, such as during work hours or while
they were doing certain tasks:

No, I hate to lie but maybe to hide the time would be nice
because you did not answer the phone and you don’t want
them to know that you were awake. –TECH

Another interviewee, a journalist, wanted to be able to turn all
sharing on during parts of the day when working instead of
following a more cumbersome domain whitelisting approach.
Sharing Anonymously or in Aggregate. Most interviewees
(14/16) felt uncomfortable about sharing aspects of their data
publicly. Some interviewees thought they would feel more
comfortable if it were somehow anonymous or only appeared
in aggregate, though this would make some social beneﬁts
unattainable. Given the possibility of de-anonymization, as
happened with the AOL Query Log Dataset, a anonymization
feature might be unwise to offer, even if users want it. There
were other ways that interviewees wanted to be able to con-
trol their sharing. Some interviewees felt that they would be
more willing to whitelist certain domains if they could ob-
fuscate certain details, such as the speciﬁc page they were on
within the domain, the amount of time spent on a page, or the
time of day the visit occurred. However, these controls would
necessarily add complexity to the decision to share and would
need to be balanced with clear design.

SOCIAL BENEFITS OF WEB ACTIVITY SHARING
As expressed earlier and in prior work [26], people wanted
incentives for sharing data.
In this section, we turn to ex-
isting social media features to consider what potential bene-
ﬁts could be unlocked with shared web activity data. With
each feature, we gauged impressions using scenarios posed
to interviewees. A scenario began with something that the in-
terviewee was familiar with, and we provided screenshots of
existing systems as visual cues. Then for each scenario, we

designed a set of hypotheticals to present to interviewees that
varied different aspects of the system and asked for their reac-
tion. One set of hypotheticals broadened the existing system
in question so that it would exist ﬁrst on other pages on the
web and then on every page on the web. Another set of hypo-
theticals asked interviewees to consider sharing information
ﬁrst only with friends and then to the public. Some hypothet-
icals included screenshots of aspects of the Eyebrowse tool
we built to give users visual examples.
Visibility on a Webpage. We asked interviewees to consider
websites that showed who else was online at the same time,
such as on Facebook or Google Hangouts. When asked to
then consider having the same visibility feature on speciﬁc
webpages on the Internet or on any webpage on the Internet,
many interviewees (8/16) responded positively:

Maybe I’ll realize that this random guy in my entryway
is always on Epicurious looking up recipes just like me.
That’s cool. Then, if you’re on speciﬁc pages and it’s show-
ing you who is on that actual page...then you could know
that you can have a conversation with someone about it
later. –FRIENDS

Most interviewees wanted the visibility feature to only ap-
pear on certain websites, much as they preferred to share their
information publicly only about certain domains. Some in-
terviewees preferred to only be visible to friends instead of
the public. Other interviewees didn’t mind being visible pub-
licly but were only interested in learning about people they
knew. Interviewees were also concerned about getting dis-
tracted by others and wanted the ability to go incognito when
doing work or focusing on a private task.
Chatting and Commenting on a Webpage. Many intervie-
wees (9/16) saw beneﬁt in being able to chat in real-time
with other people on the same webpage or leave comments
on pages anywhere on the web. One interviewee mentioned
trying to learn more about data hosted on a page online, while
another saw utility in real-time chat on StackOverﬂow:

The comments that were available on that page were from
other people asking for updated data... They were relatively
recent. I knew that there was a lot of interest in it. It would
have been really great to be able to see who else was ac-
tively on the page...and maybe have a, “Hey are you look-
ing at this too? Do you know anywhere else?” Being able
to use them as a piece of support for the Internet. –NEWS
StackOverﬂow...people will post their comments, but it will
be much easier to chat with other people that are currently
solving the same problem, and to discuss things. –TECH

Interviewees also preferred having the ability to block people
or to leave chats when they were done or were busy else-
where. More members of NEWS and TECH were interested
in conversing with strangers and had a greater history of par-
ticipating in public comment spaces or on public social me-
dia. Members of FRIENDS were more interested in chatting
if it were limited to a small group of friends. Some were
not against the idea of chatting with strangers but saw little
beneﬁt. Many interviewees expressed a desire for the conver-
sations to be moderated or organized in some fashion, citing
the chaotic nature of many public chat rooms and forums.

917

Ambient Awareness. For this scenario, interviewees were
asked to think of more auto-shared and ambient activity
streams such as sometimes present on the Facebook home
page or on Spotify. They were then asked to consider such
a stream but comprised of real-time visits to webpages that
their friends or colleagues were currently on. Many intervie-
wees (6/16) were interested in the serendipitous beneﬁts that
such a stream might provide:

I feel like our web patterns...are less likely to be only use-
ful to us... If the person’s attending an arbitrary Facebook
event, odds are I’m probably not interested and/or invited.
But if they’re visiting a certain webpage, I think the odds
that it might be interesting to me, especially if I read the title
and judge whether I want to click, are higher. –FRIENDS

Interviewees mostly wanted to keep such a stream limited to
information from their friends. While some could see it as
potentially interesting if it were integrated into their browser,
others were concerned that it would be too distracting and
wanted the ability to turn it on or off or not have it showing
when they were doing work or composing an email. Others
wanted the ability to ﬁlter the information or have the system
only show the most interesting visits and not mundane ones.
Reﬂection and Self-Improvement. Several interviewees
(7/16) were interested in the idea of monitoring their web
browsing. While personal applications for online monitoring
such as RescueTime exist, a few interviewees were interested
in the social aspect of monitoring, such as sharing summaries
or streams of their browsing habits as a way to be more ac-
countable, not unlike many of the ﬁtness and food dieting so-
cial applications people use. Similarly to those systems [5],
interviewees were concerned about coming off as a brag-
gart and about annoying or overwhelming their friends. Sev-
eral interviewees mentioned that they felt that sharing would
cause them to be more mindful of how they browse the web:

...I would make more of an effort to, say, go to diverse news
sources...
I respect my friends for doing that so I would
want them to feel like I do that, too... Yeah, I think the
potential for...approval from friends is potentially a good
incentive to change behavior... –FRIENDS

Other interviewees felt that sharing what articles they had
read with others would cause them to read more carefully.
Some interviewees that were interested in monitoring their
browsing felt that there were parts of the web that they wanted
to monitor but didn’t want to share in detail, such as all the
pages they visit on Facebook. Here, a strategy for sharing the
domain only and not speciﬁc pages might be more ﬁtting.
Self-Presentation. One important reason people participate
on social media is self-presentation [23]. The act of self-
presentation could also extend to the web browsing realm.
Several interviewees (7/16) thought this feature was interest-
ing. One interviewee expressed how with some sites she even
wanted people to know that she read them:

I think that there are some websites that are very normal,
and almost good that you read them, right?...I like people
to know that I read the news or that I try to keep up with
politics and energy stuff... –FRIENDS

918

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Another beneﬁt that was more of a draw for members of
NEWS was self-presentation for a public audience. One in-
terviewee mentioned a goal of being more transparent about
her work process while reporting on the news:

It scares me, but I’m interested.
I think that’s what ap-
peals to me about...how can I make my recording process
more transparent and invite people to give me criticism
about how I research... It probably will provide more trans-
parency for how something becomes news which I think
would be great. –NEWS

Several TECH interviewees were also interested in being able
to broadcast their web activity streams for instance when
working on an open-source software project. Prior research
has also shown that showing one’s browsing behavior can
cause audiences to trust the advice of the sharer more [24].
Content Recommendation. Finally, we ask interviewees to
consider how browsing information collected from friends
or the public could recommend interesting content for them
to read, similarly to many aggregators. Almost all intervie-
wees (13/16) found this feature interesting. Some intervie-
wees thought this information would be interesting in differ-
ent ways than recommendations from other social media be-
cause there would be less curation:

I think there are certain ﬁlters to what people post on Face-
book... I often read about pregnancy or depression ...not
things that I want to be throwing over Facebook... I think it
would be interesting to see what people are reading in ad-
dition to what people are comfortable posting. –FRIENDS

Some interviewees preferred recommendations from friends,
while others were also interested in recommendations from
the public:

My friends are smarter than the vast majority of New York
Times readers...My friends tend to be thoughtful people and
interested in...the same issues I’m interested in. –NEWS
I would really love it, deﬁnitely in sort of gawking
way...What do people know about? What do people care
about? From a curious news-producing perspective that
would be incredibly interesting. –NEWS

Interviewees were also interested in how the analytics pro-
vided by a web activity dataset could be useful:

I have a sense that the New York Times and the Wall Street
Journal are really legit. If I’m on a random website, I don’t
have a good sense of its legit-ness. So it would be nice if you
could...see how many readers this site gets in a day...[and]
sense whether it’s an important news source. –FRIENDS

Many interviewees brought up the need for more sophisti-
cated ﬁltering capabilities to be able to remove the types of
content that they didn’t ﬁnd interesting. Some interviewees
also felt overwhelmed with the amount of news and other
content they already read and felt that something that wasn’t
carefully curated by people would exacerbate that issue.

FIELD STUDY RESULTS
We now turn to our ﬁeld study, which allowed us to see
how people would behave in a more real-world setting while
browsing as usual, as opposed to hypothetically. We ﬁrst de-
scribe the web activity sharing tool that we built.

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Figure 1. Screenshot of the live stream of data presented on one of the
the Eyebrowse feeds.

Figure 2. Prompt showing recent visitors and comments on the webpage
the user is viewing.

The Eyebrowse System
The Eyebrowse system1 consists of a web server coupled with
a Chrome extension that allows a user to build up a whitelist
of domains from which they permit their activity to be auto-
matically shared. At the start, a user’s whitelist is empty and
no browsing activity is tracked by default. When visiting a
new domain, the user is occasionally asked via a small popup
on the corner of their window if they wish to whitelist that
domain. If they click no, the domain is stored within a sep-
arate “blacklist,” or list of domains the user does not want to
share, and they no longer receive prompts about that domain.
If they click yes, the domain is whitelisted, and information
about each visit to a page within that domain, such as the page
title and overall time spent, is automatically sent to the Eye-
browse server. Besides whitelisting domains, Eyebrowse also
lets users publish one-off “check-ins” to pages on domains
they do not wish to whitelist. Users can temporarily disable
all automatic sharing via a toggle link in the extension.
At the server, shared browsing data is collected into several
real-time and aggregate streams. Each user has a public pro-
ﬁle page with their shared webpage visits. On their home
page, they can see a feed of the pages visited by people they
follow called “Following”, as well as a “Firehose” feed of all
web activity sent to Eyebrowse. An example of such a feed is
in Figure 1, where already visited pages are grayed out, and
comments made on a page can be viewed. We use a simple
algorithm to aggregate and rank page visits based on factors
including time decay, number of people that visited a page,
average time spent on a page, and number of comments on
a page. Users can mute speciﬁc key phrases or subdomains
from their Following or Firehose feeds and delete items from
their own visits retroactively (though someone may see the
item before its deletion). A real-time version of this feed is
also available that sorts in reverse-chronological order.
1http://eyebrowse.csail.mit.edu

919

Figure 3. Chrome extension popup, showing an example of a comment
and a chat conversation on a page.

Figure 4. Personal informatics visualizations available about a user.

We enable social interactions while browsing the web using
the Chrome extension. As shown in Figure 2, when visiting
a webpage that another Eyebrowse followee recently visited,
a small prompt appears in the corner of the page showing
the followees that have been to that page as well as the most
recent comment left on the page. Followees currently on the
page are highlighted, allowing users to “bump into” followees
while browsing. Clicking on the extension icon opens a small
pop-up window, as shown in Figure 3, where users can see
all comments made on the page as well as a dedicated pub-
lic chat board for that page. From this window, users can
post comments that then also appear on the Eyebrowse web-
site feeds, or participate in chat, which is only accessible on
that page. While posting, users can tag followees who will
then get an email notiﬁcation that they were tagged. We also
provide some visualizations for users to see how they browse,
including a word cloud of terms appearing in page titles, time-
of-day and day-of-week breakdowns, and top webpages and
domains visited, as shown in Figure 4.

Activity on Eyebrowse
We show the use of the Eyebrowse tool by participants dur-
ing the ﬁeld study in Table 3. We noticed in the usage logs
that overall, sharing of page visits was quite variable, even
though users’ whitelists did not change very often. From ask-
ing users, we found this was due to issues like using other
browsers, computers, or mobile devices, or not browsing the
web on certain days. Since on these occasions, users were not
actually using Eyebrowse, we normalize several measures by
days of active usage of Eyebrowse, or days in which at least
one item was shared.

avg # items shared*

5.5
5.2
10.2
6.1
27.8
19.7
0.6

4.0
3.0
38.8
2.7
13.3
7.5
0.4

FRIENDS

FRIENDS-2

NEWS

avg # followees†
avg # followers†

avg # domains in whitelist †
avg # times pop-up opened*

TECH
4.5
3.2
12.8
2.6
11.9
4.3
0.1
Table 3. Average counts of user actions from ﬁeld study. †Average per
user. *Average per user per day of active usage.

avg # visits to web feed*

avg # clicks from web feed*

3.8
4.0
19.2
37.6
11.1
5.9
0.2

When they used the system, users were overall engaged, in-
cluding accessing feeds on the Eyebrowse website and click-
ing on the extension 7.5 and 7.6 times per day on average,
respectively. Users visited their own proﬁle the most often
(45% of all visits to Eyebrowse), and visited other people’s
proﬁles much less often (17%). They also chose to view the
Firehose feed (26% of all visits) more often than they viewed
their Following feed (12%). We also measured how often
users clicked on a link from the Following or Firehose feed on
the Eyebrowse website. Overall, we found most users chose
to click on news articles. Out of 55 total clicks, 27% were
news related articles or websites. Some use of Eyebrowse was
playful when it came to sharing information; for instance, one
TECH participant shared Google Search result pages of silly
queries about another user that he knew would see the visit
on Eyebrowse. This demonstrates the performative aspects
of sharing information.
While trying out Eyebrowse, many users chose to share, ei-
ther automatically through whitelisting or actively “checking
in,” their page visits on the web. We can see in Figure 5
that people generally shared anywhere from 0 to 30 items
a day. There were a few outliers in FRIENDS-2 that shared
upwards of 60 to 80 items during the time they tried out Eye-
browse, though other members of FRIENDS-2 shared much
less. Within the other groups as well, one can see the spread
of number of items shared, demonstrating the differences
in how much people are willing to share. Figure 6 builds
upon this, showing how the FRIENDS group was willing to
whitelist many domains right away, while members of NEWS
were more cautious and slowly built their whitelist over time
while browsing the web.
In Figure 7, we show whitelist and blacklist decisions broken
down by category among all participants using Eyebrowse.
As users were prompted about whitelisting a domain only oc-
casionally while browsing, these decisions do not account for
all domains visited during the ﬁeld study. Categories were ex-
tracted from an open API provided by alexa.com. Many do-
mains return no category information from the API, including
150 whitelisted domains and 100 blacklisted domains and are
excluded from the graph. As reﬂected in the interviews, many
participants chose to whitelist news websites, reference sites
such as Wikipedia, and technology sites. It is interesting to
note that many categories can be considered both public and
private. For example, both the “Society” and “World” cat-
egories contained a mix of whitelisted and blacklisted items.
Conversely, some domains were considered public by the ma-
jority of users, such as “News” or “Regional.” Overall, there

920

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

FRIENDS
FRIENDS-2

NEWS
TECH

20

40

60

80

Days Actively Using Eyebrowse

y
a
D

r
e
P
s
e
g
a
P
d
e
r
a
h
S
#
g
v
A

80

60

40

20

0

0

Figure 5. Scatterplot of the average number of pages shared by a user
over the course of actively using the Eyebrowse system.

r
e
s
U

r
e
P
s
n
i
a
m
o
D
d
e
t
s
i
l
e
t
i
h
W
#

g
v
A

20

15

10

5

0

0

FRIENDS
FRIENDS-2

NEWS
TECH

5

10

15

20

Days Actively Using Eyebrowse

Figure 6. Timeseries of the average number of whitelisted domains per
user within each group over ﬁrst 20 days of actively using the Eyebrowse
system.

was little overlap in domains whitelisted, with 312 domains
whitelisted only by 1 person and 14 domains whitelisted by
two or more people. This speaks to the diversity of domains
online and the very different browsing patterns that people
have, suggesting that ﬁnding out about new domains could be
an interesting feature in addition to new articles or webpages.
When it came to usage of social features, the NEWS partici-
pants were the heaviest users of the chat and comment func-
tions, posting 11 out of 12 total chat messages and 19 out
of 30 total comments over the course of the 1-week ﬁeld
study. This may be because they all had public Twitter ac-
counts and were accustomed to maintaining public personas.
Many participants used the commenting capabilities to alert
their friends of pages, to post a short reaction to the public, or
to leave a note to themselves, somewhat similarly to Twitter.
There were several cases of serendipitously coming across
information about other members. For instance, one user in
NEWS who was from San Francisco noticed that another user
had been visiting the webpages of restaurants in San Fran-
cisco and asked on chat if she would be making a trip there.
The other user replied to say yes and to ask for recommenda-
tions. As another example, two people discovered they’d be
attending the same conference due to visit traces left on the
conference website.

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

100

50

0

WHITELIST
BLACKLIST

u lt

d

A

A rts

u si n

B

e s s
C

p

m

o

u t e r s

K i d s

e s

m

a

G

e

m

o

H

w

e

N

s
R

a ti o

c r e

e

n

R

e

c

n

e f e r e

a l

n

g i o

e

R

e

c

n

c i e

S

p

o

h

S

g

p i n

c i e t y

o

S

o rts

p

S

W o rl d

Figure 7. The number of items whitelisted and blacklisted by all participants within each domain category.

Post-Study Survey
We sent out a survey of mostly open-ended free-response
questions after the completion of the ﬁeld study to all par-
ticipants of Eyebrowse. 23 (60% male, average age of 28.4)
out of 24 total participants ﬁlled out the survey.
When we asked about people’s experiences with whitelist-
ing domains and deciding what to share versus not, some re-
spondents expressed that they were surprised by what they
actually felt or did in the moment. One user, who in the in-
terview had been conﬁdent about what he was comfortable
sharing, realized that there were some domains where he was
okay sharing the domain but not the speciﬁc pages he was
on. He later went back and deleted visits to those domains
from his feed. Another user realized that Wikipedia was ac-
tually something that he did not want to share: “I realized
I don’t really want to be revealing my ignorance plus it can
be embarrassing to share the random stuff you browse on a
Wikipedia dive.” Some people’s concerns were more related
to self-presentation to their peers instead of about privacy.
One respondent expressed trying to curate their feed simi-
larly to how they curated their Twitter feed: “I’m politically
waayyyyyy left and decided I didn’t want everybody to be able
to see some of the things that would indicate that.”
When it came to features that were useful or interesting ver-
sus not, many respondents enjoyed being able to see their own
content (16/23) as well as other people’s content (16/23). Ten
respondents stated that they found interesting content on their
feeds, including things about their friends that they didn’t re-
alize before, for instance, that a friend had a Github proﬁle
or a personal blog. When it came to their own content, 12
respondents indicated aspects about their own browsing that
they found interesting or surprising. Several mentioned habits
that they were interested in changing as a result, with one per-
son stating they did a lot of multitasking and other users re-
alizing they spent a lot of time on Facebook or Twitter. One
NEWS user said: “I spent a lot of time on my own newsroom
website, and on mainstream news sites.
I realize I should
expand my horizon and start looking at smaller and more di-
verse sites.” When it came to the social features, users were
split. Eight people stated social features were the most useful
features: “I liked the social bits way more than I expected. I
was wishing I had some speciﬁc project to work on where I
could ask others for their input.” On the other hand, ﬁve peo-
ple stated they were the least useful feature: “I didn’t have a
lot of interaction with other users.”
People also had different things to say about their overall ex-
perience. Some respondents saw the potential in Eyebrowse
and were interested in continuing to participate voluntarily:

“I can chat about stuff I found online with people I knew have
been reading the same stuff...If Eyebrowse’s goal is creating a
public space online, I believe the app has met its objective. Well
done!”
“I thought using Eyebrowse is really great, I think the more peo-
ple to use it the more it can offer.”
“I think it’s a good idea that can be successful, because it’s im-
plementing the social component with the statistical component
in a fun way.”
Other respondents had criticisms of the experience:
“Maybe if more of my friends would use it than it will be inter-
esting but currently the content which is presented to me is just
not that interesting.”
“It was pretty boring, most of the people I was following only
marked pages in StackOverﬂow or Github which wasn’t very in-
teresting.”
One user expressed greater concern about privacy after trying
the system: “I got more aware about what pages I visit on
the web and how my browsing history...might be perceived by
others. I am not really comfortable with sharing my brows-
ing history, not even for a few selected domains.” From the
interviews and ﬁeld study results, it was clear that there were
some people for whom sharing any web activity data was out
of the question. In the end, 18 of the 23 respondents indicated
that they would continue to use Eyebrowse.

DISCUSSION
From our ﬁeld study results, it appears that many users en-
joyed or were willing to share aspects of their browsing data
in order to learn more about their friends and themselves and
to participate socially. Most users readily understood and par-
ticipated in using whitelisting to segment their private and
public spaces on the web. Many users also expressed that they
became more mindful of their browsing behavior while using
Eyebrowse and more aware of the information their browsing
data communicated.

Providing Social Incentives
As several users commented, it may be that beneﬁts for this
system may not be fully realized until many more people are
using the tool. With more peer users, social interactions such
as “bumping into” someone while browsing the web would
happen more often, and better web-scale analytics and per-
sonalized recommendations could be provided. Perhaps ben-
eﬁts may not be clear until a user has followees in the tens
or hundreds as is often the case on Facebook or Twitter [27].

921

Issues such as impression management to different social cir-
cles might become more salient at those scales as well.
While a larger ﬁeld study might provide more insight into the
use of Eyebrowse’s social features, we chose to start with a
smaller ﬁeld study combined with interviews in order to get
a more in-depth understanding of users’ reactions to sharing
browsing data. Our ﬁndings from this study serve to indicate
how we might better design personal and social incentives
and privacy controls, areas that Eyebrowse needs to get right
in order to have a successful wider rollout or public launch.
Even if features are designed well, bootstrapping a social sys-
tem can still be difﬁcult as well as risky. It may be beneﬁcial
to focus on slowly growing the user base by improving the in-
dividual beneﬁts of Eyebrowse, such as self-monitoring and
reﬂection, before social ones in order to attract initial contrib-
utors. It also might be useful to develop features that piggy-
back onto existing systems, such as allowing easier integra-
tion with Twitter or Facebook or providing widgets to inte-
grate into websites.

Tensions Between Different Goals
As we saw in both interview and ﬁeld study results, there
was a tension between sharing information publicly and ac-
cruing some of the social beneﬁts that we introduced. For in-
stance, users interested in monitoring their own information
diet and browsing habits might want a more comprehensive
set of aggregate statistics than what they are willing to share
at the webpage level. Interviewees also mentioned wanting
to be able to conduct some social activities only with a small
group of friends or work colleagues instead of with the pub-
lic. Another tension that arose was between the desire for
self-presentation or fear of judgement and the interest in pro-
viding more data for transparency purposes, participation in
discussion, or other reasons.
One approach to alleviate some of these issues would be to
allow users to designate some visits as private to themselves
or private to a set of users. A concern with simply allowing
users to form private groups is that users might then default
to not sharing anything publicly. Here we can also look to
social media systems that still have considerable public ac-
tivity even with the ability to make some posts or proﬁles
private. For instance, a system might support or emphasize
the more public-facing aspects in order to encourage public
sharing. Another issue with this approach would be that the
system would now be in possession of private and potentially
sensitive data, making security more of an issue.
A different approach would be to allow users to designate cer-
tain visits as anonymous. This should be implemented with
care since web activity can sometimes be de-anonymized,
such as happened with the AOL Query Log Dataset. One
way might be to associate each anonymous visit to a separate
identiﬁer, so that no web traces were stored; however, this re-
duces the usefulness of the data collected. Other ways that
reduce the likelihood of de-anonymization but still provide
insight into browsing paths would be to only group page vis-
its under a single identiﬁer within a certain time frame, within
a domain, or that arise from clicking links only.

922

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Opportunities for Public Beneﬁt
As stated earlier, some of the social beneﬁts we mentioned
could accrue even in a social non-public model, where friends
and acquaintances share privately with each other.
Indeed,
some interviewees stated that they would prefer this. How-
ever, some beneﬁts require a public dataset, such as seeing
what a general population is doing or building a public per-
sona. An additional beneﬁt that would come with publicly
shared data is the enabling of more research and development
of new tools in the public domain. As one interviewee stated:

If you ask me, I would rather prefer a thousand, a billion
times that researchers for an academic and humanistic and
knowledge purpose are the ones that...can map that infor-
mation and store it for humanity, than a private company.
– News

Currently, few publicly accessible repositories of web activity
data exist due to concerns related to the de-anonymization of
anonymous logs. But if users chose to share their web activity
publicly, research and development could ﬂourish. For our
tool, we chose to explore the public sharing of web activity
due to these beneﬁts and because it was the most extreme
in terms of getting away from the inaccessibility of current
browsing data.
Along these lines, we included with the Eyebrowse system
a publicly accessible API to grab, ﬁlter, and query different
parts of the existing data. One question given this approach
then, is whether the data shared is of any usefulness. The
data provided by this form of tracking will always be infe-
rior to that collected by indiscriminate tracking because it is
not comprehensive for an individual and also is not used by
everyone. The beneﬁt of data gathered in this way is that it
is collected and released with the knowledge and consent of
the user. Concerns over data privacy or identity leakage are
therefore reduced. However, we still need to take care with
data that is public, even if it is shared voluntarily by users,
as it might still not be ethical to analyze or release more
widely publicly accessible data [2]. This is due to the con-
text of when the user chose to share the data, a context that
may change drastically once the audience changes. This issue
may be of particular concern when it comes to web browsing
data, even data that users have consented to share publicly.
It may be exacerbated if users are unaware of what hidden
attributes of themselves can be gleaned from their publicly-
released browsing data or the data in combination with data
from other sources. Our model of consent does not account
for this, and the solution may not be a purely technical one.
At the least, this requires that people who may analyze brows-
ing data show consideration when publishing aspects of that
data to a wider audience. It may be possible to consider lim-
iting API access to the data to people that specify how they
will use the data, or indicate that they will abide by rules such
as using the data only in ways that beneﬁt the producers of
that data. Therefore, while the data would still be publicly
available, the system emphasizes accountability and appro-
priate use [33], similarly to the Creative Commons system.
Additionally, while this model of consent helps with some
concerns we discussed in the paper, it does not offer a com-
plete solution to others, for instance the issue of context col-

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

lapse and fear of misrepresentation. Here too, additional pri-
vacy features such as the ability to share in private or to share
anonymously might diminish the issues, though they may not
completely erase them.

LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Our study involved only a small number of people, both in
the interviews and in the ﬁeld study. Thus, the ﬁndings we
present are not meant to be conclusive but instead provide in-
sight into how users might think about and use the system
as well as suggestions for ways to improve the system. Be-
cause we partially targeted people from areas such as news
and technology, we may have introduced additional biases in
our results. As mentioned earlier, it was clear from our results
that Eyebrowse in its current form may be more interesting or
useful to some people and not others. In order to understand
if web activity sharing is feasible as a strategy for collecting a
large repository of data that is useful, a deployment needs to
be made to larger and more diverse audiences. It may be that
new concerns or beneﬁts may arise with a different set of peo-
ple or larger social groups that we did not account for. Also,
as mentioned earlier, several potential social beneﬁts may not
be fully realized until greater adoption or greater peer net-
work penetration occurs.
In the future, we aim to conduct ﬁeld studies with much larger
peer groups, such as at the community or campus level, as
well as conduct in-the-wild studies where we publicize Eye-
browse extensively. However, this study has brought up key
design considerations that should be addressed before a wider
rollout. For instance, the algorithms for determining feeds
could be improved to recommend more interesting content.
More ﬂexibility regarding sharing preferences could be intro-
duced, such as obfuscating or anonymizing certain aspects.
In terms of new features and directions, a strategy will need
to be developed to incorporate mobile browsing data, as mo-
bile browsers currently do not permit extensions. Certain
additional data, such as referrer information or within-page
scrolling data, could be very interesting to collect and share,
though they introduce new privacy challenges. We also did
not consider other aspects that might be useful or entertain-
ing to users, such as allowing users to rate webpages or gam-
iﬁcation, where users can be “mayors” of a site, similarly to
Foursquare.
Once a larger web activity data repository is available, it
would also be interesting to recruit members of the commu-
nity to build upon or study the data. Introducing the tool to
other user populations or inviting additional research or de-
velopment may provide other interesting use cases for this
data that we may not have envisioned. For example, though
recommending web content was a natural feature to incorpo-
rate, many other kinds of recommenders could be built given
the richness of browsing data. Indeed, releasing this data to
outside developers could open up an ecosystem for the devel-
opment of more tools that beneﬁt the creators of this data as
opposed to tools and analysis that stays within corporations.
This would create a feedback loop that further incentivizes
people to contribute their data.

CONCLUSION
Organizations that track users’ browsing activity, often with-
out the knowledge or consent of users, gain massive beneﬁts
from this privately held data while users themselves beneﬁt
little. At the same time, social media has demonstrated how
many users will freely share their data and self-monitor their
levels of privacy and publicity when social incentives are built
in. In this paper, we investigated the social opportunities and
privacy challenges surrounding a tool for public web activ-
ity sharing. We outlined several social beneﬁts that could be
unlocked with sharing web activity, examined privacy con-
cerns with sharing browsing data, and considered ways for
allowing users to control what they share. Our results from
conducting both scenario-based hypothetical interviews and a
preliminary ﬁeld deployment of a public web activity sharing
tool suggest that a system for sharing some aspects of web ac-
tivity publicly may be feasible and interesting to users given
the proper privacy controls and social incentives.

REFERENCES
1. Mark S. Ackerman, Lorrie F. Cranor, and Joseph

Reagle. 1999. Privacy in E-Commerce: Examining User
Scenarios and Privacy Preferences. In Proceedings of
the ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce (EC ’99).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1–8. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/336992.336995

2. danah boyd and Kate Crawford. 2012. Critical questions
for big data. Information, Communication & Society 15,
5 (2012), 662–679. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2012.678878

3. Laura Dabbish, Colleen Stuart, Jason Tsay, and Jim

Herbsleb. 2012. Social Coding in GitHub: Transparency
and Collaboration in an Open Software Repository. In
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing
(CSCW ’12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1277–1286.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2145204.2145396

4. Nicole B. Ellison, Charles Steinﬁeld, and Cliff Lampe.
2007. The beneﬁts of Facebook ”friends:” social capital
and college students’ use of online social network sites.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 12, 4
(2007), 1143–1168. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1083-6101.2007.00367.x

5. Daniel A. Epstein, Bradley H. Jacobson, Elizabeth

Bales, David W. McDonald, and Sean A. Munson. 2015.
From ”Nobody Cares” to ”Way to Go!”: A Design
Framework for Social Sharing in Personal Informatics.
In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing
(CSCW ’15). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1622–1636.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675135

6. Adam Fourney and Meredith R. Morris. 2013.

Enhancing Technical Q&A Forums with CiteHistory. In
Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on
Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM ’13). AAAI, Palo
Alto, CA, USA.

923

7. Batya Friedman, Daniel C. Howe, and Edward Felten.

2002. Informed Consent in the Mozilla Browser:
Implementing Value-Sensitive Design. In Proceedings of
the IEEE Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences (HICSS ’02). IEEE, New York, NY, USA.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HICSS.2002.994366
8. Kirstie Hawkey and Kori M. Inkpen. 2006. Examining

the Content and Privacy of Web Browsing Incidental
Information. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on World Wide Web (WWW ’06). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 123–132. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1135777.1135801
9. E. Herder, R. Kawase, and G. Papadakis. 2011.
Experiences in Building the Public Web History
Repository. In Proceedings of DataTEL Workshop of
STELLARnet Alpine Rendez-Vous (ARV ’11).
10. Jason I. Hong and James A. Landay. 2004. An
Architecture for Privacy-sensitive Ubiquitous
Computing. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and
Services (MobiSys ’04). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
177–189. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/990064.990087

11. Gordon Hull, Heather Richter Lipford, and Celine
Latulipe. 2011. Contextual gaps: Privacy issues on
Facebook. Ethics and Information Technology 13, 4
(2011), 289–302. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10676-010-9224-8

12. Ellen A. Isaacs, John C. Tang, and Trevor Morris. 1996.
Piazza: A Desktop Environment Supporting Impromptu
and Planned Interactions. In Proceedings of the ACM
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
(CSCW ’96). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 315–324.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/240080.240316

13. Aniket Kittur, Bongwon Suh, and Ed H. Chi. 2008. Can

You Ever Trust a Wiki?: Impacting Perceived
Trustworthiness in Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the
ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work (CSCW ’08). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
477–480. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1460563.1460639

14. Scott Lederer, Jason I. Hong, Anind K. Dey, and
James A. Landay. 2004. Personal privacy through
understanding and action: ﬁve pitfalls for designers.
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 8, 6 (Nov. 2004),
440–454. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00779-004-0304-9

15. Ian Li, Jeffrey Nichols, Tessa Lau, Clemens Drews, and

Allen Cypher. 2010. Here’s What I Did: Sharing and
Reusing Web Activity with ActionShot. In Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI ’10). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 723–732. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753432

16. Alessandra Alaniz Macedo, Khai N. Truong,

Jos´e Antonio Camacho-Guerrero, and Maria da
Grac¸a Pimentel. 2003. Automatically Sharing Web

924

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Experiences Through a Hyperdocument Recommender
System. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on
Hypertext and Hypermedia (HT ’03). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 48–56. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/900051.900061

17. Mary Madden and Lee Rainie. 2015. Americans’

Attitudes About Privacy, Security and Surveillance. Pew
Research Center. (20 May 2015). Retrieved May 21,
2015 from http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/05/20/
americans-attitudes-about-privacy-security-
and-surveillance/.

18. Catherine C. Marshall and Frank M. Shipman. 2015.

Exploring the Ownership and Persistent Value of
Facebook Content. In Proceedings of the ACM
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
& Social Computing (CSCW ’15). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 712–723. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675203
19. Alice E. Marwick. 2012. The public domain:

Surveillance in everyday life. Surveillance & Society 9,
4 (2012), 378–393.

20. Alice E. Marwick and danah boyd. 2011. I tweet

honestly, I tweet passionately: Twitter users, context
collapse, and the imagined audience. New Media &
Society 13, 1 (2011), 114–133. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1461444810365313
21. Ericka Menchen-Trevino and Chris Karr. 2012.

Researching real-world web use with Roxy: Collecting
observational web data with informed consent. Journal
of Information Technology & Politics 9, 3 (2012),
254–268. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19331681.2012.664966

22. Matthew B. Miles and Michael Huberman. 1994.

Qualitative Data Analysis: An Expanded Sourcebook.
Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA, USA.

23. Ashwini Nadkarni and Stefan G. Hofmann. 2012. Why

do people use Facebook? Personality and Individual
Differences 52, 3 (2012), 243–249. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2011.11.007

24. Duyen T. Nguyen, Laura A. Dabbish, and Sara Kiesler.
2015. The Perverse Effects of Social Transparency on
Online Advice Taking. In Proceedings of the ACM
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
& Social Computing (CSCW ’15). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 207–217. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675253
25. Helen Nissenbaum. 2009. Privacy in Context:

Technology, Policy, and the Integrity of Social Life.
Stanford University Press, Palo Alto, CA, USA.

26. Fuming Shih, Ilaria Liccardi, and Daniel Weitzner.

2015. Privacy Tipping Points in Smartphones Privacy
Preferences. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’15).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 807–816. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702404

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

27. Aaron Smith. 2014. 6 new facts about Facebook. Pew

Research Center. (3 February 2014). Retrieved July 27,
2015 from http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/
2014/02/03/6-new-facts-about-facebook/.

28. Karen P. Tang, Pedram Keyani, James Fogarty, and

Jason I. Hong. 2006. Putting People in Their Place: An
Anonymous and Privacy-sensitive Approach to
Collecting Sensed Data in Location-based Applications.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’06). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 93–102. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1124772.1124788

29. Joseph Turow. 2003. Americans & Online Privacy: The

System is Broken. Annenberg Public Policy Center,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

30. Joseph Turow, Jennifer King, Chris J. Hoofnagle, Amy

Bleakley, and Michael Hennessy. 2009. Americans
reject tailored advertising and three activities that enable
it. Social Science Research Network (2009). DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1478214

31. Christian von der Weth and Manfred Hauswirth.

DOBBS: Towards a Comprehensive Dataset to Study the

Browsing Behavior of Online Users. In Proceedings of
International Joint Conferences on Web Intelligence &
Intelligent Agent Technologies (WI/IAT ’13).

32. Yang Wang, Pedro Giovanni Leon, Alessandro Acquisti,

Lorrie F. Cranor, Alain Forget, and Norman Sadeh.
2014. A Field Trial of Privacy Nudges for Facebook. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’14). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 2367–2376. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557413

33. Daniel J. Weitzner, Harold Abelson, Tim Berners-Lee,

Joan Feigenbaum, James Hendler, and Gerald J.
Sussman. 2008. Information Accountability. Commun.
ACM 51, 6 (June 2008), 82–87. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1349026.1349043

34. Chi Zhang, Jinyuan Sun, Xiaoyan Zhu, and Yuguang

Fang. 2010. Privacy and security for online social
networks: Challenges and opportunities. IEEE Network
24, 4 (2010), 13–18. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MNET.2010.5510913

925

