CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

 SunForum: Understanding Depression in a Chinese 

Online Community 

Guo Li1,2, Xiaomu Zhou3, Tun Lu1,2, Jiang Yang4, Ning Gu1,2 

1School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China 

2Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, Fudan University, China 
3School of Communication and Information, Rutgers University, USA 

4Alibaba Group, China 

 

ABSTRACT 
More  than  350  million  people  worldwide  suffer  from 
depression. Major depressive disorder has a hugely negative 
impact on psychological well-being, work, and family life. 
Yet culture may shape how depressed patients interpret their 
symptoms,  choose  treatments,  and  behave.  This  paper 
reports a case study, including participant observations and 
interviews,  of  the  Chinese  online  depression  community, 
SunForum. Our findings reveal that Chinese cultural beliefs 
(e.g.,  the  power  of  inner  self-control)  and  Chinese  beliefs 
about  traditional  medicine  (e.g.,  the  integrated  body-mind 
relationship) significantly affect patients’ understandings of 
depression,  illness  management,  and  social  interactions. 
These beliefs create problems of understanding depression in 
society  –  including  family  members,  friends,  co-workers, 
and  others  –  and  present  various  challenges  for  depressed 
patients who can become marginalized, suffer discrimination, 
and lose their jobs. We draw implications for how Chinese 
society as a whole may respond to the misunderstanding of 
mental illness and the raising of public awareness. We also 
propose  specific  social  media  design  to  support  depressed 
patients as they seek online information and social support. 
Author Keywords 
Depression; illness management; mental health; mental 
illness; online community; social and culture influence; 
social media 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous.  
INTRODUCTION 
According  to  the  most  recent  World  Health  Organization 
(WHO)  report,  more  than  350  million  people  suffer  from 
depression around the world [1]. Major depressive disorder 
has a hugely negative impact on psychological well-being, 
including disrupting interpersonal relationships and causing 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must be  honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy  otherwise, or republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA  
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819994 

morbidity  and  mortality,  controlled  substance  abuse,  and 
unemployment [1]. Currently, depression is the fourth most 
important determinant of burden in people’s life caused by a 
human disease, and will rank second by the year 2020 [30].  
In China, there are over 30 million  depressed patients and 
more  than  90%  of  them  are  not  able  to  receive  prompt 
diagnosis and treatment [38]. Due to the strong cultural bias 
against this mental illness, many patients do not actively seek 
professional  help  [37];  or  if  they  do,  they  go  to  general 
physicians  to  complain  about  somatic  symptoms  (e.g., 
headache, dizziness, fatigue, stomachache) [22]. In addition, 
China’s healthcare system is extremely limited in financial 
expenditures for the huge numbers of patients and lack of 
health  insurance  coverage  [29];  and  there  are  very  few 
mental health services and resources, leading to very limited 
professional help, dubious therapy, and inhuman treatment 
for mental illness patients (e.g., in extreme cases, shackled 
by a chain and imprisoned in a cage) [10].  
Researchers  find  that  culture  (including  beliefs,  values, 
norms, etc.) has a huge impact on people’s understanding of 
depression and on patients’ choice to seek professional help 
[46]. To explore the reality of the depression population in 
Chinese  context,  we  investigated  an  online  community, 
SunForum1,  one  of  the  largest  online  discussion  forums 
focusing  on  depression  in  China.  This  online  community 
mostly includes depressed patients, as well as a small portion 
of  family  members  and  volunteers  (e.g.,  helping  answer 
patients’ questions, maintain the website, and moderate the 
discussion  threads).  They  participate  in  online  discussions 
with  a  wide  range  of  depression  topics  (e.g.,  recovery 
experiences, social encounters, illness-related questions and 
answers).  To  date,  there  are  more  than  74,000  registered 
users, and users have generated more than 900,000 posts. 
While our study may cover only a limited group of depressed 
patients, i.e., only those participating in SunForum, through 
the  lens  of  this  community  we  hope  to  understand  how 
people with depression understand this illness in a specific 
culture, where the concept and psychiatric label of this illness 
have  long  been  rejected  by  the  society,  instead,  being 
replaced  by  a  more  somatic  label  of  neurasthenia  [22]. 
Through  analyzing  their  online  discussions  and interviews 

1 http://www.sunofus.com. SunForum is a literal translation of an 
acronym from the original Chinese characters for the forum title. 

515

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

with  20  members  of  the  community,  we  want  to  discover 
what and how Chinese cultural beliefs may influence patients’ 
understandings and management of the illness, how societal 
attitudes  toward  depression  present  challenges  in  their 
professional and social life, how they turn to social media for 
help, how they learn from each other, and whether there are 
any issues with social media use in supporting the depression 
population.  By  a  better  understanding  of  this  group  of 
patients  and  their  social  context,  we  hope  to  learn  how 
exactly  social  media  may  play  a  role  to  help  depression 
patients,  such  as  helping  correct  the  misunderstanding  of 
mental illness due to historical and cultural influences, and 
enhancing  positive  social  interactions.  We  further  explore 
how  an  online forum  can  be better  designed  with  specific 
features to support depressed patients that yield better coping 
strategies and outcomes.  
RELATED WORK 
Depression and Chinese Culture 
As a common but serious form of mental illness, the core and 
basic symptoms of depressive disorder are almost universal 
[8].  According  to  Diagnostic  and  Statistical  Manual  of 
Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV), an individual 
who  suffers  from  major  depressive  disorder  must  have 
several  depression  symptoms,  including  depressed  mood, 
diminished  interest  or  pleasure,  weight  loss,  insomnia  or 
hypersomnia,  feelings  of  worthlessness  or  excessive  or 
inappropriate guilt, etc.  
Worldwide,  there  are  many  problematic  attitudes  toward 
depression,  affecting  how  depressed  patients  understand, 
express, and seek treatment. For example, a study conducted 
in  four  European  countries  shows  a  moderate  degree  of 
personal stigma (i.e., personal negative and unfair thoughts 
and beliefs) toward depression and a strikingly higher degree 
of  perceived  social  stigma  (i.e.,  perception  of  how  other 
people  negatively  think  and  feel  about  depression)  [11]. 
Furthermore, to assess the nature and severity of experienced 
and  anticipated  discrimination  with  major  depressive 
disorder,  a  survey  with  1082  patients  from  35  countries 
shows 
these  people  had  experienced 
discrimination  [25].  This  stigma  and  these  discrimination 
attitudes  can  significantly  affect  patients’  help-seeking 
behavior [2, 20]. 
In  China,  the  epidemiology  of  depression  shows  different 
patterns compared with many Western countries, e.g., low 
prevalence,  and 
in 
metropolitan China [26]. The experience of depression, such 
as the expression of illness, coping strategies, help-seeking 
behaviors, and treatment, is also different from many other 
countries and significantly shaped by Chinese culture [8, 39]. 
For  instance,  depression  is  often  clinically  diagnosed  as 
neurasthenia,  resulting  in  diagnosis  rates  very  low  in 
depression and very high in neurasthenia [22, 46]. Instead of 
elaborating  emotional  and  cognitive  manifestations  of 
depression,  depressed  patients  with  a  Chinese  background 
(e.g., Chinese from mainland, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Chinese 

insignificant  gender  difference 

that  79%  of 

516

has 

intrigued 

the  U.S,  Malaysia,  and  elsewhere)  often  express 
in 
feeling  no  energy, 
depression  somatically;  such  as 
sleeplessness,  bodily  aches  [22,  36,  37,  39].  This 
phenomenon 
international  medical 
professionals  and  researchers  from  psychology  and  social 
medicine, who argue that the understandings and behaviors 
of  depressed  patients  in  the  Chinese  context  are  highly 
influenced by its traditional culture.  
Chinese  culture 
is  described  as  group  oriented  and 
collectivistic:  an  individual’s sense  of self  is  embedded  in 
group  and  social  relationships,  and  the  group  (rather  than 
individual)  is  the  basic  unit  in  society  [27].  This  is  very 
different from Western cultural frameworks that emphasize 
the autonomy of each person and the importance of personal 
experiences,  goals,  and  values  [8].  With  these  beliefs, 
Chinese people often neglect or hide their inner experience 
of emotions and feelings, but are more sensitive to somatic 
symptoms. Meanwhile, influenced by thousands of years of 
Confucian  thought,  people  from  Chinese  culture  believe 
individuals should have the ability to cultivate their morality 
and exercise their self-control [27]. The symptoms of mental 
illness  are  perceived  as  problematic  behaviors  that  are 
negatively  associated  to  one’s  morality.  If  an  individual 
cannot resolve the inner problems or conflicts by himself, he 
will be labeled as weak-willed and spineless [42]. Therefore, 
“mental illness” has long been a taboo term that both patients 
and  doctors  avoid  using  while  discussing  depression 
symptoms [28, 42]. 
In addition to Chinese culture, traditional Chinese medicine 
also has a huge influence on how people perceive an illness. 
According  to  the  principles  of  Chinese  medicine,  body 
(somatic) and mind (mental) are viewed as integrated, each 
influencing  the  other;  as  such,  many  mental  problems  are 
thought to be caused by the imbalance of the body and mind 
(e.g.,  bodily  aches  break 
to 
psychological pain and sadness), and treatment of somatic 
problems can actually help resolve mental problems [45]. In 
the  practice  of  Chinese  traditional  medicine,  patients  with 
depression  often  are  diagnosed  as  shen-kui  (weakness  or 
problems with kidney) because the kidneys are believed to 
control the function of the cerebrum [46]. These body-mind 
beliefs in Chinese traditional medicine may also help explain 
why  depressed  patients  tend  to  use  somatic  symptoms  to 
describe their mental illness, regardless of the cultural beliefs 
as described earlier. 
Furthermore, social and political factors also complicate the 
expression, understanding, and interpretation of depression. 
For instance, medical anthropologist Arthur Kleinman found 
that during the Cultural Revolution (ten-year period starting 
May  1966),  depression  and  other  psychiatric  labels  were 
assumed to be associated with wrong political thinking and 
lack  of  enthusiasm  for  the  communist  program  and 
revolution. Therefore, patients rarely expressed the negative 
emotional feelings, and depression became a dangerous term 
to apply to anyone [22]. Sadly, such thinking and association 

the  balance, 

leading 

SESSION: INTERNATONAL INSIGHTS

still seem to affect the society’s attitude toward depression 
[46]. 
Depression and Social Interactions 
Psychology  and  medicine have  produced rich  accounts on 
how social interactions affect health outcomes for depressed 
patients.  For  example,  Nasser  and  Overholser  find  that 
support from family members and friends can significantly 
contribute to a positive health outcome for depressed people 
[34].  While  social  interactions  are  generally  perceived  as 
having a positive impact on psychological well-being, how 
much  social  interaction  on  the  Internet  and  what  types  of 
interactions are beneficial to general populations as well as 
patients  with  specific  illness  are  still  open  questions.  For 
instance,  O'Keeffe  et  al.  find  that  preteens  and  teenagers 
began to “exhibit classic symptoms of depression” after they 
spent a great deal of time on social media [35]. Following 
studies,  however,  find  no  evidence  that  depression  is 
associated with SNS use [16], and studies also confirm that 
greater  SNS  use  in  a  communicative  fashion  is  associated 
with  increased  social  capital  and  reduced  loneliness  [6]. 
Meanwhile, Kalwar and his colleagues find that Asian and 
Western  users  show  different  scales  of  anxiousness  in  the 
designed tests [17], and human behavior on the Internet can 
be  linked  to  various  cultural  attributes  [18,  19].  These 
valuable insights prompt us to explore how exactly Chinese 
culture  impacts  depressed  patients’  social  interactions  and 
their behavior online.  
Indeed, social interactions among depressed patients should 
be more carefully examined, because depressed patients may 
perceive social interactions differently from non-depression 
populations. Clinical studies find that depressed patients may 
be more depressed after they  had conversations with other 
depressed patients [8], and depressed patients rate negative 
interactions lower (i.e., more socially undesirable) than non-
depressed  [14].  If  so,  should  depressed  patients  be 
encouraged  to  interact  among  themselves  more?  Research 
communities  need  to  carefully  examine  how  exactly 
depressed patients interact and what specific issues exist on 
social  media  platforms  designated  for  people  with  mental 
illness, and explore how we may help improve the design of 
these online platforms to facilitate healthy social interactions.  
Depression and Online Support Forums 
Online  peer  support  forums  have  become  increasingly 
prevalent for all types of chronic illness. Patients get both 
informational  and  emotional  support  by  participating  in 
online  communities  designated 
illness  or 
problems, such as diabetes, various types of cancers, etc. [43, 
44, 47] 
In the context of depression, Dyer and Thompson find that 
Journey-of-Hearts, acting as an adjunctive Internet resource, 
can fill a void in the treatment of depression and grief [12]. 
Similarly,  Barney  et  al.  analyze  BlueBoard  to  identify 
depressed patients’ information needs. They find six board 
themes, i.e., understanding depression, disclosure and stigma, 
medication, treatment and services, coping with depression, 

to  specific 

517

and comorbid health problems, are the most discussed and 
needed [3]. Furthermore, Vayreda and Antaki find that there 
is  a  mismatch  between  a  new  user’s  first  post  and  forum 
members’  replies  in  bipolarweb,  concluding  that  the 
unsolicited advice may help new users induct them into the 
mores of the group [41].  
Informed  by  these  early  studies,  our  research  will  take  a 
specific  perspective  –  we  want  to  examine  how  cultural 
beliefs  may  influence  depressed  patients,  including  their 
understanding  of the illness, their  experience of  managing 
the  illness,  as  well  as  their  social  interactions  online  and 
offline. Located in Chinese context, our study will contribute 
a unique account with valuable insights on how depressed 
patients, facing various misunderstandings from the society 
and  cultural  challenges, take advantage  of social  media to 
manage their illness and improve their health.  
METHODS  
Research Site: SunForum 
To locate an online forum for our research interest, we used 
Chinese keywords “depression forum” to search via Google 
and Chinese search engine Baidu, both returning SunForum 
as the top-ranking result. The forum provides six discussion 
zones for people to post and receive replies: (1) Depression 
Zone (including sub-forums Fighting Depression, Fighting 
Bipolar Disorder, and Recovery Experience); (2) Neurosis 
Zone (including sub-forums Anxiety, Obsessive-Compulsive 
Disorder,  and  Phobia);  (3)  Featured  Zone  (including  sub-
forums Psychologists, Morita Therapy, Having Babies); (4) 
Life  with  Sunshine  (for  users  to  post  photos,  videos  and 
music, make friends, and chat); (5) Religions (including sub-
forums Buddhism and Christianity); and (6) Forum Affairs 
(for  publishing  new  donations  and  announcements,  and 
collecting suggestions provided by the users). Among these 
forums,  Depression  Zone 
the  most  active,  with 
significantly  more  visits,  posts,  and  replies.  In  addition  to 
posting 
registered  users  can  also 
communicate privately via the internal message channel.  
There are four types of users: administrators, board masters, 
registered members, and visitors. Non-registered visitors can 
only browse the content and are not allowed to post or reply. 
Three administrators have full control of the site, with each 
having  specific  focuses  (i.e.,  technical  support,  internal 
management,  and  outreach  for  public  relations).  A  board 
master is appointed by administrators based on nomination, 
the quality of his or her previous posts, and  volunteerism. 
Board masters manage their own assigned discussion zones 
or  sub-forums,  having  the  power  to  edit,  and  to  delete 
spammed,  offensive,  or  inappropriate  posts,  to  keep  the 
discussion forum clean and healthy. Most of the registered 
users  are  patients  with  depression  or  other  mental  illness, 
their  family  members,  and  volunteers  (e.g.,  providing 
technical  support,  organizing  offline  events,  and  offering 
psychological  consulting).  A 
few  psychologists  and 
psychiatrists,  who  host  special  sub-forums,  also  actively 
participate at SunForum. With their presence, patients and 

these  zones, 

is 

in 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

themes  were 

their  family  members  often  take  advantage  by  asking 
questions and getting professional advice. All administrators 
and most of the board masters are or used to be patients with 
depression. 
Data Collection and Analysis 
We  conducted  qualitative  research,  including  participant 
online observations and interview studies. The first author 
performed data collection at the research site by registering 
an account. The researcher’s participation includes creating 
limited  threads  and  posting  comments  for  the  research 
purposes,  such  as  announcing  the  research  project,  and 
recruiting participants for interviews.  The first author read 
through  over  1000  threads  (selection  strategy  is  described 
below) in a period of six months and selected a collection of 
representative threads to share among the research team.  
In the initial stage of data collection, to build our general and 
broad understanding of “what’s going on” at SunForum, we 
first collected all newly posted threads (nearly 700 threads 
throughout the first three months) across all discussion zones 
and  their  sub-forums.  We  employed  Grounded  Theory 
approach to identify emerging themes and potential analytic 
concepts in these threads [33]. With an open coding scheme, 
several  preliminary 
identified,  such  as 
understanding the nature of depression and sharing coping 
strategies (recording life experiences via diary, photography), 
encountered  social  problems  (due 
to  social  phobia), 
misunderstanding  (from  family,  friends,  and  society), 
relationships  (with  family,  coworkers),  choosing  medicine 
(Chinese traditional medicine vs. Western modern medicine), 
suicidal  thoughts  and  attempts,  making  friends  (marriage-
seeking),  learning  and  practicing  religion  (Buddhism, 
Christianity)  as  part  of  therapy.  Furthermore,  several 
analytical  concepts  also  emerged,  such  as  the  impact  of 
Chinese  culture  on  understanding  the  illness,  information 
sharing  and  exchanging  strategies  of  managing  illness, 
seeking  social  and  emotional  support,  perceiving  and 
processing online information. After identifying these core 
concepts,  we  further  used  more  directed  data-collection 
methods to collect more than 300 threads, i.e., paying more 
attention to  the threads surrounding  the  major themes  and 
core concepts, while also watching for new phenomena. 
To help answer certain questions that we could not answer 
by  reading  the  threads,  we  conducted  interviews  with  20 
users  (10  male  and  10  female;  including  college  students, 
manufacturing  workers,  housewives, 
freelancers,  and 
unemployed people). Our recruiting process proved to be a 
big  challenge,  although  not  totally  surprising  --  many 
patients did not want to talk with the researchers; some were 
in very bad moods at the moment we approached them, and 
we  did  not  want  to  aggravate  their  illness  by  accidentally 
asking questions that might trigger negative responses. We 
used  two  approaches  to  recruit.  First,  we  sent  recruiting 
messages through the internal message channel at the forum 
to 40 active users who were already identified as potential 
interviewees through reading their posts based on the topics 

518

we were interested in pursuing. (This is a similar method to 
identifying  informants  in  traditional  ethnographic  field-
based research [4].) Eleven users agreed to join our study. 
Second, we invited one site administrator to be interviewed, 
and  through  him,  snowball-sampling  method  was  used  to 
recruit  eight  more  users  for  the  interviews.  The  20 
interviewees in total represent two administrators (both are 
patients), four board masters (all are patients), twelve regular 
patient members and two family members.  
Our  interviews  were  semi-structured,  and  questions  were 
asked based on our general observations online and research 
inquiries. We also had a range of tailored questions targeting 
each  specific  interviewee  based  on  their  activities  at 
SunForum.  Eight  interviews  were  conducted  by  phone 
(about 50 minutes each on average); five via email and two 
via  the  internal  message  channel  of  SunForum  due  to  the 
interviewees’ preference (each contains about 1,500 Chinese 
characters on  average);  another  five  via instant  messaging 
(each contains more than 2,000 Chinese characters). For all 
these  interviews,  we  obtained  users’  consent  to  record 
interview  content,  and  audio 
later 
transcribed. We continued using iterative coding strategy for 
our  interview  data  and  added  new  subthemes  such  as 
workplace discrimination, losing jobs, etc. 
FINDINGS 
SunForum adopts Discuz, one of the most popular free online 
discussion  platforms 
too  much 
development  cost.  It  is  nonprofit  and  advertisements  are 
prohibited.  Administrators  examine  each  new  account  to 
determine whether it is an authentic user or spam. By mid- 
May  2015,  there  were  over  74,000  registered  members, 
representing a wide range of geographic areas. While most 
of the users are located in China, many are Chinese residing 
in the U.S., Canada, Australia, Malaysia, Singapore, Japan, 
Germany, France, Korea, New Zealand, etc.  

in  China  without 

interviews  were 

Subject 

Friends of SunForum, share your encouragements! 
I have to take medicine again. 
A woman's story 
Accept Jesus’ love, your days will be full of hope, 
love, and power! 
Be patient, happiness may come slowly, as long as it 
is true; I need real happiness. 
The pressure that life can't bear - my journey of 
anxiety depression. 
Taking Chinese traditional medicine, continue to 
work hard, overcome depression! 
To live is to do meaningful things. 
Every exit is another entrance to a new place 
Sharing experiences of walking through depression, 
and collections of valuable threads. 

Replies 
3676 
3658 
3292 
3233 

3096 

2257 

2189 
1994 
1962 
1837 

Table 1. Top 10 threads that receive the most replies. 

Table 1 lists the top 10 most popular threads, all receiving 
thousands  of  follow-up  replies.  These  threads  continually 
attract  members’  attention  and  participation through  many 

SESSION: INTERNATONAL INSIGHTS

years.  The  top  1  thread  asking  for  encouragement  has 
received  3,676  replies  from  nearly  400  members,  such  as 
“Don’t give up! Every extremity is a fault; the darkest hour 
is before dawn.” As well, the thread “Sharing experiences of 
walking  through  depression,  and  collections  of  valuable 
threads” was created by one patient to share his experience 
of fighting depression, incorporating other threads beneficial 
to fellow patients. His experience on pharmacotherapy and 
morita 
therapy  (an  ecological  and  purpose-centered, 
response-oriented therapy) attracted 226 users to share their 
own experiences and exchange their opinions. 
Understanding and Depression Management in China 
A depressive disorder is a common and serious mental illness 
that interferes with daily life and normal functioning. It is 
different from occasional moodiness or sadness. Unlike other 
somatic diseases that have standard medical indicators, the 
conception of depression may be very different  in specific 
culture  contexts.  In  this  section,  we  discuss  how  our 
participants  understand  their  illness,  and  how  their  social 
context may affect their reaction to their depression.  
Lack of understanding: somatization, fear, stigmatization 
Through our observations online and in interviews, we found 
that patients discuss their illness from different perspectives, 
some  focusing  on 
the  body,  others  on  body-mind 
relationships. For instance, one of our interviewees strongly 
believes:  

“[Depression] is that my body is not in a perfect 
status.  It  may  be  related  to  my  psychological 
mood,  but  fundamentally  it’s  my  body  that  has 
some problems, so I would define my situation as 
my body not being in good health.” (p16, patient, male, 
age 26) 

While we do not know how many patients on this forum hold 
this belief, earlier studies indeed find that many depressed 
patients  with  a  Chinese  cultural  background  would  more 
likely describe their illness through somatic symptoms [36]. 
Compared to this purely body-oriented understanding, some 
patients seem able to consider their somatic symptoms along 
with psychological symptoms, as described below:  

“I believe depression is a type of mental illness. 
There are both physiological and psychological 
symptoms  when  I  am  in  a  major  episode. 
Physiologically, I suffer stomach pain, headache, 
insomnia, and I am inefficient in work and feel 
stupid  and  dumb.  Psychologically,  I  feel 
emotionally down, worry  excessively, think bad 
things happening, and lost all interests to the 
activities I used to enjoy a lot.” (p5, board master, 
female, age 35) 

Public  health  education  about  depression  has  been  largely 
missing in China, which explains what we observed and how 
in general people do not understand the illness and tend to 
associate  it  with  schizophrenia.  Indeed,  many  people, 
including the patients, greatly fear the illness. In our study, 
some patients described when they first were diagnosed and 
“labeled” as a depressed patient; some feared depression so 

519

much,  they  considered  it  a  “worse”  situation  than  getting 
cancer. One female patient described in the interview:  

it 

would 

“At first, I was extremely afraid of this illness. 
I didn’t know whether this illness could be cured, 
or 
affect 
body 
physiologically, such as getting married, having 
children.” (p4, board master, female, age 29) 

whether 

my 

The reaction of patients’ family members, after their child or 
spouse  is  diagnosed  with  depression,  is  also  dramatically 
different  from  how they  would  react to a somatic disease, 
wondering  “what’s  wrong  with  them.”  In  such  fear  of 
depression,  some  parents  from  an  older  generation  would 
believe there are bad, unlucky things or ghosts that inhabit 
the patient’s body; some even go further to  ask  help from 
fortune-tellers or conduct religious rites in an attempt to keep 
the bad things or ghosts away. One parent told us that her 
family conducted the religious rites without letting the child 
patient know about it. 
Furthermore, people without depression also fear interacting 
with  depressed  patients,  believing  that  depressed  patients 
may  take  unusual  and  unpredictable  actions,  e.g.,  sudden 
irritations leading to violence (similar to schizophrenia), or 
extreme sorrow and suicide. Therefore, many of them try to 
keep some distance from depressed patients. An interviewee 
expressed how his friends acted when he told them that he 
was depressed: 

“A friend of mine, not knowing I was a depressed 
patient,  was  talking  with  me  about  his  huge 
empathy  to  a  depressed  patient  who  tried  to 
commit suicide, and wished him to get treatment 
and  support.  However,  after  I  told  him  my 
depression, he was just disappeared and didn’t 
contact to me anymore. Another friend, after I 
told her the truth about my depression, added me 
to the blacklist of her WeChat2, never talking 
to me again, probably, thinking I should not be 
in the same social circle with her anymore.” (p10, 
patient, female, age 32) 

This fear and stigma may come from lack of understanding 
depression  as  a  form  of  mental  illness.  However,  Chinese 
cultural beliefs may have significant impact on how people 
perceive  the  illness  and  how  they  act  toward  the  patients. 
Here,  we  report  on  our  investigation  in  light  of  Chinese 
cultural beliefs:  
Beliefs and attitudes about depression 
In  addition  to  values,  norms,  and  personality,  people’s 
beliefs are a major antecedent of their social behaviors [5]. 
Deeply rooted in Confucian thought for thousands of years 
is the idea among Chinese people that individuals have the 
ability to exercise self-control, emphasizing efforts to self-
cultivation and self-perfection [27]. In our study, depressed 
patients  are  often  labeled  as  being  weak-willed  and 

2 WeChat provides text messaging, hold-to-talk voice messaging, 
broadcast (one-to-many) messaging, sharing of photographs and 
videos, and location sharing. WeChat has most of the functions 
that Facebook enables, making it the most popular networking 
application in China. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

psychologically lopsided. In addition, some symptoms (and 
related behaviors) of depression, e.g., sleeping excessively, 
being  constantly  unhappy,  are  regarded  as  laziness,  not 
trying  hard  enough,  and  weak-mindedness.  Lack  of  true 
knowledge about depression, even patients themselves also 
think  they  should  not  be  ill  because  they  used  to  be  very 
strong, as one patient described:  

“In  2006,  even  I  was  hospitalized,  I  did  not 
believe I had the illness condition, because I 
thought only the people who are psychologically 
fragile and close-minded may get this illness. I 
am quite outgoing and I should not have this.” 
(p2, administrator, male, age 28) 

Patients  are  often  criticized  by  their  family  members,  or 
mocked by their friends. Some of these people firmly believe 
that depression is just an alternative medical label for people 
who do not work hard, and they even persuade the patients 
not  to  take  medicine,  instead  focusing  on  strengthening 
personal will and making more effort to change the state of 
mind.  One  patient  interviewee’s  parents  even  refused  to 
bring her to see doctors, as described below:  

“My parents actually love me dearly; however they 
don’t understand my illness, calling me a lazy-
bone, an escapist. They didn’t give me money to 
see a doctor. Finally when they took me to the 
hospital, they fiercely argued with the doctors, 
saying doctors talk nonsense, and wanted to beat 
them up.” (p12, patient, female, age 32) 

Furthermore, these problematic beliefs about depression and 
this  stigmatization  may  lead  to  discrimination.  Numerous 
patients at the forum and our interviewees talked about how 
they  were  marginalized  and  discriminated  against  at  their 
workplace, and many even lost their jobs. One interviewee 
described his situation: 

“When  I  was  working at  the  Institute  for  Drug 
Control, I took my medical records to ask my boss 
for  a  sick  leave  and  it  was  granted.  However, 
after I came back, I was not allowed to work in 
the laboratory, and I was left with nothing else 
to  do,  being  completely  discriminated.”  (p2, 
administrator, male, age 28) 

Managing depression 
Patients with depression may experience serious conditions, 
i.e., clinically defined as a major depressive episode. During 
this  episode,  patients  may  present  many  symptoms, 
including loss of interest or pleasure in everyday activities, 
feeling  sad,  anxious,  hopeless,  helpless,  or  worthless,  and 
recurrent  thoughts  of  death  and  suicide  [1].  While  all 
depressed  patients  have  to  deal  with  these  issues,  what  is 
unique  about  Chinese  patients  is  that  they  often  have  to 
juggle  Western  modern  medicine, 
traditional  Chinese 
medical  beliefs,  and  religion,  and  they  experience  a 
significant lack of medical resources for treating depression.  
Traditional  Chinese  medicine  has  a  very  long  history  and 
been widely accepted for treating various diseases. However, 
unlike many other somatic diseases, there is no reasonable 
explanation and well-known therapy in traditional Chinese 
medicine for treating depressive disorders. Patients often are 

diagnosed  as  ganyutizhi  (a  somatic  disease  caused  by 
problems  with  the  liver)  or  shen-kui  (caused  by  problems 
with the kidneys). In Western medicine, there are systematic 
clinical and pathological analyses for depression; therefore, 
most  patients  in  our  study  trust  Western  medicine  and 
therapies for treatment, although it is widely believed among 
Chinese people that Western medicine has more severe side 
effects than traditional Chinese medicine [13]. 
While  taking  Western  medicine,  many  patients  also  try 
traditional  Chinese  medicines  to  relieve  the  side  effects 
caused by Western medicine and some somatic symptoms of 
depressive  disorders,  finding  it  very  effective.  Therefore, 
traditional Chinese medicine can be seen as a complement to 
Western  medicine  in  treating  depression.  One  interviewee 
told us his opinion on traditional Chinese medicine and how 
he used it to treat the side effects of Western medicine: 

“Based on the courses I have taken, there is no 
prescription for the treatment of depression or 
bipolar depression. Traditional Chinese medicine 
is  not  focused  on  mental  illness.  Traditional 
Chinese  medicine  can  relieve  the  side  effects 
caused by Western medicine. For example, I would 
be  extremely  thirsty  (that  water  won’t  help) 
after  taking  Western  medication.  I  bought 
traditional Chinese medicine herbals, boiled and 
then  drank  it.  After  one  week,  the  symptoms 
improved a lot, feeling no longer thirsty.” (p2, 
administrator, male, age 28) 

Interestingly  enough,  some  members  also  believe  that 
religion may also help them recover from depression even 
though they do not practice religion on a regular basis. In the 
discussion zone Religions, members share their experience 
of  coping  with  depression  via  practicing  Buddhism  or 
Christianity. In this context, belief in religion may be a more 
strategic  choice,  as  one  member  suffering  both  depression 
and anxiety disorder described: 

“I  only  have  faith  in  religion  and  practice 
Buddhism  when  my  depression  shows  up.  I  would 
get up early to chant Buddhism scriptures, and 
then my head becomes clear. When my anxiety gets 
serious, feeling the end of world coming, I start 
chanting  scriptures  to  easy  the  situation.  I 
think practicing Buddhism is more efficient than 
taking medication.” (p12, patient, female, age 32) 

Meanwhile, under the influence of Japanese culture, morita 
therapy  introduced  from  Japan  is  often  mentioned  and 
practiced by interviewees. The main idea of morita therapy 
is “following the way of nature as ideal,” closely related to 
Taoist  culture  [27],  making  it  very  easy  for  Chinese 
depressed  patients  to  accept.  Morita  therapy  is  popular  at 
SunForum, and there is a discussion zone Morita Therapy for 
discussing and sharing experiences with this approach.  
There are many problems and challenges for mental health 
systems  in  China,  for  example,  lack  of  medical  resources 
(psychiatrists,  hospital  beds),  lack  of  health  insurance 
coverage,  and  huge  mental  health  burdens  (e.g.,  91.8%  of 
diagnosed  mental  patients  never  seek  help)  [29].  These 

520

SESSION: INTERNATONAL INSIGHTS

present a lot of challenges for the depressed patients to seek 
professional help for their illness.  
The limited number of psychiatrists or professional doctors 
means that there is little time for patients to fully discuss their 
illness with doctors. The interviewees often expressed that 
the doctors were often in a hurry to finish the meeting and 
simply did not talk to them. One interviewee described the 
scenario as follows:  

“The  doctor  is  very  busy,  receiving  dozens  of 
patients a day. He did not have time to chat with 
me. He, in general, listens to me to describe my 
symptoms,  and  then  give  prescriptions.  He 
wouldn’t talk much.” (p19, patient, male, age 27) 

To see qualified doctors, patients in rural areas had to spend 
a lot of time, energy, and money to travel far to bigger cities. 
Indeed, there is great imbalance between costs and gains for 
patients. Because the doctors often have no time to engage in 
a conversation with patients about their illness, patients do 
not feel it is worth the time and effort to visit doctors, as one 
patient family member described: 

“Our trip to Shanghai is not very easy, departing 
about 6 o’clock in the morning, and arriving at 
about  11  o’clock.  It  took  about  10  minutes  to 
see  the  doctor  and  then  prescribe  medication. 
Then we return. At first time, he (the doctor) 
told us to take one (pill). The second time visit, 
with  a  lot  of  efforts  and  spending,  including 
traveling expenses, the doctor just told us to 
take one more (pill). Later, I did not go to see 
doctors  in  Shanghai,  because  the  cost  was  too 
high.” (p7, family member, female, age 36) 

At  SunForum,  many  members  discuss  medicines  and 
therapies,  share  their  successful  experience  and  therapies, 
ask and answer questions about treatments. Many discussion 
zones,  e.g.,  Recovery  Experience,  Medicine  Therapy, 
Psychological  Therapy,  and  Other  Therapies,  contain 
different  kinds  of  knowledge  for  managing  and  treating 
depressive  disorders.  There  are  also  several  professional 
psychologists  and  psychiatrists  who  answer  questions  in 
dedicated discussions. Many patients stay at SunForum after 
they  have  been  cured,  and  try  to  help  other  patients;  they 
were  often  consulted  for  specific  treatments  and  personal 
management  strategies  for  depression.  All  these  kinds  of 
online interactions cushion the significant impact of the lack 
of medical resources in China. 
Information Seeking and Social Interactions Online  
As  with  many  online  support  communities,  there  are 
abundant  information  support  and  social  interaction  at 
SunForum.  In  this  section,  we  focus  on  how  depressed 
patients  seek,  perceive,  and  process  online  information 
related to their illness,  as  well  as  social interactions  (both 
positive and negative). While some of the findings may be 
similar to previous findings in different communities [43, 44, 
47], our observations reveal nuanced details within a specific 
cultural context. 

521

Information sharing, perceiving, and processing 
As described earlier, the misunderstanding from the culture 
and society and lack of knowledge resources and education 
opportunities  may  be  some  of  the  encouraging  factors  for 
patients and family members to search for knowledge online 
about  mental  illness.  In  fact,  seven  of  our  interviewees 
mentioned  that  they  joined  SunForum  due  to  their  initial 
online  search  for  knowledge  about  depressive  disorders. 
Patients come to the forum with mental illness in different 
forms, e.g., mild depression, major depressive disorder, and 
bipolar disorder. While some information zones may present 
more knowledge and informational materials, all forums and 
sub-forums  have  the  discussion  feature  embedded  to 
facilitate learning and understanding. The knowledge about 
depression,  including  its  symptoms,  medical  explanations, 
treatments,  and  consequences,  helps  reduce  the  fear  that 
comes from knowing nothing about depression, and prepares 
the patients with knowledge they need to manage the illness. 
In addition to abundant information about depression across 
all  sub-forums,  personal  experiences  are  often  shared  in 
members’ diaries and stories about how they fight depression. 
At the forum, many members keep writing diaries about their 
life  and their  illness, including  daily  activities,  symptoms, 
thoughts  about  depression 
(desperation  and  hope), 
medication  they  use,  etc.  Some  members  have  even  been 
writing this kind of daily log for several years. Members not 
only learn from each other’s specific strategies, they also find 
hope  from  knowing  others’  experiences,  as  one  desperate 
wife described:  

“When I read how other patients described their 
own situations -- some of them were more severe 
but eventually got cured, I believed my husband 
would also be cured certainly. When I saw some 
patients also couldn’t wash their faces and lay 
in beds on their own (just like my husband), I 
knew it was a natural pathologic process and I 
should wait for medicine to take effects and be 
patient.” (p7, family member, female, age 36) 

the 

illness.  From 

At SunForum, it is very common that the knowledge learned 
from  elsewhere  is  reposted.  As  mentioned  earlier,  a  few 
psychologists and psychiatrists also regularly participate in 
online  discussions.  Their  answers  to  certain  questions  are 
often passed along. In addition, patients with long-standing 
situations  often  share  numerous  strategies  and 
their 
understanding  of 
this  perspective, 
informational support at SunForum is very effective. Indeed, 
the  forum  plays  an  important  role  in  helping  patients  and 
family  members  understand  the  illness  and  its  symptoms, 
making  them  less  fearful  about  depression,  and  correcting 
their problematic beliefs about depression.  
It is worth noting that members of SunForum also make their 
best effort to educate the general public beyond the forum 
community,  attempting  to  reduce  fear  and  discrimination 
about depression in the society. For instance, administrators 
of the forum and representative members often give lectures 
to  neighborhood  communities  and  universities,  and 
participate in TV shows to talk about depression and spread 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

knowledge of depressive disorders to a much larger audience. 
Furthermore,  SunForum  has  also  organized  members  to 
write a book, titled A Journey Through Days of Depression, 
containing  many  real  stories  which  have  been  posted  at 
SunForum  and  been  further  refined  by  the  corresponding 
posters, knowledge about depression, etc. The book has been 
reviewed by experts and published as public health education 
material, as the administrator promoted: 

“Let more people understand depression in China, 
so  that  the  society  gradually  increase  its 
awareness about this mental illness.” (Quote from 
online threads) 

While informational support is indeed evident, we are also 
interested in learning how depressed patients perceive and 
process information they receive at the forum. Earlier studies 
have examined whether depressed and non-depressed people 
differ  in  their  perception  and  processing  of  information. 
Exposed to the same information (mixed with depressing and 
non-depressing  content),  depressed  people  would  use  far 
more depressing adjectives to refer to themselves; and the 
degree  of  depression  also  has  an  impact,  i.e.,  clinically 
diagnosed severely depressed patients recall more negative 
than positive information as compared to mildly depressed 
patients [24]. Differences in how non-depressed, mildly, and 
severely  depressed  individuals  perceive  information  imply 
that people with depression may need special consideration 
when they experience social encounters, online and offline. 
While our findings show that most of the patients seem able 
to recognize positive social encounters and embrace them, 
certain  incidents  cause  patients  to  withdraw  from  the 
community,  or  ask  their  parents  or  spouses  to  help  find 
necessary  information,  due  to  their  extreme  sensitivity  to 
what others say online. One mother of a depressed daughter 
described it well:  

“[My  daughter]  said  seeing  much  of  this  sad 
content  caused  irritation.  I  don’t  have  such 
feelings. Perhaps this is the difference between 
me  and  my  child.  What  I  see  is  how  people 
suffering  depression  insist  on  fighting,  and 
what kinds of rational thinking they have.” (p8, 
family member, female, age 44) 

Similar cases show that some patients repeatedly call for the 
same emotional support (e.g., “I’m in pain. Who can help 
me?”),  while  not  being  able 
to  perceive  the  useful 
information  that  other  members,  including  doctors,  have 
provided,  which  results  in  negative  reactions  within  the 
community. This impaired perception of help and inability to 
process information among patients may help explain why 
many parents on behalf of their children (junior and adult), 
or  a  spouse  on  behalf  of  the  other  one,  participate  online 
rather  than  requiring  patients  to  endure  the  process 
themselves. As such, confederates help filter and pass along 
valuable information to their loved ones. For these patients, 
SunForum is a source of valuable information, but it allows 
patients  to  avoid  social  interactions  with  other  severely 
depressed patients who may post further depressing content. 

While  it  is  not  uncommon  to  experience  inflammatory 
remarks on any social media forum [32], depressed patients’ 
impaired  perception  and  inability  to  process  information, 
particularly  from  negative  social  encounters,  is  a  serious 
concern on a site meant to serve depressed people. When a 
patient is severely depressed and battling suicidal thoughts, 
a negative encounter with an encouraging comment to death 
(e.g., “Have  a  nice  trip  on  the  journey  to  death”) 
could result in tragedy. 
Online social interactions, good and bad 
As  we  discussed  earlier,  depressed  patients  are  often 
discriminated against in the society. In China, people tend to 
care more about their mianzi (face) (i.e., how others see them) 
than expressing or revealing their emotions and actual illness 
situations  to  get  understanding  [27].  In  fact,  mianzi  is 
identified  as  one  of  the  five  fundamental  Chinese  cultural 
values  relevant  to  people’s  conflict  behaviors,  along  with 
harmony, conformity, contextualism, and guanxi [21]. These 
cultural  values  influence  how  people  understand,  discuss, 
and  experience  mental  illness,  and  how  they  interact  with 
others offline and online. 
Many patients keep their depression secret from colleagues, 
friends, and even family members in the offline world. At 
SunForum,  a  digital  space  with  privacy  protection  and 
freedom, patients don’t have to worry about the mianzi, don’t 
have  to  afraid  of  revealing  their  secrets.  Privacy  in  this 
context can only be delivered with an online community, as 
the interviewee described:  

“Anonymous  brings  a  sense  of  security.  In  the 
real world, firstly, I fear of knowing by my work 
partners,  so  they  would  doubt  about  my  work 
ability  and  then  discriminate  me.  Secondly,  I 
worry  about  bring  troubles  to  myself,  such  as 
answering  the  same  questions  about  depression 
again and again to people who are curious, which 
would also makes me shameful in my workplace. I 
think  it  is  the  same  feeling  of  “coming  out” 
[Note by the authors, admitting in public about 
being homosexual].” (p10, patient, female, age 32) 

From our reading of the threads and our interviews, most of 
the members love the community and really want to spend 
time  at  the  forum.  One  patient  expressed  her  feeling  of 
gratitude and the sense of belonging to the community: 

“SunForum is full of warmth. When I just got sick, 
no one around me had this illness. I could not 
go to work, feeling gross and shamed, and hiding 
at  home  and  avoiding  seeing  anyone.  I  felt 
desperate. Now at SunForum we are together! The 
new  patients  can  find  belonging;  old  patients 
can share experience. We support each other and 
face many problems together. It's a really good 
experience, thanks!!” (Quote from online threads) 

that 

Indeed,  many  members  express 
they  not  only 
emotionally  attach  to  the  community,  but  also  rely  on 
SunForum to start their days, as described by one interviewee:  
“Every day, my first thing is to get on SunForum, 
check whether someone replies my post, and check 
on the status of several friends I deeply care 

522

SESSION: INTERNATONAL INSIGHTS

about. It has become a part of my life. Even when 
I’m completely cured, I also want to come here, 
perhaps acting as an experienced person to help 
those who need help. I have a life here; it’s 
part of my life!!” (p9, patient, female, age 27) 

The sense of belonging experienced at SunForum may also 
result from the lack of understanding and avoidance from the 
people around the patients in the physical world. In fact, this 
detachment from the physical world may be one of the main 
reasons for patients to join this online group. Indeed, what 
members do at SunForum also helps explain why SunForum 
is vital and able to attract patients to stay even after they get 
well and stay relatively depression-free for a long time. 
In addition to direct interactions at the forum, many instant 
chatting  groups  via  QQ  (instant  messaging  application), 
WeChat are organized and built for members of SunForum 
to chat based on similar background, e.g., groups for college 
students,  postpartum  depressed  mothers,  bipolar  disorder 
patients,  or  patients  in  different  locations  (e.g.,  Shanghai, 
Beijing, etc.). These messaging groups are very active. They 
can provide tangible offline support, and patients can choose 
how to interact with others. 
While  seeing  mostly  positive  social  interactions,  we 
observed a fair amount of negative encounters at SunForum. 
Some  members  repeatedly  post  the  same  question,  crying 
desperately  for  help,  yet  not  reading  the  posting  answers 
carefully, which irritate the members who have offered the 
help and may start an attack on the person. As well, while 
most  members  try  extremely  hard  to  comfort  a  depressed 
patient  with  recurrent  thought  of  death  and  attempts  to 
suicide, easing the situation and collectively tracking down 
the  patient’s  activities  at  all  times,  some  members  post 
inflammatory responses to the patients with their entangled 
suicidal thoughts, saying “Have a nice trip (to death); 
forgive me not to accompany you far.” Often, this type 
of  negative  response  invites  further  arguments  and  more 
judgmental comments:  

“You are such a boring and unscrupulous person. 
I’ve  already  warned  you:  don't  bully  patients 
and  encourage  them  to  commit  suicide.  Are  you 
shamed? Other members still talk to you because 
you are also a patient. But I don’t consider you 
a patient anymore; I see you as a dead for what 
you do and the words coming from your mouth, full 
of carrion smell.” (Quote from online threads) 

While this type of friction may originate from some members’ 
remorselessness toward their fellow patients, other conflicts 
may be inevitable due to their disagreement on their beliefs 
in certain treatments. For instance, one patient created three 
different threads aiming to “fight” with a member who often 
makes  exaggerated  claims  about  Buddhism  for  curing 
depression.  
DISCUSSION AND DESIGN IMPLICATIONS 
Our empirical findings provide a rich understanding of the 
influences  of  traditional  Chinese  culture  and  online  social 
interactions  in  a  sample  of  depressed  patients  and  their 

523

family  members.  As  illustrated,  members  described  how 
they  understood  depression  in  their  social  and  cultural 
context,  how  they  managed  the  illness,  and  how  they 
received huge benefits from engaging an online community 
as  a  means  to  compensate  for  the  lack  of  medical 
professional help in China.  In this section, we will further 
discuss our findings and present implications to raise public 
health  awareness  and 
to  better  support  depression 
populations with social media.  
Conflicts between Beliefs in Chinese Culture and 
Depression 
In China, influenced by the cultural beliefs of collectivism 
and  the  strength  of  internal  self-control  [27],  people  often 
neglect  self-value  or  hide  personal  emotional  states. 
Meanwhile, with the huge influence of Confucian thought, 
people are educated to use self-supervision and reflection to 
solve  inner  conflicts.  For  somatic  diseases,  people  could 
accept the diagnosis of Western medicine easily, as it could 
present  test  results  from  a  laboratory  or  from  radiology. 
Mental  illness,  however,  is  diagnosed  based  on  symptoms 
often  interpreted  not  as  clinical  but  behavioral  issues  in 
Chinese  cultural  beliefs  [22,  46].  This  is  reflected  in  our 
study,  as  many  members  reported  that  they  are  judged  by 
their co-workers, family members, and friends to lack strong 
will.  Many  people  either  simply  deny  the  concept  of 
depression, considering it an excuse for failure and for not 
working hard, or consider it to be the same as schizophrenia, 
staying away from the patients rather than providing much 
needed  social  support  and  emotional  help.  Furthermore, 
many  patients  themselves  describe  their  symptoms  from 
somatic perspectives when they see doctors [36], or blame 
themselves for being weak, trying to be strong to overcome 
the disorder without taking any medication. While our study 
did not particularly include doctors in our interviews, earlier 
studies  found  that  Chinese  doctors  tend  to  diagnose 
“neurasthenia,” focusing on the weakness of neuron nerves 
(i.e., a somatic description) in a patient who is diagnosed as 
depressed in the Western medical system [22, 28].  
In  Chinese  culture,  mainzi  (face)  and  guanxi  (connections 
and networks) are important cultural characteristics that have 
strong  implications  on  social  status  and  interpersonal 
relationships.  Losing  mainzi  or  not  being  able to  maintain 
and develop guanxi will harm one’s social status and success. 
With  marginalization,  stigmatization,  and  discrimination 
against depressed people, patients and their family members 
fear  admitting  the  disease  that  would  ultimately  hurt  their 
mainzi  and  damage 
their  guanxi.  These  cultural 
characteristics  can  prevent  understanding,  disclosure,  and 
even treatment of depression for patients and their families. 
Indeed,  cultural  beliefs  have  a  huge  influence  on  patients. 
They are the antecedents for patients’ social behaviors [27], 
which will be reflected in their experience dealing with the 
illness and the symptoms, including the descriptive language 
they use when they visit doctors, the treatment decisions they 
make, the relationships they maintain with doctors, and the 
outcomes they reach (such as suicide) [23]. Many Chinese 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

depressed  patients  simply  would  not  want  to  share  any 
information about their illness in the physical world due to 
its strong negative impact on their mainzi and guanxi.  
With  the  evolution  of  Chinese  society  and  the  spread  of 
Western culture and modern medicine, many Chinese people, 
especially  the  younger  generations,  have  started  to  learn 
about and accept depression as a form of mental illness. In 
our study, we observed that some patients’ parents insisted 
that their children did not have depressive disorders, while 
the patients themselves accepted the diagnosis. This scenario 
demonstrates that while traditional Chinese cultures indeed 
have influences on people’s attitudes toward mental health, 
the degree of the influence may have started to change. The 
following  factors  may  contribute  to  these  changes.  First, 
there  have  been  efforts,  although  not  enough,  to  bring 
attention to mental health and general well-being in China. 
For example, many universities and schools have started to 
provide psychological counseling services for education and 
treatment,  as  one  of  our  interviewees  described  how  the 
counseling service in his school had educated him and his 
parents  about  depression,  and  he  finally  understood  the 
illness  he  had  been  suffering.  Second,  many  influential 
celebrities  (e.g.,  popular  singers,  movie  stars,  and  TV 
anchors) have publicly admitted having clinical depression. 
For example, after three years of disappearing from public 
view and finally admitting his depression, a well-known TV 
anchor  made  an  interesting  claim:  “The  depressed  are  all 
geniuses.” He has since become a strong advocate for society 
to understand depressed patients [31]. Third, China passed 
the Mental Health Law of the People's Republic of China in 
2012 [7], which could be seen as a significant government 
effort to promote a better understanding of mental health as 
well as an important step toward improving general public 
well-being in Chinese society. 
Social Media and Promoting Mental Health  
Our  empirical  findings  illustrate that  social  media  such  as 
online  discussion  forums  can  play  a  significant  role  in 
improving mental illness management, taking advantage of 
patient  expertise  [9],  and  volunteer  professionals.  At 
SunForum, experienced patients and volunteer doctors work 
together to contribute valuable knowledge and information 
about depression, discuss symptoms, and help address new 
issues. This collaborative helping and learning process [15] 
can  fill  the  gap  left  by  the  lack  of  access  to  professional 
doctors  and  professional  knowledge.  In  this  section,  we 
further discuss our findings in the context of social media 
toward helping the depressed population, as well as draw out 
implications for design.  
Improving public understanding of depression 
As we have discussed, there are 30 million depressed patients 
in China, and Chinese society has a poor understanding of 
this  illness  for  various  reasons  (e.g.,  traditional  Chinese 
cultural beliefs, Chinese traditional medicine, public health 
education,  etc.)  Social  media,  such  as  SunForum,  can 
promote  public  understanding  of  depression,  including 

internal  resources,  e.g.,  accumulation  of  knowledge  and 
patient  expertise  within  the  online  community,  as  well  as 
with external approaches, e.g., television shows and books. 
However, we believe there still are many opportunities for 
social  media  to  improve  the  public’s  understanding  of 
depression,  especially  with  the  popularity  and  adoption  of 
micro-blogging and mobile computing. 
First,  there  is  a  need  to  systematically  aggregate  mental 
illness  knowledge  and  useful  coping  strategies  for  the 
purposes of education and sharing. Many recovered patients 
eagerly  share their successful  stories  and  experiences,  and 
these  cases  are  currently  scattered  everywhere  over  the 
forum,  even  though  there  is  a  designated  sub-forum  for 
successful  stories.  The  system  should  be  able  to  crosslink 
these cases, and invite these recovered members to provide 
further strategies to cope with major depressive episodes. In 
addition, valuable knowledge from external sources should 
be aggregated into the forum. Some members have taken the 
initiative to do this, but that effort is far from adequate.  
Second, social media and mobile platforms can be used to 
promote  public  understanding.  At  the  SunForum,  much 
knowledge and discussion of depression flow only within the 
community, making it very  difficult for outsiders to learn, 
understand,  sympathize,  and  support  depressed  patients. 
Therefore,  social  media  and  mobile  platforms  are  very 
important  for  sharing  knowledge  with  outsiders  and  the 
general public. In China, there are many large-scale, high-
speed  micro-blogging  platforms  (e.g.,  Weibo)  and  mobile 
platforms (e.g., WeChat) providing spaces for broadcasting 
different  kinds  of  knowledge  to  a  large  audience.  Our 
research suggests it would be extremely beneficial to share 
aggregated  knowledge  and  high-quality  content  about 
depression  with  the  public  via  micro-blogging  and mobile 
platforms. 
Connecting with online medical resources 
Due  to  the  limited  medical  resources  in  China,  many 
depressed patients have to invest a lot of money, time, and 
energy to go to a hospital, or even have no opportunity to 
receive  treatment.  With  the  increasing  prevalence  of  the 
Internet,  online  medical  websites  and  services,  including 
online psychotherapy and online diagnosis, increasingly gain 
attention. Several interviewees tell us they have tried online 
prescriptions from China’s most successful online medical 
website, HaoDaiFu3, to reduce costs. 
Connecting  online  medical  websites  with  online  support 
forums  could  benefit  both  sides.  On  the  one  hand,  online 
medical websites usually lack details of patients, which are 
often important for diagnosis and prescription. With online 
communities,  much  detailed  information,  e.g.,  their  mood, 
their  activities,  and  so  on,  can  be  provided.  On  the  other 

3  The  direct  translation  of  HaoDaiFu  is  Good  Doctors, 
http://www.haodf.com/,  a  Chinese  online  platform  that  many 
large health organizations participate to help people who would 
like to receive professional help via the Internet. 

524

SESSION: INTERNATONAL INSIGHTS

the  post 

hand, the doctors and psychiatrists of medical websites can 
participate in online forums, answering questions, providing 
professional advice, and connecting with patients.  
Dealing with impaired ability of information processing 
As shown, depressed patients may have impaired perception 
of  information,  which  can  enhance  depressing  and  sad 
content,  and  further  they  can  experience  negative  social 
encounters  (e.g.,  remorseless  comments  about  suicidal 
thoughts and attempts). However, there is no way for patients 
to  discern  depressing  and  sad  content  without  reading  it. 
Linguistic patterns of emotional signals can be used to detect 
whether 
is  depressing,  sad,  or  disturbing. 
Accordingly,  a  mindful  warning  can  be  provided  before 
users click the thread to read unwanted content. With the help 
of  professional  experts  or  board  masters,  this  censoring 
feature could help identify harmful content in advance, while 
not depriving members’ rights of freedom of speech.  
Automatically detecting user emotions and pushing positive 
information  can  also  be  incorporated  to  help  depressed 
patients.  Positive  content  is  often  accepted  and  needed  by 
depressed patients, however many of them stop to interact 
with others online when they are feeling bad and in fact need 
more  social  interactions.  We  speculate  that  mobile  and 
ubiquitous computing can be combined to achieve the goal 
of  actively  pushing  positive  information  and  promoting 
social  interactions  in  the  future.  For  instance,  wearable 
devices  can  detect  a  patient’s  mood  change  [40],  as  such, 
data generated in an online community and sensor data can 
be  used  jointly  to  identify  depressed  states,  and  promptly 
follow up with positive information and interactions. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we report a case study, including participant 
observations  and 
the  Chinese  online 
depression community, SunForum. Our findings reveal that 
Chinese cultural beliefs (e.g., the power of inner self-control) 
and  Chinese  beliefs  about  traditional  medicine  (e.g.,  the 
integrated  body-mind  relationship)  significantly  affect 
patients’ understanding of depression, illness management, 
and social interactions among this online patient population. 
These beliefs create problems of understanding depression in 
society  –  including  family  members,  friends,  co-workers, 
and  others  –  and  present  various  challenges  for  these 
depressed patients  who  could become  marginalized, suffer 
discrimination,  and  lose  their  jobs.  Due  to  limited  study 
scope, we do not claim to generalize our findings to apply to 
all other depressed patients in China.  Looking through the 
lens  of  SunForum  to  examine  depressed  patients  in  this 
Chinese community, we attempt to provide a unique account 
that  could  reveal  and  highlight  the  cultural  impact  on 
understanding  and  managing  this  illness.  Furthermore,  we 
draw implications for how Chinese society as a whole may 
respond  to  the  misunderstanding  of  mental  illness  and  the 
raising of public awareness, and also propose specific social 
media  designs  to  support  depressed  patients  as  they  seek 
online information and social support. 

interviews,  of 

525

is  supported  by 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank the reviewers for their valuable suggestions. The 
work 
the  National  Natural  Science 
Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant No.61332008. 
REFERENCES  
 1. American Psychiatric Association.2013.Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition. 
American Psychiatric Association. 

 2. Lisa J. Barney and Kathleen M. Griffiths, et 

al.2006.Stigma About Depression and its Impact On 
Help-Seeking Intentions.Australian and New Zealand 
Journal of Psychiatry 40, 1: 51-54. 

 3. Lisa J. Barney and Kathleen M. Griffiths, et 

al.2011.Explicit and Implicit Information Needs of 
People with Depression: A Qualitative Investigation of 
Problems Reported on an Online Depression Support 
Forum.BMC Psychiatry 11, 1: 88. 

 4. Harvey Russell Bernard.2013.Social Research Methods: 

Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches. Sage. 
 5. Michael Harris Bond.2009.Believing in Beliefs: A 

Scientific but Personal Quest. Springer. 

 6. Moira Burke and Cameron Marlow, et al.2010.Social 

Network Activity and Social Well-Being.In CHI'2010, 
1909-1912. 

 7. H.H. Chen and M.R. Phillips, et al.2012.Mental Health 

Law of the People's Republic of China.Shanghai 
Archives of Psychiatry 24, 6: 305-321. 

 8. Yulia E. Chentsova-Dutton and Andrew G. Ryder, et 

al.Understanding Depression Across Cultural Contexts. 

 9. Andrea Civan-Hartzler and David W. McDonald, et 

al.2010.Bringing the Field Into Focus: User-Centered 
Design of a Patient Expertise Locator.In CHI'2010, 
1675-1684. 

10. CNN.2014. Dubious Shrinks, Political Prisoners Inside 
China's Mental Health Care System.Retrieved July 22, 
2015 from 
http://edition.cnn.com/2014/05/06/world/asia/china-
mental-health/ 

11. Evelien Coppens and Chantal Van Audenhove, et 

al.2013.Public Attitudes Toward Depression and Help-
Seeking in Four European Countries Baseline Survey 
Prior to the OSPI-Europe Intervention.Journal of 
Affective Disorders 150, 2: 320-329. 

12. Kirsti A. Dyer and Cole D. Thompson.2000.Internet 
Use for Web-Education on the Overlooked Areas of 
Grief and Loss.CyberPsychology and Behavior 3, 2: 
255-270. 

13. Therese Hesketh and Weixing Zhu.1997.Health in 

China: Traditional Chinese Medicine: One Country, 
Two Systems.BMJ 315, 7100: 115-117. 

14. Diane Hoehn-Hyde and Robert S. Schlottmann, et 

al.1982.Perception of Social Interactions in Depressed 
Psychiatric Patients.Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology 50, 2: 209. 

15. Jina Huh and Mark S. Ackerman.2012.Collaborative 
Help in Chronic Disease Management: Supporting 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Individualized Problems.In CSCW'2012, 853-862. 

16. Lauren A. Jelenchick and Jens C. Eickhoff, et 

al.2013."Facebook Depression?" Social Networking 
Site Use and Depression in Older Adolescents.Journal 
of Adolescent Health 52, 1: 128-130. 

17. Santosh Kumar Kalwar.2010.Comparison of Human 
Anxiety Based on Different Cultural Backgrounds. 
Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking 13, 
4: 443-446. 

18. Santosh Kumar Kalwar and Kari Heikkinen, et 

al.2013.Quantifying Cultural Attributes for 
Understanding Human Behavior on the Internet.In 
Online Communities and Social Computing. Springer, 
40-49. 

19. Santosh Kumar Kalwar.2014.Conceptualizing and 

Measuring Human Anxiety On the 
Internet.Lappeenranta University of Technology. 

20. Tahir M. Khan and Syed A. Sulaiman, et 

al.2009.Attitude Toward Depression, its Complications, 
Prevention and Barriers to Seeking Help Among Ethnic 
Groups in Penang, Malaysia.Mental Health in Family 
Medicine 6, 4: 219. 

21. Paul S. Kirkbride and Sara FY Tang, et al.1991.Chinese 

Conflict Preferences and Negotiating Behaviour: 
Cultural and Psychological Influences.Organization 
Studies 12, 3: 365-386. 

22. Arthur Kleinman.1986.Social Origins of Distress and 

Disease: Depression, Neurasthenia, and Pain in 
Modern China. Yale University Press. 

23. Arthur Kleinman.2004.Culture and Depression.New 

England Journal of Medicine 351: 951-952. 

24. Nicholas A. Kuiper and Michael R. 

MacDonald.1982.Self and Other Perception in Mild 
Depressives.Social Cognition 1, 3: 223-239. 

25. Antonio Lasalvia and Silvia Zoppei, et al.2013.Global 
Pattern of Experienced and Anticipated Discrimination 
Reported by People with Major Depressive Disorder: A 
Cross-Sectional Survey.The Lancet 381, 9860: 55-62. 
26. S. Lee and A. Tsang, et al.2009.The Epidemiology of 

Depression in Metropolitan China.Psychological 
Medicine 39, 05: 735-747. 

27. Kwok Leung.2010.Beliefs in Chinese Culture.The 
Oxford handbook of Chinese psychology: 221-240. 
28. Guoxiang Liu.2009.Depression in China.The Twenty-

First Century Review, 114: 85-92. 

29. Jin Liu and Hong Ma, et al.2011.Mental Health System 

in China: History, Recent Service Reform and Future 
Challenges.World Psychiatry 10, 3: 210-216. 

30. Alan D. Lopez and Christopher C.J.L. Murray.1998.The 
Global Burden of Disease,1990-2020.Nature Medicine 
4, 11: 1241-1243. 

31. Metro Reader.2005. Cui Yongyuan: "the Depressed are 

All Geniuses".Retrieved July 22, 2015 from 
http://www.china.com.cn/chinese/CU-c/799421.htm 

32. Michael J. Moore and Tadashi Nakano, et 

al.2012.Anonymity and Roles Associated with 
Aggressive Posts in an Online Forum.Computers in 

 

526

Human Behavior 28, 3: 861-867. 

33. Michael J. Muller and Sandra Kogan.2010.Grounded 
Theory Method in HCI and CSCW.Cambridge: IBM 
Center for Social Software: 1-46. 

34. E. H. Nasser and J. C. Overholser.2005.Recovery from 
Major Depression: The Role of Support from Family, 
Friends, and Spiritual Beliefs.Acta Psychiatrica 
Scandinavica 111, 2: 125-132. 

35. Gwenn Schurgin O'Keeffe and Kathleen Clarke-

Pearson, et al.2011.The Impact of Social Media on 
Children, Adolescents, and Families.Pediatrics 127, 4: 
800-804. 

36. Gordon Parker and Y-C Cheah, et al.2001.Do the 
Chinese Somatize Depression? A Cross-Cultural 
Study.Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology 
36, 6: 287-293. 

37. Gordon Parker and Gemma Gladstone, et 

al.2001.Depression in the Planet's Largest Ethnic 
Group: The Chinese.American Journal of Psychiatry 
158, 6: 857-864. 

38. Research and Markets. Research Report On China's 

Antidepressant Market, 2013-2017.Retrieved July 22, 
2015 from 
http://www.researchandmarkets.com/reports/2365618/ 

39. Andrew G. Ryder and Jian Yang, et al.2008.The 

Cultural Shaping of Depression: Somatic Symptoms in 
China, Psychological Symptoms in North 
America?Journal of Abnormal Psychology 117, 2: 300. 

40. Gaetano Valenza and Mimma Nardelli, et 

al.2014.Wearable Monitoring for Mood Recognition in 
Bipolar Disorder Based on History-Dependent Long-
Term Heart Rate Variability Analysis.Biomedical and 
Health Informatics 5, 18: 1625-1635. 

41. Agnes Vayreda and Charles Antaki.2009.Social Support 

and Unsolicited Advice in a Bipolar Disorder Online 
Forum.Qualitative Health Research 19, 7: 931-942. 

42. Danfen Wang and Xiaoming Lei, et al.2004.The 

Depression of Chinese and the Reflection Related to 
their Society and Culture.Chinese General Practice 7, 
5: 315-317. 

43. Jing Wang and PatrickC. Shih, et al.2015.Life After 
Weight Loss: Design Implications for Community-
Based Long-Term Weight Management.CSCW 24, 4: 
353-384. 

44. Yi-Chia Wang and Robert Kraut, et al.2012.To Stay Or 

Leave?: The Relationship of Emotional and 
Informational Support to Commitment in Online Health 
Support Groups.In CSCW'2012, 833-842. 

45. Yu-Wen Ying.2002.The Conception of Depression in 
Chinese Americans.In Asian American Mental Health. 
Springer, 173-183. 

46. Dan Zhang.1995.Depression and Culture--A Chinese 
Perspective.Canadian Journal of Counselling 29, 3: 
227-233. 

47. Xiaomu Zhou and Si Sun, et al.2014.Sweet Home: 

Understanding Diabetes Management Via a Chinese 
Online Community.In CHI'2014, 3997-4006.

