CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Crafting the Image in Surgical Telemedicine 
Helena M. Mentis  

Ahmed Rahim and Pierre Theodore 

Department of Surgery 

University of California San Francisco Medical Center 

{Ahmed.Rahim, Pierre.Theodore}@ucsf.edu   

Department of Information Systems 

University of Maryland, Baltimore County 

mentis@umbc.edu 

ABSTRACT 
In the past few years, surgical telemedicine has emerged as 
a  promising  answer  to  the  increasing  needs  of  everyday 
surgical collaboration and education. The implicit desire is 
to  allow  a  remote  surgeon  to  see  the  body  as  the  local 
surgeon does in order to engage in shared decision-making 
or  instruction.  With  this  paper  we  take  a  step  back  by 
discussing  the  productive  and  cross-referential  nature  of 
surgical  practice  and  image  use. We  discuss  how  it  is  not 
simply  a  case  of  transferring  recorded  video,  but  rather  a 
new practice is instantiated in creating a view of the body 
for  the  remote  surgeon.  In  order  to  investigate  these 
practices for capturing and using video, we have deployed a 
head-mounted  video  camera  (via  the  Google  Glass)  in  six 
transplant  organ 
recovery  assessments.  Drawing  on 
observations  and  analysis  of  the  video  recordings,  we 
examine how the transmitting surgeon crafts a view for the 
remote surgeon in order to facilitate the co-construction of 
knowledge  and  shared  decision  making.    We  use  these 
findings to discuss further design directions for video use in 
expert telecommunication. 
Author Keywords 
Video recording; head-mounted; telemedicine; surgery; 
communication; co-construction. 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous.  
INTRODUCTION 
There  has  been  extensive  research  in  the  human-computer 
interaction  and  computer  supported  cooperative  work 
communities  on  the  tools  necessary  to  foster  effective 
collaboration  among  distributed  workers  (e.g.,  [9,12,27]). 
These studies have shown that video of the work area can 
help  people  collaborate  on  a  complex  task,  such  as  bike 
repair,  by  aiding  the  development  and  maintenance  of 
common  ground  [10,12,15,30,31].  However,  there  is  an 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not  made  or  distributed  for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for  components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be 
honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or 
republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
from 
specific  permission  and/or  a 
Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA  
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819978 

fee.  Request  permissions 

744

underlying assumption that what is seen in the transmitted 
images  or  video  are  unadulterated  –  that  it  is  what  one 
would  see  if  they  were  looking  directly  at  the  object  and, 
thus, knowledge from one form of visual representation to 
the other is easily captured and transferred. As we argue in 
this  paper,  simply  transmitting  an  image  does  not  directly 
translate 
to  collaborators  acquiring  an  effective  co-
constructed gaze. Much guidance is needed in interpreting 
and working with that image towards the particular goals of 
the collaborative pair.  
These are fundamental practices that have been extensively 
explored within the social studies of science. Many studies 
of  medical  image  use  discuss  the  negotiations  around  and 
interpretation  of  images  in  clinical  and  surgical  work  (cf. 
[2,23,26,37]), and that perception of visuals is situated and 
interactional  (cf.  [18,21,22,39]).  For  instance,  studies  of 
collocated medical and scientific collaboration have shown 
images, such as brain CT scans, being manipulated through 
rotation  during  discussions  to  aid  in  understanding  (e.g. 
[23,26,37]). Furthermore, the need for collaborative image 
interaction is intensified when one party does not impart the 
same level of expertise or ‘professional vision’ as the other 
[17,29].  In  this  sense,  the  question  of  interest  is  not  how 
video  imparts  additional  information,  but  rather  in  what 
way  do  the  collaborators  structure  the  video  in  order  to 
impart their view of the work to one another. 
Telemedicine is one domain where interaction with highly 
specialized  images  are  vital  for  the  efficient  and  effective 
conveyance  of  expert  information,  and  yet  collaborating 
individuals  may  not  have  the  same  form  of  expertise 
([1,3,7]).  This 
in  surgical 
telemedicine, which has emerged as a promising answer to 
the increasing needs of everyday surgical collaboration and 
education  [1,7,35].  However,  in  telemedicine,  the  remote 
surgeon cannot work with the body or the images – they are 
at  the  will  of  the  view  that  is  provided  to  them  by  the 
transmitting  surgeon.  This  in  turn  translates  to  the  work 
required  of  the  transmitting  surgeon  to  create  the  images 
for  both  surgeons  to  engage  in  the  co-construction  of 
knowledge  and  shared  decision-making.  In  this  paper,  we 
show that surgeons do not simply transmit images, but they 
engage in crafting the image, ultimately to be used to some 
collaborative  aim.  By  ‘crafting’  we  mean  the  deliberate 
execution  on  what  to  capture  and  how  to  capture  it,  thus, 
invoking  a  particular  view  of  the  body  and  actions  on  the 
body to be shared. 

is  particularly 

the  case 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

transplant 

recording  device 

Towards our goal of elucidating these crafting practices, we 
have  studied  the  deployment  of  a  head-mounted  video 
recording  device  in  telemedicine  during  transplant  organ 
recovery surgery. The scarcity of donor organs and the need 
to  ensure  that  all  implanted  organs  will  provide  quality, 
long-term  function  for  their  recipients,  mandates  very 
careful  organ  selection.  Often,  organ  recovery  for  use  in 
transplant  surgery  occurs  far  from  the  hospital  of  the 
transplant  recipient.  In  order  to  save  precious  time,  the 
recovery team travels to the donor to assesse the organs for 
viability while the transplant team will begin to prepare the 
patient. Currently, a remote recovery surgeon discusses any 
concerns  regarding  donor  organ  assessment  with  the 
implant surgeon by phone prior to proceeding with explant 
or  terminating  the  recovery.  In  order  to  enhance  co-
construction  of  knowledge,  and  improve  assessment  in  a 
limited window of time, we have deployed a head-mounted 
video 
recovery 
assessments. The video, coupled with consultation with an 
implanting surgeon at the time of procurement, promises to 
permit improved sharing of organ function assessment and 
facilitate  decision-making  between  recovery  and  implant 
surgeons. 
With this paper, we show the considerable work in  which 
surgeons  engage  in  order  to  capture  and  use  video 
effectively  for  communication  and  decision-making.  Our 
primary  aim  was  to  consider  the  ways  in  which  surgeons 
may craft the video in order to allow others to see the body 
through  indirect  vision.  Examining  these  occasions  when 
crafting  is  performed  exposes  how  a  recovery  surgeon’s 
interpretation  based  on  knowledge  and  experience  is 
manifest and glean insights in how practitioners choose to 
communicate  through  and  around  video.  From  these 
findings,  our  secondary  aim  to  consider  mechanisms  to 
enable  surgeons  to  observe  and  perceive together  in  order 
to  co-construct  their  understanding.  Although  the  use  of 
telemedicine  systems  and  opportunities  for  the  design  of 
mechanisms 
is 
increasingly  important,  this  research  can,  more  broadly, 
improve  our  understanding  of  how  using  video 
in 
distributed collaboration in any domain is not without work. 
BACKGROUND 
CSCW has had a long history of interest in video studies, 
such  as  by  Heath  and  Luff  [19,20]  and  John  Tang 
[24,40,41],  showing  the  benefit  of  video  for  collaboration 
above  and  beyond  voice.  In  particular,  a  shared  video 
stream  of  the  object  of  work  (as  opposed  to  videos  of 
to 
collaborators’ 
significantly 
and 
collaborative  work  outcomes.  For  instance,  collaborators 
prefer  to  look  at  and  benefit  most  from  video  of  the 
physical workspace, the task tools, and the worker’s hands 
as opposed to the worker’s face or other aspects of the work 
environment  [11,14].  In  addition,  collaborators  perform 
better when they are provided video of the workspace than 

talking  heads)  has  been 
improve 

communication  practices 

interaction  around 

those  videos 

shown 

in 

six 

for 

it 

required 

interaction 

[25]  discussion  of 

through  fluoroscopic  X-ray 

when  they  are  using  audio  only  communication  [6,8–
10,15,30,31].  
It is easy then to simply state that the transmitted images – 
whether  video  or  stills  –  offer  an  unadulterated  means  of 
seeing the body in telemedicine. However, medical images 
do not offer unmediated access to a body that exists outside 
of language and human actions. Rather physicians and other 
scientists  need  to  work  with  the  images  in  order  to 
understand  them  [5,26,37].  For  instance,  Alač  [2],  in  a 
study  of  neuroscientists’  use  of  fMRI  brain  images, 
observed  the  manipulation  of  medical  images  by  both 
parties,  e.g.  zooming  and  rotating  the  images,  during 
discussions in order to collaboratively understand and make 
meaningful what they were seeing.  
In surgery, the domain of our study, the importance of the 
manipulation of images on understanding is seen in the way 
surgeons  advance  through  images  as  demonstrated  by 
Johnson  et  al.’s 
interventional 
radiologists  viewing  the  temporal  sequencing  of  images 
when  advancing 
images. 
Koschmann  has  shown  the  importance  of  the  interpretive 
nature of seeing images in surgery and the effect it has over 
action [28,29]. Mentis and colleagues [32,34] in particular 
have shown that simply seeing surgical images was not an 
endpoint; 
discussion. 
Understanding is not achieved simply through moments of 
looking, but by virtue of seeing as the presentation unfolds. 
The perception and determination of location of ducts and 
arteries,  and  the  team’s  ability  to  comprehend  why  and 
where action should occur are accomplished in and through 
the  interaction  between  the  surgeons,  the  tools,  and  the 
images.  In  these  cases,  collaborative  interaction  with  the 
images allows for the surgeons to co-create a view and then 
to  co-construct  their  understanding  of  the  information 
before  them.  Thus,  simply  presenting  an  image  does  not 
directly translate to an effective medical gaze: manipulating 
an image so it is understood is first necessary before it can 
be used to guide procedures.  
The  consequence  of  this  manipulation  is  a  disciplined 
image  [23]  –  in  other  words,  the  body  is  visualized  and 
configured in such a way that it conforms to the needs of 
the surgeon and thus plays an important role in the way an 
image  is  discussed  and  acted  upon  [37].  Disciplining  the 
image is akin to the exposition of the body that has been an 
integral part of the practice of surgery from the beginning. 
Dissection is a process through which the internal body is 
made visible and identifiable [23]. This method of viewing 
the  body  is  a  part  of  the  training  and  visual  learning  of 
human  anatomy  that  a  surgeon  must  undergo  –  to  see  the 
body as parts that are separable from the whole body [23]. 
Thus, interactions with the body or the images of the body 
do not reveal the inner body as much as produce the body; 
and that in order to produce that body, the surgeon needs to 
discipline it.  

and 

745

As we argue in this paper, simply capturing and presenting 
an image does not directly translate to an effective medical 
gaze.  Thus,  this  points  to  the  need  to  investigate  how 
surgeons create a view towards co-construction when they 
are  distributed  in  time  and  space  as  they  typically  are  in 
surgical telemedicine. 
In  the  following  paper  we  describe  the  use  of  a  head-
mounted video recording device during the organ recovery 
phase of transplant surgery. The intention of video capture 
in  this  setting  is  to  facilitate  communication  regarding 
donor organ viability before the transplant recipient is to be 
prepared for surgery at another hospital. Through this trial, 
we  are  provided  with  the  opportunity  to  explore  how  and 
what surgeons capture, how the technology becomes a part 
of  the  practice  of  and  affects  organ  viability  discussions, 
and,  in  turn,  how  video  can  be  better  facilitated  in  the 
surgical environment.  
TRANSPLANT ORGAN RECOVERY ASSESSMENT 
In  the following, we describe  the crucial concerns in  lung 
and  heart  organ  assessment  in  cardiothoracic  transplant 
surgery.  There  is  a  need  to  conduct  these  assessments 
thoroughly  yet  quickly  and  then  be  able  to  effectively 
transmit  the  crucial  pieces  of  information  back  to  the 
implant  surgeon  for  final  recovery  decision-making.  It  is 
important  to  note  that  the  local  assessment  of  organs 
involve  both  a  visual  assessment  as  well  as  a  tactile 
assessment.  
Lung Assessment 
For lung assessment the recovery surgeon is concerned with 
whether the lungs can properly function and whether there 
is any structural damage to the tissue. First, they will assess 
the  lungs  for  fluid  and  tumors  through  palpation  (feeling 
with the fingers or hand) and visually investigate for signs 
of damage. Further investigation is necessary if there is any 
significant concern. 
For  instance,  atelectasis  (partially  collapsed  lung)  is  a 
typical  concern. 
inhalation 
oxygenates  the  blood  cells.  The  structures  that  allow  the 
transfer of oxygen molecules from the air inside the lung to 
a blood cell are alveoli. If the alveoli fail to inflate, then the 
bloods cells will not be oxygenated, which can prove fatal 
for  the  transplant  recipient.  In  organ  recovery  assessment, 
the anesthesiologist inflates the lungs with an endotracheal 
tube. At the same time, the surgeon manipulates the lungs 
in order to ‘pop open’ the structure, and prove the organ is 
usable.  This  is  a  visual  assessment  where  a  sanguine 
coloration shows the recruitment of alveoli – i.e., they open 
up and take on oxygen. 
Heart Assessment 
In heart assessment the recovery surgeon is concerned with 
proper  functioning  of  the  heart  and  whether  there  is  any 
structural  damage  to  the  organ.  They  note  whether  it  is 
beating,  whether  the  blood  pressure  is  acceptable,  and 
whether  or  not  there  is  something  grossly  wrong  with  the 

In  healthy 

tissue, 

lung 

746

SESSION: HEALTHCARE PROVIDERS

ID 

Type 

1 

2 

3 
4 
5 
6 

Heart and 
Lungs 
Heart-Lung 
Block 
Lungs 
Lungs 
Lungs 
Heart 

Recovery 
Surgeon 
Recovery A 

Implant 
Surgeon(s) 
Implant A & B 

Recovery B 

Implant A & B 

Recovery C 
Recovery B & C 
Recovery C 
Recovery A 

Implant A 
Implant A 
Implant A 
Implant B 

Table 1. Surgery trials with recovery and implant surgeon 

team configurations. 

rooms  around 

tissue,  such  as  a  hematoma  from  impact.  However, 
ventricular function is difficult to quantify and substantiate 
verbally.  Often,  the  assessment  is  tied  up  in  an  expert’s 
experience  of  what  does  and  does  not  constitute  a  well-
functioning heart. In these situations, communication ends 
with the assessment that “it’s not twisting correctly” or “it’s 
not squeezing correctly”.  
METHODS 
The  authors  deployed  a  first-person  video  capture  device 
during six (6) heart and lung organ recovery procedures in 
three  operating 
the  San  Francisco 
metropolitan  area  (Table  1).  Our  intention  with  this 
deployment was to observe the telemedicine-enabled organ 
recovery  procedures  while  understanding  the  collaborative 
organization  of  the  work  practices  and  the  use  of  first-
person video within those practices. 
Data Collection 
Data collection included observations of initial system use 
and integration of this new way of coordinating work into 
their  surgical  practices,  videos  that  were  captured  and 
shared by the device, and interviews with surgeons after the 
trial.  During  the  observations,  we  had  the  opportunity  to 
interact  with  the  recovery  surgeon,  providing  us  with 
additional  explanations  of  the  pathologies  and  procedures 
being undertaken, details of the concerns identified, use of 
the device, and explanations of decisions made.  
Following  the  collection  of  observation  notes  and  videos, 
we engaged in a series of interviews with the recovery and 
implant  surgeons.    During  these  interviews,  the  surgeons 
were asked to watch the collected videos again, and during 
these  review  sessions,  comment  on  what  was  occurring, 
what  they  were  attempting  to  capture,  why  they  were 
capturing  it,  and  what  the  outcome  of  the  case  was.    We 
also  took  these  interviews  as  an  opportunity  to  probe  the 
surgeons  on  current  practices  – 
the  challenges  of 
communication 
recovery 
assessments  and  the  opportunities  for  enhancing  these 
practices. 

decision-making 

and 

in 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

after 

assessment 

these 

are 

IN  ORGAN 

At that time, the researcher would ensure the device was on 
and recording and then placed the device on the head of the 
surgeon.  The surgeon would return to the field of operation 
to record their investigation and presentation of the organs 
(see Figure 1).  When completed, the surgeon would turn to 
the  researcher  to  have  them  remove  the  device.    The 
researcher  would  then  sync  the  device  with  a  laptop 
computer  in  order  to  upload  the  videos  to  a  secure  file 
sharing  service.  The  researcher  would  then  send  an  email 
with a link to the folder to the implant surgeon indicating 
that the video was now available.   
CURRENT  DISCUSSION  PRACTICES 
ASSESSMENT 
To  begin,  we  will  review  the  current  practices  in  organ 
assessment  as  evidenced  by  the  interviews  we  conducted 
with the implant and recovery surgeons.  
In  organ  recovery,  much  of  the  assessment  of  organ 
viability relies on the experience and ‘eye’ of the recovery 
surgeon. The recovery surgeon is to primarily communicate 
whether  there  is  a  problem  of  consequence;  otherwise  he 
does  not  comment  on  issues  that  may  be  perceived  as  a 
problem  –  in  those  cases  he  only  reports  on  organ 
acceptability.   
There are many reasons why a feature of the organ, such as 
a  significant  blemish  on  the  surface  of  the  lung,  may  be 
perceived by the recovery surgeon as a problem. However, 
if 
deemed 
inconsequential by the recovery surgeon, they are not raised 
during  the  phone  conversation  with  the  implant  surgeon. 
Often  during  our 
the  recovery  surgeons 
reiterated, “If I don’t feel that it is necessary to talk about 
anything that doesn’t affect the outcome or the usability of 
the  lungs,  I  don’t  bother  [discussing  it]  then.”  [Recovery 
Surgeon  B  Interview]  On  the  other  end  of  the  transplant 
process, the implant surgeon is at another hospital preparing 
the  patient  for  surgery  and  assumes  that  if  the  recovery 
surgeon calls after assessment then there is a concern of the 
organ  viability  for  transplant.  Thus,  in  many  cases  the 
practice is for the recovery surgeon to simply move ahead 
with  organ  recovery  or,  if  there  is  anything  deemed 
important to convey, to make a short debrief to the implant 
surgeon indicating their recommendation in proceeding.   
If  there  is  a  significant  concern  beforehand  with  the 
viability of the organ, then occasionally the implant surgeon 
will make the journey with the recovery surgeon to perform 
her  own  inspection.  However,  this  is  not  done  very  often 
and  if  it  does  occur  then  “the  fact  that  she’s  there  meant 
that we thought that they were bad. … ‘Cause otherwise she 
would  be  back,  sort  of  starting  an  operation  while  I’m 
taking the lungs out.” [Recovery Surgeon C Interview]  
However,  it  is  far  more  often  the  case  that  the  implant 
surgeon  is  not  available  to  accompany  the  recovery  team 
due to the time pressure on readying the recipient. In those 
events,  the  implant  surgeon  has  to  rely  upon  what  the 

interviews, 

features 

Figure 1. Surgeon wearing Google Glass during organ 

recovery surgery 

the 

the  contextual  understanding  of 

Data Analysis 
Within 
in  situ 
observations,  the  recordings  enabled  a  more  detailed, 
reflective  and  systematic  analysis  of  the  unfolding  actions 
of  the  recovery  surgeon  than  was  possible  during  in-the-
moment  observations.  A  detailed  transcription  including 
both talk and action was made of the collected videos and 
then  an  inductive  data-driven  analysis  was  performed  to 
find recurring patterns of interaction [13][16]. The focus of 
the analysis was on how the recovery surgeons created and 
used  these  videos  to  co-construct  their  understanding  in 
order to make a decision regarding organ viability.  
Google Glass as a Head-Mounted Video Capture Device 
For this investigation, we used the Google Glass as the tool 
for  recording  video  of  organ  function  during  recovery 
surgery for the implant surgeon. Google Glass is a wearable 
technology which features an optical head-mounted display, 
a touchpad located on the side to control the device, and a 
front-facing camera which affords users with the ability to 
take photos and record 720p HD video. The benefit of the 
Google Glass over an overhead camera or an assistant held 
camera was the ability for the surgeon to interact with it in a 
‘touchless’ manner. In other words, with the movement of 
his  head  and  body,  he  could  decide  where  to  focus  the 
camera  and  how  much  of  the  field  of  view  he  wished  to 
capture. In addition, the ability to be ‘hands free’ allowed 
the surgeon to manipulate the organs at the same time while 
filming. 
During  the  organ  recovery,  the  recovery  surgeon  would 
signal to a researcher when they were ready to video record 
the organ.  This could occur at any time during the recovery 
process  as  it  was  at  the  sole  discretion  of  the  recovery 
surgeon  to  identify  what  and  when  they  wanted  to  utilize 
the  device  to  capture  a  video.  However,  this  normally 
would  occur  after  the  donor  was  opened  and  organs  were 
exposed for assessment. 

747

reiteration  of  current  practices  highlights 

recovery surgeon observes and relates. There are times that 
the recovery surgeon may send a supplemental picture via 
camera phone for their discussion. The need of the implant 
surgeon  to  take  responsibility  for  the  final  outcome 
necessitates this additional resource for assessment – as we 
will  discuss  later  in  this  paper,  the  determination  of 
“acceptable”  is  up  for  interpretation.  As  another  very 
experienced  recovery  surgeon  shared  during  an  interview, 
there  is  a  clear  need  to  bring  the  implant  surgeon’s 
interpretation  of  visuals  into  the  decision-making  process, 
even when they are not able to be physically in the room. 
“We  have  [used  camera  phones],  for  communication, 
where we thought we needed to show the surgeon, “Look, 
there’s these boo-boos on the lungs. I don’t think they mean 
anything, but you still have the right to turn them down now 
that you can see what I’m talking about, not just taking my 
description  of  it  for  granted.”  [Recovery  Surgeon  B 
Interview] 
the 
This 
motivation  we  had  in  introducing  a  first  person  video 
recording device into transplant surgery. The utilitarian goal 
was to reduce the need to have the implant surgeon travel to 
the recovery site as well as reduce the need to use insecure 
personal  phones.  What  we  describe  in  the  next  section, 
though, is the work that goes into creating the videos in the 
OR for use during discussions between the surgeons. 
In  the  following,  we  delve  into  the  ways  in  which  the 
recovery surgeon used a first-person video recording device 
– what they chose to capture, how they captured it, and how 
these  shared  images  changed  or  affected  the  resulting 
discussion.  As  evidence,  we  present  interactions  from  the 
captured  videos  rounded  out  by  our  observational  field 
notes as well as quotes from interviews with the surgeons. 
We also present snapshots from the videos embedded in the 
transcription to show the manipulation of organs or deixis 
that  is  used  by  the  surgeons  in  order  to  provide  the  best 
view for the implant surgeon.  
CRAFTING OF VIDEO DURING ASSESSMENT 
Setting up the View 
In  three  of  our  six  cases,  we  saw  deliberate  use  of  the 
camera  to  capture  a  particular  view.  Those  resulted  in 
videos  that  lasted  less  than  a  minute  and  were  taken  only 
after  the  recovery  surgeon  fully  assessed  the  organs.  On 
these  videos,  a  narration  for  the  remote  surgeon  was  also 
capture.  On  all  of  the  videos,  a  good  deal  of  talk  was 
captured  –  primarily  between 
and 
anesthesiologist or supporting resident. Comments such as 
lung pressure provide further information or context to what 
the  implant  surgeon  is  seeing  and  doing.  However,  there 
were  also  a  number  of  examples  of  surgeons  specifically 
talking to the camera – elucidating what they are doing for 
the benefit of the implant surgeon. In the following, we first 
present a short video that captures the setup of the “view” 
as well as a narration for the remote surgeon. 

the 

surgeon 

SESSION: HEALTHCARE PROVIDERS

Surgery ID #1  
1  RS1:  Now  (1.2)  what  we’re  gonna  do  is- 
ma::ybe  >trying  to  just  sort  of<  take  that 
uh nick pad out_= 
2  Re: =[((Pulls out nick pad))]  
3  RS:         [Yeah, and then          ] 
(0.7) with your left hand sort of push down 
on the diaphragm towards the liver (,)=  
4    Re:  =((Inserts  [hand  ],  pushes  on 
diaphragm and heart/lungs lift up)) 
5  RS:                  [Yeah] 
6  OS: (1.2) Careful with that. That’s 
actually beating_(.) 
7  RS: Yeah_ 
8  Re: (1.2) Do you want any more (?) 
9  RS: Na::h. That’s that’s it.  
10 RS: (1.0)        That [shows the anterior 
wall:: (,)]  
11 RS:                   [((Moves in closer 
affecting a zoomed-in view))] 

 
 
 
  

In  this  case,  the  surgeon  conducted  his  investigation  and 
then put on the camera to selectively record a presentation 
of  the  organs.  In  lines  1  through  9,  the  video  captured 
conversation  between  the  recovery  surgeon,  resident,  and 
another surgeon who was waiting his turn for recovery of a 
different  organ.  Although  not  directly  for  the  implant 
surgeon’s benefit, this talk does provide further context of 
what was captured visually. In line 10, the recovery surgeon 
switches  to  speaking  for  the  sake  of  the  video  viewer  – 
elucidating  what  he  was  using  the  camera  to  capture.  In 
essence  directing  the  eyes  of  the  implant  surgeon  to  an 
important  piece  of  information  for  decision-making.  The 
resulting image change is evident in the closer view as well. 
Thus, in this instance, the recovery surgeon is crafting the 
image  by  only  capturing  what  he  wants  to  show  and  then 
narrating over it. 
There  were  other  times  when  the  talk  that  was  included 
centered  on  describing  what  act  the  recovery  surgeon  was 
about to perform and what he hoped to convey in that act 
solely for the video audience (i.e., the implant surgeon). 
Surgery ID #2 
1  RS: And I will (1.2) [pull a lung out(,) 
and  show  you  what  it  looks  like_] 
 
 

                                                             
1  RS=recovery  surgeon,  IS=implant  surgeon;  Re=resident, 
An=Anesthesiologist, OS=other surgeon 

748

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

2    RS:  ((Inserts  hand  [pulls  up  on  right 
lung]  and  holds  it  up 
))  
 
 
 
 
 
3  RS: (6.0) ((Places lung down)) And here 
is the apex_ ((Inserts hand and pulls up 
lung and holds 
))   
 
 
 
 
4  RS: (3.0) ((Places lung down again))  
In this case, the recovery surgeon directed his comments to 
the  implant  surgeon  by  saying,  “show  you”  in  line  1.  He 
described what he was about to do as well as why. He then 
holds the view at the end of line 2 and then again at the end 
of  line  3  for  a  few  seconds  each  time  to  ensure  a  clear 
capture of the image. What we see in these two examples is 
image crafting using the hands or head to lift up or zoom in 
on  the  organs.  These  actions  coupled  with  talk  elucidated 
what was important for the remote surgeon’s interest. 
Choosing  what  to  capture  or  providing  commentary  is  the 
crafting  work  that  is  taken  up  by  the  recovery  surgeon. 
Through a form of exposition, he crafts a view in order to 
support  co-construction  of  knowledge.  These  are  clearly 
actions  for  the  sole  motivation  of  disciplining  the  images 
for the remote surgeon to view and ‘see’ what the remote 
surgeon wants her to see. 
Capturing Competence 
Another  prevalent  use  of  the  video  was  to  display  the 
recovery  surgeon’s  expertise  and  competence.  This  is 
primarily  due  to  the  number  of  ‘questionable’  cases  that 
required  an  expert  eye.  As  the  responsibility  for  the  case 
always  resides  with  the  implant  surgeon  –  they  are 
ultimately  responsible  for  the  decision  to  take  and  use  an 
organ  –  there  is  a  great  deal  of  trust  between  the  implant 
and recovery surgeon. What we observed were a number of 
instances  where  the  recovery  surgeon  created  a  video  that 
captured  his  own  competence  in  assessment.  The  crafting 
process  in  these  examples,  then,  have  less  to  do  with 
crafting  the  specific  image  for  the  implant  surgeon  to 
assess,  and  more  to  do  with  crafting  a  visual  narrative  or 
record of one’s due diligence and assessment process. 
In the following example, we provide an instance where the 
demonstration  of  competence  and  experience  made  the 
difference  between  accepting  and  not  accepting  an  organ. 
With this case, a 15-year-old boy, who was in a fatal motor 
vehicle accident, donated both his heart and lungs. Because 
of  the  age  of  the  donor,  and  the  favorable  preoperative 

749

findings  from  CT  scans  and  echoes  of  the  heart  and  the 
lungs,  there  was  little  concern  of  the  organs  being 
unsuitable.  However, due to the blunt force involved in the 
accident,  inspection  for  any  permanent  damage  to  the 
organs  that  would  preclude  the  transplant  was  needed.  In 
this  case,  the  recovery  surgeon  decided  to  capture  the 
entirety of the inspection of the lungs. 
Surgery ID #2 
1  RS: ((Begins to squeeze the lungs)) Stop 
ventilation. ((waits for lungs to drop))  
2  RS: ((Feels for tumors and for fluid))  
3  RS: ((Begins to visually inspect the 
lungs on right side)) 
4  RS: ((Moves to other side of table to 
visually inspect the left lung))  
5  RS: ((Sees blemishes on the apex of the 
left lung))  
6  RS: ((Begins palpation of blemish)) 
In this video, he stopped ventilation in order for the lungs to 
deflate and drop down (line 1). This in turn allowed him to 
properly palpate the lungs and check for hard tumors or the 
telltale spongy feel and weight of fluid in the lungs (line 2). 
Satisfied  with  the  probe,  he  began  a  visual  inspection  on 
one side (line 3) and then the other (line 4). At this point he 
discovered significant blemishes (line 4), which led him to 
again  manually  inspect  the  apex  of  the  lung  (line  5).  This 
palpation allowed him to determine that the blemishes were 
not indicative of permanent damage. Later, during his call 
to  the  implant  surgeon  he  reviewed  what  inspections  he 
performed and referred to the blemishes that he found.  He 
then  continued  on  to  indicate:  “The  lungs  have  good 
function  and  I  think  they  would  be  fine.  We  don’t  have  to 
worry  about  those  bleeding  spots  because  they  will  go 
away.” 
In  this  case,  the  blemishes  could  be  construed  as  an 
indication  of  permanent  damage  –  not  entirely  surprising 
given 
the 
experience of the recovery surgeon allowed him to identify 
the concern, know the best way to assess the veracity of that 
concern  (through  palpation),  and  then  dismiss  the  concern 
when  enough  information  was  gathered.  Transmitting  the 
visuals  of  the  blemishes  to  the  implant  surgeon  would 
provide her with the information regarding the possibility of 
damage.  But,  it  was  the  video  of  him  palpating  the 
blemishes on the lungs coupled with his final interpretation 
of 
to  her  full 
understanding  of  the  situation  and  the  two  surgeons 
agreeing to proceed. So even if an implant surgeon sees the 
organs for herself, the recovery surgeon still needed to add 
the execution of the crucial palpation examination in order 
to facilitate the co-construction of their understanding. This 
was  provided  by  way  of  him  recording  his  palpation  as 
opposed to simply telling her. 
This case shows the importance of experience and trust in 
organ recovery. It also shows how video recordings entailed 
crafting practices in capturing and transmitting one’s entire 

the  motor-vehicle  accident.  Fortunately, 

them  not  being  a  concern 

that 

led 

process  of  assessment  in  order  to  hopefully  reduce  the 
chasm in the co-construction of knowledge between them. 
However,  in  the  following  case,  the  addition  of  visuals 
leads  to  an  additional  discussion  about  the  suitability  of  a 
donor heart that might not have occurred otherwise. 
Surgery ID #6 
1  RS: Lift up the LV out of the cavity so 
that we can just see the (.) anterior wall. 
2  Re: ((inserts hand and picks the heart 
out of the chest))  
3  RS: Is that a hematoma on the front wall 
or is that just [blood (?)] 
4  RS:          [wipes at splotch] 
 
5  Re:  
6  RS: (2.0) OK. ((  
 

[Just blood.] 
 

 

 )) 

the  blood  splotch.  The 

7  RS: (0.7) I think we have a little bit 
of a hematoma^ (1.0) That’s probably just 
from the sternum fracture_   
In this case, the surgeon started with attempting to capture 
a view of the heart by lifting it up. But as he looks on, he 
becomes  aware  of  a  troubling  indicator:  the  left  anterior 
descending  artery  of  the  heart,  which  is arguably one  of 
the most important arteries in the body, was running right 
through 
recovery  surgeon 
identified  this  in  line  3  and  tried  to  wipe  at  the  splotch, 
but  it  did  not  come  off  (line  4).  Then  in  line  6,  the 
recovery  surgeon  focused  on  the  heart  to  capture  the 
splotch  in  the  video and then asserted that it might be a 
hematoma  (line  7).  The  issue  he  then  had  to  address  is 
whether or not the coronary artery had been damaged and 
if the blood was coming out of the artery. If that were the 
case, then the heart would be turned down for transplant.  
The first investigation supported canceling the transplant. 
Most  senior  surgeons  would  decide  not  to  take  the  risk 
because  they  would  not  want  a  damaged  left  anterior 
descending artery on an implanted heart. The heart would 
not  work  or  it  would  quickly  fail.  But  the  recovery 
surgeon  did  not  think  it  was  a  damaged  artery.  His 
experience  led  him  to  believe  it  was  something  less 
severe. However, as he had the video at hand, he decided 
at  this  point  to  contact  the  implant  surgeon  and  pointed 
out the potential hematoma on the transferred video. This 
began a discussion between the implant surgeon  and the 
recovery  surgeon.    They  were  both  able  to  look  at  the 
organ  and  then  comment  on  it,  and  then  look  at  the 
hematoma. They decided to investigate the severity of the 
issue by trying to strip off the adherent clot. At this point, 
the recovery surgeon decided to record a new video. 

SESSION: HEALTHCARE PROVIDERS

1  RS: ((begins to manipulate the 
epicardium)) (10.0) ((successfully strips 
the adherent clot off))  
We  see  that  the  recovery  surgeon  determined  that  the 
blood  was  not  inside  of  the  heart,  it  was  not  around  the 
vessel, and the heart’s function was good. In this case, the 
outcome was a positive one. The visuals provided a point 
of discussion and agreement to use the heart. In the end, 
“The  patient  did  fantastic.  The  patient  weaned  off 
immediately, already has been discharged. … This human 
being may never have received the transplant had it not 
been 
for  real-time  harvest-to-implant  collaboration, 
potentially.”  [Recovery  Surgeon  A]  However,  in  this 
example, we see that the surgeon chose to capture a new 
video; this time to record the clot’s adherence and show if 
it is possible to remove it – which it was. Had it not been, 
this  video  would  have  been  further  evidence  towards 
rejecting the heart. Thus crafting the image is very much 
about  guiding  another’s  perception,  interpretation,  and 
ultimately  the  decision  by  deciding  for  the  remote 
collaborator what they can and should see. 
IMPACT OF CRAFTING ON THE WORK 
More Questions and Involvement 
An  interesting  change  in  practice  also  was  raised  in  the 
prior  vignette  (ID#6).  Due  to  his  experience,  the  recovery 
surgeon did not need to include the implant surgeon in this 
stage of the procedure. His motivation to include him was 
due  to  the  interest  in  the  implant  surgeon’s  assessment  of 
risk. However, the visuals furthered discussion beyond the 
‘agreement’ the recovery surgeon was expecting. Recovery 
Surgeon  A  later  reflected  during  his  interview,  “In  some 
ways,  the  real-time  communication  made  it  an  issue  that 
may not have been an issue otherwise. In other words, if he 
hadn’t  known  that  there  was  a  possible  issue,  I  might’ve 
just harvested the heart, brought it back, and nobody would 
ever thought about it. But because I made him aware of the 
issue, then all of a sudden, he got cold feet and then I had to 
bring him back into the full disorder.” 
We have seen this in other cases as well. For instance, on 
reflection  of  the  15-year  old  motor-vehicle  accident  case 
(ID #2) during the follow-up interview, Recovery Surgeon 
B further elaborated: “[T]here’s a very short moment when 
you  see  the  tip  of  the  right  lung  that  actually  looks  pretty 
ugly. It kinda looks bloody. And that's the kind of thing that 
needs  my  commentary.  The  [implant]  surgeon  said,  “Oh, 
what  the  hell  is  this?”  and  “Are  you  sure  this  is  okay?” 
And  I  said,  “Yeah,  it  is  because  it’s  only  superficial.”  
Thus, there is often a need to reassure when the visuals are 
shared with the implant surgeon – even for those with years 
of experience and an ‘expert eye’.  
As  additional  visuals  lead  to  more  questions,  recovery 
surgeons  need  to  consider  what  to  capture,  what  to  say 
while  presenting  the  visuals,  and  how  to  describe  it 
afterwards  during  the  conversation.  This  is  potentially  a 
confusing task as a concern of a recovery surgeon may not 

750

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

be  the  same  as  a  concern  of  an  implant  surgeon.  And  so, 
one  question  is  if  the  recovery  surgeon  should  err  on  the 
side of showing and commenting on everything as opposed 
to only that which he deems important.  Recovery Surgeon 
B  shared  that,  despite  his  extensive  experience  and  the 
immense  trust  other  surgeons  have  in  his  assessment, 
“Some  surgeons  have  different  opinions  about  what  they 
want  to  accept,  and  therefore,  what  I  think  is  acceptable 
may  not  be  acceptable  to  a  colleague.”  In  this  regard, 
crafting  an  image  is  very  much  about  what  one  deems 
important  enough  to  share  and  how  one  disciplines  the 
image is very much about imparting one’s own professional 
vision of an acceptable organ. The need to reassure impacts 
which visuals are chosen and thus crafting what one wants 
the  other  person  to  see.  Thus,  crafting  requires  much 
forethought  to  the  impact  the  images  will  have  on  the 
subsequent discussion. 
Pushing the Boundaries of What is Acceptable 
Despite the extra work for experienced surgeons to explain 
away perceived problems, the video recordings do provide 
a benefit in facilitating the decision to push the boundaries 
for organ acceptance. By ‘push the boundaries’ we are not 
suggesting surgeons are becoming haphazard in their choice 
of organs, but rather there is room for discussion in order to 
co-construct  knowledge  by  harnessing  the  experience  and 
knowledge,of both actors.  
As  there  is  an  ever-growing  need  for  organ  transplants, 
there is a push for surgeons to start accepting more organs. 
This increases the need for the transplant team to come to 
an agreement on acceptability even in the face of trying to 
be  more  inclusive  of  potential  donor  organs.  In  the 
following  case,  the  potential  for  using  a  lung  led  to  the 
acceptance of a lung that, in the end, did have a problem, 
albeit  minor  and  easily  addressed.  The  donor  had  a  prior 
operation on her right side, which had made the apex of the 
lung stuck due to an inordinate amount of scar tissue. The 
team was not sure if they were going to be able to remove 
the lungs without damaging them beyond use.  
Surgery ID #4 
1  RS: Lung’s down (?)  
2  An: Lung’s down_ 
3  RS: Okay. (5.0)((pulls down on lung and 
holds down                    ))  
 
 
 
4  RS: (1.0) ((speaking to resident)) See 
because if we injured the lung here, then 
we know this is the- (0.5) It's all over 
for us. ((begins cauterizing adhesions))  
The recovery surgeon knew the delicate job he had before 
him – that he had to take down all the adhesions first before 
he could then test the lungs to see if they were damaged. It 
is interesting to note that he chose to record this work: the 

to  capture 

recovery  surgeon  wanted 
the  process  of 
removing the scar tissue so the implant surgeon could see 
how stuck the lung had been. As a result this was by far our 
longest  recording  (11:37  in  total).  After  six  minutes  of 
removing  the  adhesions,  the  recovery  surgeon  felt  he  was 
ready to start the crucial tests. 
4  RS: Alright, can I have uh saline(?) 
(1.5) I just wanna test it, see if there 
are leaks and then-  
5  RS: (13.0) You're uh ventilating?  
6  An: Yeah. 
7  RS: Can I give- have you give a 
valsalva(?) 
8  An: Uh sure. 
9  RS: (1.0) Do you have a bucket of saline 
for me?  
10 An: How many centimeters of water?  
11 RS: 20, please. (3.0) Feel like the, 
that’s not- 
12 An: ((arrives with water))  
13 RS: Yeah just poor it in here. Is it 
warm(?)[Sorry. Yeah(?)] 
14 An: [((nods))      ] 
15 RS: (2.0) Okay. ((watching for leaks 
from the ventilated lungs)) (7.0) O:kay.  
       [Looks pretty good(,)]  
16 Re: Mmmhmm^. 
17 RS: Alright^ success:  
At the end of this case, the recovery surgeon had to test the 
lungs to see if he had caused holes or tears in the lung. They 
immersed  the  lungs  in  saline  to  show  there  were  no  air 
leaks.  At  this  point,  both  the  attending  recovery  surgeon 
and the assisting resident agreed that they saw no leaks. The 
recovery  surgeon  then  called  the  implant  surgeon  and  the 
two  surgeons  had  an  extensive  phone  conversation 
regarding the lungs. In the end the final decision was short 
with the single question, “So, can we use them?” and reply, 
“Yeah,  use  them.”  Unfortunately,  when  the  team  arrived 
back  to  the  implant  hospital  with  the  lungs,  though,  there 
were  air  leaks.  In  the  end,  the  lung  was  used,  but  the 
implant surgeon had to remove the part that was leaking.  
When Recovery Surgeon C was asked what was the benefit 
of having the device in this situation, he answered, “At least 
she  had  proof  that  it  didn’t  leak  before  she  accepted  the 
lung.” As we mentioned before, the responsibility lies with 
the  implant  surgeon.  Ultimately,  she  can  only  make 
decisions with the information made available to her. In this 
case,  the  information  and  the  methods  of  assessment 
indicated  that  the  lung  would  be  functional  despite  the 
concern. It is not clear if leaking had been detected earlier if 
the implant surgeon would still not have taken the lung and 
continued  by  removing  the  damaged  section,  but  we  do 
have  evidence  that  the  visuals  reassured  all  individuals 
during  decision-making  as  well  as  during  after-the-fact 
reflection on decision-making. 
Visuals in telemedicine help push the boundaries in aiding 
to  make  a  final  decision  in  the  face  of  contra-indicative 

751

evidence. Recovery Surgeon B reflected on his 25 years of 
practice and how the field has significantly changed: “We 
are taking lungs that have been subjected to being bashed 
around,  as  I  say.  Somebody  who’s  been  hit  by  a  car,  and 
what  I  call  high-speed,  high  deceleration  trauma,  which 
means that the organs are moving inside the body. … And 
when I started doing this … we wouldn’t even touch these 
lungs. We would say, “Oh, they’re not gonna be good.” We 
do  [use  them]  now.”  This  is  partially  due  to  advanced 
medical  knowledge  and  partially  due  to  devices  that,  for 
example,  allow  the  team  to  clear  a  lung  full  of  fluid  by 
circulating  the  lungs  outside  of  the  body  for  a  few  hours 
before  being  transplanted.  However,  the  transfer  of  all  of 
the vital information for consideration, such as the feel of 
heavy lungs indicating they are very full of fluid, while also 
seeing the quality of the lungs may be the impetus to allow 
the implant surgeon to choose to try to save  the  lungs  for 
later transplant instead of canceling the entire procedure.  
For  all  intents  and  purposes  the  lungs  would  have  been 
acceptable.  However,  the  scar  tissue  adhesions  brought  a 
moment  of  doubt  into  the  minds  of  the  implant  and 
recovery surgeons. The use of visuals allowed them both to 
seriously  weigh  this  doubt  and  make  a  decision  together 
with all of the information before them. What we see then is 
a  deliberate  crafting  of  the  video  with  the  understanding 
that  the  evidence  provided  will  fundamentally  affect 
discussions  and  decision  making.  In  this  regard,  the 
recovery surgeon’s decisions on what to capture and how to 
capture  it  is  the  act  of  disciplining  the  images  for 
communicating an intent for action to their collaborator.  
DISCUSSION 
In  this  study  of  video  creation  and  use,  we  were  most 
interested  in  the  patterns  of  action  and  interaction  that 
resulted from the use of the device and transmission of the 
videos. We wanted to unfold the acts of creation and use of 
images beyond that of simply looking at them and instead 
show  how  collaborators  interpret  and  work  with  them  in 
concert. We investigated how the use of such technologies 
in transplant surgery facilitated organ viability assessments 
and  how 
the 
recovery  and  implant  surgeons.  But  more  importantly,  we 
explored  how  crafting  the  image  through  selection  and 
presentation is work that constitutes the difference between 
simple transmission to one of co-construction. 
As  we  see  from  the  cases  presented,  the  benefits  of  the 
videos 
the 
assessment of the organs by a remote implant surgeon and 
to  engage  in  a  dialogue  between  recovery  and  implant 
surgeons  in  using  organs  that  may  show  some  contra-
indicative  evidence.  We  also  see  a  number  of  additional 
costs on the surgeons, such as the need to choose whether 
they will transfer their entire investigation or only a select 
video  fragment,  the  need  for  commentary  by  the  recovery 
surgeon  either  during  or  after  the  recording,  and  often 
additional discussion that would not have occurred had the 

transformed  communication  between 

telemedicine 

to  support 

is 

it 

in 

transplant 

SESSION: HEALTHCARE PROVIDERS

the 

image 

towards 

implant surgeon not had access to the visuals. We showed 
how  recoveries  led  by  senior  surgeons  were  also  affected 
despite the enduring trust between the various partners. But 
the benefit is that it will also allow for more potential donor 
organ use due to the ability to discuss problems and make a 
plan for making sure the organ is useable. 
Tying  these  findings  back  to  the  prior  work  in  the  social 
studies  of  science  as  well  as  prior  work  on  imaging 
interaction  in  surgery,  we  see  that  the  manipulation  is 
prescribed  by  the  sender,  both  in  terms  of  when  capture 
occurs as well as what is captured (i.e. the entire process of 
inspection  or  a  single  view)  and  how  it  is  presented  (e.g. 
organ  held  up,  zoomed  it).  All  of  this  is  a  form  of 
disciplining 
their  collaborator’s 
understanding.  Remember,  usually  the  recovery  surgeon 
has already begun the surgery by opening up the donor and 
conducting  any  exposition  of  the  body  that  was  necessary 
before  assessing  the  organs  themselves.  Thus,  they  are 
bringing  in  the  camera  after  they  have  already  disciplined 
the  body.  They  then  discipline  the  image  by  choosing  the 
view  or  process  they  wish  to  show  and  overlaying  it  with 
appropriate  and  meaningful  talk.  Thus,  by  ‘crafting’  we 
mean that the process of disciplining the image leads to a 
particular presentation for a particular aim. Because of this 
the  remote  implant  surgeon  has  no  recourse  but  to  accept 
the  images  as  a  form  of  truth  and  then  ask  for  further 
information  via  a  series  of  questions.  Although  they  have 
more information, they themselves are not disciplining the 
body or images and thus the interaction with the body and 
images that has been shown to be so vital in prior work has 
been taken away from the remote surgeon.  
This  is  where  we  return  to  a  discussion  of  the  tools  that 
bring  the  remote  collaborator  back  into  the  fold  of  image 
creation and use. In the following, we further explore two 
design opportunities for collaborative image interaction.  
Collaborative Image Interaction in Surgical Telemedicine 
In  the  case  of  recorded  video,  such  as  in  the  situations 
presented  in  this  paper,  we  see  the  need  for  a  mechanism 
for  linking  explicit  commentary  along  with  the  video 
captured. The appearance would remain mostly unchanged 
– capturing the talk by the surgeons during video capture. 
However,  keywords  would  provide  a  ‘bookmark’  on  the 
video  that  is  easily  accessed  by  the  implant  surgeon  to 
either jump to a part of the video that she wishes to view or 
even to reiterate what is being viewed at any given moment. 
This  could  be  realized  through  a  hyperlinks  mechanism 
such  as  the  ones  proposed  by  Shipman  et  al.  [38]  that 
supports hyperlink for navigating between video sequences 
or even within one video. 
Particularly  in  situations  where  there  is  a  live  video  feed 
between  the  local  and  remote  surgeon,  though,  it  is  clear 
that  this  would  allow  for  the  real  time  description  by  the 
surgeon  and  elucidation  if  there  are  further  questions.  In 
addition,  this  would  support  ‘guidance’  practices  such  as 
instructing  a  surgeon  in  feeling  the  lungs  and  describing 

752

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

the  predominant 

telepointer  was  used 

what  they  feel  through  a  question  and  answer  process.  A 
live  feed  could  better  support  the  co-constructive  practice 
between  the  recovery  and  implant  surgeons  in  deciding 
whether to use an organ, and ultimately push the boundaries 
regarding organ recovery assessments.  
We  could  also  go  much  further  than  simply  transmiting 
video in a real-time communication channel. For instance, 
we  know  that  mediated  communication  is  even  more 
effective when annotation and gesturing tools are provided 
for shared video of the workspace. For instance, Fussell et 
al. [12] illustrated that the ability to gesture and annotate a 
video feed led to shorter, more efficient communication and 
quicker  task  performance  than  when  simply  utilizing  an 
audio-video connection.  Bauer et al. [4] found that experts 
are 90% more likely to point instead of speak when given a 
choice,  and  a 
in  99%  of  all 
communications.  In  addition,  studies  of  shared  drawing 
environments  have  shown  the  importance  of  these  tools, 
15% of people’s verbal interactions included gestures such 
as  circles  and  arrows  [42,43].  And  in  systems  where  pens 
can  be  used  for  both  drawing  (when  pressed  down  on  the 
drawing  surface)  and  gesturing  (when  not  pressed  down), 
nearly  half  of  all  users’  pen  activity  was  for  gesturing 
purposes [42].  
However, 
telecommunication  system 
design  in  this  line  of  research  is  an  asymmetric  image 
interaction  paradigm  where  certain 
interaction 
functions  are  only  available  to  one  party.  For  instance,  a 
video of the workspace is transmitted to a remote helper for 
him to annotate, but the worker does not have the ability to 
annotate  the  images  himself;  or  the  video  taken  by  the 
worker  is  transmitted  to  the  helper,  but  the  helper  has  no 
mechanism  for  manipulating 
the  video  himself.  The 
asymmetric  image  interaction  paradigm  does  not  support 
collaboratively interacting with images to mutually craft (or 
discipline)  towards  understanding  what  is  being  seen.  We 
could  provide  manipulation  and  annotation  tools  for  both 
distributed  parties  to  use  during  discussion  and  decision 
making. A collaborative image interaction paradigm would 
provide the option for both distributed parties to annotate or 
manipulate  the  images  and,  thus,  work  together  with  the 
images  towards  a  shared  understanding  and  course  of 
action.  
CONCLUSION 
Surgical  telemedicine  will  change  the  professional  vision 
and the collaborative practices of the surgeon. It is changing 
what it means to perform surgery on the body and to ‘see’ 
the  body  through  new  imaging  techniques.  From  our 
observations of surgical telemedicine in transplant surgery 
we see the evolution of new practices that allow the remote 
surgeon  to  ‘see’  the  body  through  the  local  surgeon’s 
crafting of a view with visuals and talk. We see again how 
images do not hold within them the information that simply 
needs  to  be  accessed,  but  rather  that  (1)  local  surgeons 
discipline 
impart  particular 

in  order 

images 

image 

the 

to 

753

the 

in 

of 

the 

various 

interactive 

information into the collaborative discussion and (2) remote 
surgeons are reliant on the crafting of the local surgeon as 
they  have  no  recourse  for  disciplining 
images 
themselves.  The  importance  of  this  second  point  is  the 
directions  it  can  suggest  for  future  telemedicine  system 
design. Thus our intention has been to lay a foundation for 
the  innovation  of  new  collaborative  image  interactive 
mechanisms for surgical telemedicine. 
These findings complement prior work in the HCI field that 
discuss 
interactional 
mechanisms  of  image  use  in  the  OR  and  the  constructive 
way surgical knowledge is created and communicated in an 
embodied  manner  [28,29,33,34,36].  However,  this  work 
goes further by showing that new forms of image capturing 
technologies  allow  one  collaborator  to  craft  a  particular 
perspective  and 
the  different 
perspectives of the collaborators.  
REFERENCES 
1.  Margunn  Aanestad.  2003.  The  Camera  as  an  Actor 
Design-in-Use  of  Telemedicine 
in 
Surgery.  Computer  Supported  Cooperative  Work 
(CSCW) 
1–20. 
http://doi.org/10.1023/A:1022492210898 

Infrastructure 
1, 

further  align 

12, 

turn 

and 

2.  Morana Alac. 2008. Working with Brain Scans: Digital 
Images  and  Gestural  Interaction  in  fMRI  Laboratory. 
4, 
483–508. 
Social 
http://doi.org/10.1177/0306312708089715 

Science 

Studies 

38, 

3.  Nigel  R  Armfield,  Sisira  K  Edirippulige,  Natalie 
Bradford, and Anthony C Smith. 2014. Telemedicine--is 
the cart being put before the horse? The Medical journal 
530–3. 
of 
http://doi.org/10.5694/mja13.11101 

Australia 

200, 

4.  Martin  Bauer,  Gerd  Kortuem,  and  Zary  Segall.  1999. 
“Where  are  you  pointing  at?”  A  study  of  remote 
collaboration  in  a  wearable  videoconference  system. 
Digest  of  Papers.  Third  International  Symposium  on 
Wearable  Computers,  IEEE  Comput.  Soc,  151–158. 
http://doi.org/10.1109/ISWC.1999.806696 

5.  Anne Beaulieu. 2002. Images Are Not the (Only) Truth: 
Brain  Mapping,  Visual  Knowledge,  and  Iconoclasm. 
Science,  Technology  &  Human  Values  27,  1,  53–86. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/016224390202700103 

6.  Owen  Daly-Jones,  Andrew  Monk,  and  Leon  Watts. 
1998.  Some  advantages  of  video  conferencing  over 
high-quality audio conferencing: fluency and awareness 
of  attentional  focus.  International  Journal  of  Human-
21–58. 
Computer 
http://doi.org/10.1006/ijhc.1998.0195 

Studies 

49, 

7.  Nicolas  Demartines,  Didier  Mutter,  Michel  Vix,  et  al. 
2000. Assessment of telemedicine in surgical education 
and  patient  care.  Annals  of  surgery  231,  2,  282–91. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?art
id=1420998&tool=pmcentrez&rendertype=abstract 

2015 

May 

25, 

9, 

1, 

8. Gwyneth  Doherty-Sneddon,  Anne  Anderson,  Claire
O’Malley,  Steve  Langton,  Simon  Garrod,  and  Vicki
Bruce. 
video-mediated
communication: A comparison of dialogue structure and
task performance. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Applied 3, 2, 105–125.

1997.  Face-to-face 

and 

9. Susan  R.  Fussell,  Robert  E.  Kraut,  and  Jane  Siegel.
2000.  Coordination  of  communication.  Proceedings  of
the  2000  ACM  conference  on  Computer  supported
cooperative  work  -  CSCW  ’00,  ACM  Press,  21–30.
http://doi.org/10.1145/358916.358947

10. Susan R. Fussell, Leslie Setlock, and Robert E. Kraut.
2003. Effects of head-mounted and scene-oriented video
systems  on  remote  collaboration  on  physical  tasks.
Proceedings  of  the  conference  on  Human  factors  in
computing  systems  -  CHI  ’03,  ACM  Press,  513.
http://doi.org/10.1145/642611.642701

11. Susan  R.  Fussell,  Leslie  Setlock,  Elizabeth  M.  Parker,
and  Jie  Yang.  2003.  Assessing  the  value  of  a  cursor
pointing  device  for  remote  collaboration  on  physical
tasks. CHI ’03 extended abstracts on Human factors in
'03,  ACM  Press,  788.
computing  systems  -  CHI  
http://doi.org/10.1145/765891.765992

12. Susan  R.  Fussell,  Leslie  Setlock,  Jie  Yang,  Jiazhi  Ou,
Elizabeth  Mauer,  and  Adam  Kramer.  2004.  Gestures
Over  Video  Streams  to  Support  Remote  Collaboration
on  Physical  Tasks.  Human-Computer  Interaction  19,
273–309. http://doi.org/10.1207/s15327051hci1903_3

13. Harold  Garfinkel.  1967.  Studies  in  Ethnomethodology.

Polity Press, Cambridge, UK.

14. William W. Gaver, Abigail Sellen, Christian Heath, and
Paul Luff. 1993. One is not enough. Proceedings of the
SIGCHI  conference  on  Human  factors  in  computing
335–341.
systems 
http://doi.org/10.1145/169059.169268

’93,  ACM  Press, 

-  CHI 

15. Darren Gergle, David R. Millen, Robert E. Kraut, and
Susan  R.  Fussell. 
2004.  Persistence  matters.
Proceedings of the 2004 conference on Human factors
in computing systems - CHI ’04, ACM Press, 431–438.
http://doi.org/10.1145/985692.985747

16. Erving  Goffman.  1983.  The 

Interaction  Order:
American  Sociological  Association,  1982  Presidential
Address on JSTOR. American Sociological Review 48,
1,  pp.  1–17.  Retrieved 
from
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2095141?seq=1#page_scan_
tab_contents

June  24,  2015 

17. Charles Goodwin. 1994. Professional Vision. American
606–633. 

Anthropologist
http://doi.org/10.1525/aa.1994.96.3.02a00100

96, 

18. Charles  Goodwin. 

of  Color
Classification.  Mind,  Culture,  and  Activity  7,  1-2,  19–
36. http://doi.org/10.1080/10749039.2000.9677646

Practices 

2000. 

3, 

SESSION: HEALTHCARE PROVIDERS

19. Christian  Heath  and  Paul  Luff.  2001.  Technology  in
Press.

action. 
University 
http://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511489839

Cambridge 

20. Christian Heath and Paul Luff. 2009. Media Space and
Communicative Asymmetries: Preliminary Observations
Interaction.  Human–Computer
of  Video-Mediated 
Interaction.  Retrieved 
from
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1207/s15327051
hci0703_3#.VYrW92DZr8E

2015 

June 

24, 

21. Christian Heath. 2000. Configuring Action in Objects:
From Mutual Space to Media Space. Mind, Culture, and
81–104. 
Activity
http://doi.org/10.1080/10749039.2000.9677649

1-2, 

7, 

22. Jon  Hindmarsh  and  Christian  Heath.  2000.  Embodied
reference:  A  study  of  deixis  in  workplace  interaction.
1855–1878.
Journal 
http://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-2166(99)00122-8

of  Pragmatics 

32, 

12, 

23. Stefan Hirschauer. 1991. The Manufacture of Bodies in
Surgery.  Social  Studies  of  Science  21,  2,  279–319.
http://doi.org/10.1177/030631291021002005

2, 

24. Ellen A. Isaacs and John C. Tang. 1994. What video can
and  cannot  do  for  collaboration:  A  case  study.
63–73. 
2, 
Multimedia 
http://doi.org/10.1007/BF01274181

Systems

25. Rose  Johnson,  Kenton  O’Hara,  Abigail  Sellen,  Claire
Cousins,  and  Antonio  Criminisi.  2011.  Exploring  the
potential  for  touchless  interaction  in  image-guided
interventional  radiology.  Proceedings  of 
the  2011
annual  conference  on  Human  factors  in  computing
3323. 
systems 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979436

’11,  ACM 

-  CHI 

Press,

26. Kelly  Joyce.  2005.  Appealing 

Images:  Magnetic
Resonance Imaging and the Production of Authoritative
Knowledge.  Social  Studies  of  Science  35,  3,  437–462.
http://doi.org/10.1177/0306312705050180

27. Laurent Karsenty. 2009. Cooperative Work and Shared
Visual Context: An Empirical Study of Comprehension
Problems in Side-by-Side and Remote Help Dialogues.
283–315.
3, 
Human–Computer 
http://doi.org/10.1207/S15327051HCI1403_2

Interaction 

14, 

28. Timothy  Koschmann,  Curtis  LeBaron,  Charles
Goodwin, and Paul Feltovich. 2011. “Can you see the
cystic artery yet?” A simple matter of trust. Journal of
521–541. 
Pragmatics
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.pragma.2009.09.009

43, 

2, 

29. Timothy  Koschmann,  Curtis  LeBaron,  Charles
Goodwin,  Alan  Zemel,  and  Gary  Dunnington.  2007.
Formulating  the  Triangle  of  Doom.  Gesture  7,  1,  97–
118. http://doi.org/10.1075/gest.7.1.06kos

30. Robert  E.  Kraut,  Susan  R.  Fussell,  and  Jane  Siegel.
2003. Visual Information as a Conversational Resource
in  Collaborative  Physical  Tasks.  Human-Computer

754

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Interaction 
http://doi.org/10.1207/S15327051HCI1812_2 

18, 

1, 

13–49. 

37. Amit  Prasad.  2005.  Making  Images/Making  Bodies: 
through  Magnetic 
Visibilizing 
Resonance  Imaging  (MRI).  Science,  Technology  & 
2, 
291–316. 
Human 
http://doi.org/10.1177/0162243904271758 

and  Disciplining 
Values 

30, 

38. Frank Shipman, Andreas Girgensohn, and Lynn Wilcox. 
2008.  Authoring,  viewing,  and  generating  hypervideo. 
ACM  Transactions 
on  Multimedia  Computing, 
Communications,  and  Applications  5,  2,  1–19. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1413862.1413868 

39. Lucy  Suchman.  2000.  Embodied  Practices  of 
Engineering Work. Mind, Culture, and Activity 7, 1-2, 
4–18. http://doi.org/10.1080/10749039.2000.9677645 

40. Anthony  Tang,  Michel  Pahud,  Kori  Inkpen,  Hrvoje 
Benko,  John  C.  Tang,  and  Bill  Buxton.  2010.  Three’s 
company. Proceedings of the 2010 ACM conference on 
Computer  supported  cooperative  work  -  CSCW  ’10, 
ACM 
271. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1718918.1718969 

Press, 

41. John C. Tang and Ellen Isaacs. 1992. Why do users like 
video? Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) 
1, 3, 163–196. http://doi.org/10.1007/BF00752437 

42. Catherine  G.  Wolf,  James  R.  Rhyne,  and  Laura  K. 
Briggs. 1992. Communication and information retrieval 
with a pen-based meeting support tool. Proceedings of 
the  1992  ACM  conference  on  Computer-supported 
cooperative  work  -  CSCW  ’92,  ACM  Press,  322–329. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/143457.143539 

43. Catherine  G.  Wolf  and  James  R.  Rhyne.  1993. 
Gesturing  with  shared  drawing  tools.  INTERACT  ’93 
and CHI  '93 conference companion on Human factors 
in computing systems - CHI '93, ACM Press, 137–138. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/259964.260150 

31. Robert E. Kraut, Darren Gergle, and Susan R. Fussell. 
2002.  The  use  of  visual  information  in  shared  visual 
spaces.  Proceedings  of  the  2002  ACM  conference  on 
Computer  supported  cooperative  work  -  CSCW  ’02, 
ACM Press, 31. http://doi.org/10.1145/587078.587084 
32. Helena  M.  Mentis,  Amine  Chellali,  and  Steven 
Schwaitzberg.  2014.  Learning 
the  Body  : 
Supporting  Instruction  al  Practices  in  Laparoscopic 
Surgical  Procedures.  Proceedings  of  the  32nd  annual 
ACM  conference  on  Human  factors  in  computing 
systems, 
2113–2122. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557387 

to  See 

33. Helena M. Mentis, Kenton O’Hara, Abigail Sellen, and 
Rikin  Trivedi.  2012.  Interaction  proxemics  and  image 
use  in  neurosurgery.  Proceedings  of  the  2012  ACM 
annual  conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing 
927. 
’12,  ACM 
Systems 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2208536 

Press, 

CHI 

34. Helena M. Mentis  and  Alex  S.  Taylor.  2013.  Imaging 
the  body.  Proceedings  of  the  SIGCHI  Conference  on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’13, ACM 
Press, 1479. http://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2466197 

35. Ronald  C.  Merrell,  Bruce  E.  Jarrell,  Noah  S. 
Schenkman, Bradley Schoener, and Kathy McCullough. 
2003.  Telemedicine  for  the  Operating  Room  of  the 
2, 
Future. 
91–94. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/107155170301000206 

Innovation 

Surgical 

10, 

36. Kenton  O’Hara,  Neville  Dastur,  Tom  Carrell,  et  al. 
2014. Touchless interaction in surgery. Communications 
70–77. 
of 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2541883.2541899 

ACM 

57, 

the 

1, 

- 

 

 
 

 
 

755

