CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

 

Automatic Archiving versus Default Deletion: What 
Snapchat Tells Us About Ephemerality in Design 
Bin Xu1, Pamara Chang2, Christopher L Welker3, Natalya N. Bazarova2, Dan Cosley1 

1Department of Information Science 

2Department of Communication 

3Department of Psychology 

Cornell University 

Ithaca NY 14850 USA 

[bx55, pfc46, clw222, nnb8, drc44]@cornell.edu 

 

ABSTRACT 
Unlike  most  social  media,  where  automatic  archiving  of 
data  is  the  default,  Snapchat  defaults  to  ephemerality: 
deleting  content  shortly  after  it  is  viewed  by  a  receiver. 
Interviews with 25 Snapchat users show that ephemerality 
plays  a  key  role  in  shaping  their  practices.  Along  with 
friend-adding  features  that  facilitate  a  network  of  mostly 
close relations, default deletion affords everyday, mundane 
talk  and  reduces  self-consciousness  while  encouraging 
playful  interaction.  Further,  although  receivers  can  save 
content  through  screenshots,  senders  are  notified;  this 
selective  saving  with  notification  supports  complex 
information  norms  that  preserve  the  feel  of  ephemeral 
communication while supporting the capture of meaningful 
content.  This  dance  of  giving  and  taking,  sharing  and 
showing,  and  agency  for  both  senders  and  receivers 
provides  the  basis  for  a  rich  design  space  of  mechanisms, 
levels, and domains for ephemerality. 
Author Keywords 
Ephemerality; ownership; permanence; privacy; Snapchat 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.3.  Information  interfaces  and  presentation  (e.g.,  HCI): 
Group and Organization Interfaces 
INTRODUCTION 
With the ongoing rapid drops in price for storage, including 
cloud  technologies,  retaining  data  has  never  been  so  easy. 
In  most  online  systems,  permanent  data  retention  is  the 

Permission to  make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  the  author(s)  must  be 
honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or 
republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific  permission 
from 
Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
Copyright  is  held  by  the  owner/author(s).  Publication  rights  licensed  to 
ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819948 

fee.  Request  permissions 

and/or 

a 

useful 

aspects, 

supporting 

default. Our chat log is saved on Facebook Messenger, and 
when  we  post  pictures  in  Instagram,  they  will  stay  there 
‘forever.’  Besides  its  business  value  to  the  companies  for 
modeling  users’  interests,  such  automatic  archiving  has 
many 
coordination, 
collaboration, reminiscing, and life-logging [5, 8, 23, 38].  
Automatic  archiving  also  creates  challenges.  In  particular, 
there are tensions between self-presentation and archiving, 
in part because systems might “exhibit” data in unintended 
ways  [19].  Such  older  data  can  cause  conflicts  with  the 
presentation  of  the  current  self  and  lead  to  serious  issues 
and  active  work  to  remove  data  from  the  archive  [43]. 
Studies of digital possessions also found that users need to 
actively  decide  what  data  to  preserve  and  dispose  of  in 
order to maintain a meaningful collection of digital artifacts 
[29, 35]. Overall, automatic archiving requires active self-
management about which data should be persistent. 
Ephemerality as an Alternative to Permanence 
Recent  scholarship  has  used  these  challenges  to  call 
attention  to  the  opposite  of  persistence:  ephemerality. 
Bannon calls out forgetting as an important human activity 
and  ability,  arguing  that  HCI  and  ubiquitous  computing 
researchers  should  think about when forgetting  in systems 
is  “a  feature,  not  a  bug”  [1].  Mayer-Schönberger  further 
argues  that  persistence  of  data  without  users’  control  can 
lead  to  serious  personal  consequences,  both  in  terms  of 
others’  perceptions  and  their  own  ability  to  remember  the 
past in ways that support their evolving personal and social 
needs [26]. 
Thus,  a  design  alternative  to  automatic  archiving  arises: 
default  deletion.  Mayer-Schönberger  proposed  to  let  users 
set  an  expiration  date  for  digital  information  [26],  while 
Bannon  proposed  the  notion  of  self-destructing  data  [1]—
an  idea  realized  in  Chi  et  al.’s  prototype  “burning  your 
memory  away:  a  matchstick-like  video  recording  and 
storage device that burns itself away after being used [6].” 
Here, rather than protecting future selves’ identity, the idea 
is  that  scarcity  has  value:  less  available  objects  are  more 
special  [6,  7].  That  prototype  was  never  implemented, 

1662

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

 

 

 

   

(a)                                 (b)                                            (c)                                      (d)                                   (e) 

Figure 1. Key Snapchat interface elements. (a) Users can take photos (“snaps”) and draw on them or add captions. They can also 

set an expiration time in seconds, save a copy of the photo to the phone, or add the snap to their Story. (b) Receivers get 

notifications through their snap list, which shows unopened snaps, opened snaps, and sent snaps. (c) Receivers must hold the 
screen to view the snap; a countdown on the upper right corner shows when snap will be deleted. (d) Receivers can also take a 
screenshot while viewing the snap; here for example, by pressing the power button and home buttons of an iPhone. (e) When a 

screenshot is taken, senders are notified via their contact list (the arrow with three dots next to “B” at the top).  

although  Odom  et  al.  did  build  a  device  that  provided 
limited  access  to  past  digital  content  and  showed  that  in 
family life contexts such scarcity was seen as valuable [29].  
These  ideas  have  also  percolated  into  industry,  with  tools 
like  Snapchat,  Wickr,  and  iDelete  making  data  ephemeral 
through default deletion. Among these, Snapchat has grown 
quickly among younger users, and as of March 2015, is the 
third  most  popular  social  medium  behind  Facebook  and 
Instagram [36]. The adoption of these systems suggests that 
people find real value in ephemeral communication.  
In this study we explore this value, and how the affordance 
of  default  deletion  supports  it,  by  interviewing  Snapchat 
users  about  their  practices  and  goals  in  using  the  system. 
Their  responses  indicate  that  much  of  Snapchat’s  value 
comes from its support of mundane, everyday conversation 
among close friends; ephemerality plays a key role in this 
by  preventing 
the  accumulation  of  meaningless  and 
potentially embarrassing content. This, in turn, affects self-
presentation. With fears of inadvertent distribution reduced, 
behavior  on  Snapchat  has  less  front-stage  self-censorship 
and more “be-yourself” back-stage performance [14]: being 
fun,  funny,  informal,  and  interesting  are  key  values  that 
ephemerality  affords.  Still,  sometimes  both  performances 
and particular mundane-but-meaningful moments are worth 
saving.  People  who  receive  content  can  capture  it  with 
screenshots,  circumventing  default  deletion—but 
the 
system  notifies  senders  when  this  happens.  This  selective 
saving  with  notification  leads  to  a  complex  set  of  norms 
around  what  should  be  captured  and  shared,  by  and  to 
whom.  Taken 
these  findings  suggest  both 
theoretical  lenses  for  how  ephemerality  affects  interaction 
and ideas for system designs that use it as a feature. 

together, 

THE DESIGN OF SNAPCHAT 
To ground the discussion, we start with a brief overview of 
the  Snapchat  interface  as  of  March  2015,  illuminating  the 
elements that study participants commonly mentioned. 
Snapchat  is  an  application  for  iOS  and  Android  phones; 
there is no web or desktop version. Its core feature allows 
users to send pictures to other Snapchat users that they have 
added  as  friends.  Users  can  only  add  friends  by  entering 
their  Snapchat  username  or  by  searching  through  their 
mobile phone contacts for other Snapchat users. This design 
limits  people’s  ability  to  add  acquaintances,  leading  to 
smaller  networks  of  closer  friends  than  most  other  social 
media. 
Sending Snaps and Stories 
When  a  user  wants  to  send  a  picture  to  a  friend  (a  snap), 
they  use  their  phone  camera  to  take  a  picture  from  inside 
the  app:  pictures  stored  in  the  phone  can’t  be  sent  as  a 
snap1.  Senders  then  choose  a  receiver,  and  can  optionally 
customize  the  snap  by  adding  a  brief  caption  or  drawing 
(Figure 1a). They can also set the lifespan of a snap, which 
is  how  long  the  receiver  has  after  opening  it  before  it  is 
automatically  deleted,  to  between  1  and  10  seconds;  the 
default is 10. Senders can also send a short video, although 
this is less common.  
In addition to snaps sent to individuals, Snapchat provides a 
Story function that allows users to send snaps to their whole 
network.  Story  snaps  last  for  24  hours—similar  to  the 
default expirations proposed by Mayer-Schönberger [26]—
and  any  friend  of  the  user  can  view  the  snap  during  that 
                                                             
1 Another interface named Chat allows users to send pictures saved in their 
phones, but it cannot be done in the Snap interface. 

1663

they 

 
time  period.  Stories,  and  notifications  of  Stories,  live  in  a 
separate part of the app from person-to-person snaps. 
Snapchat has other, less commonly used features, including 
Chat, Video Chat, Snapcash, Discover, and Our Story. Chat 
provides  text  messaging, but  conversations  disappear  after 
users leave the chat. Video Chat allows users to video chat 
simultaneously.  Snapcash  permits  users  to  send  money  to 
each other. Discover is similar to Stories, except that they 
are  created  by  news  and  entertainment  companies  like 
CNN. Our Story allows people to  post  snaps for location-
based Stories that Snapchat curates. 
Receivers, Ephemerality, Deletion, and Selective Saving 
Receivers  are  notified  when 
receive  a  snap 
individually or when someone posts a snap to a Story they 
follow.  To  see  the  snap,  the  receiver  must  press  the 
notification icon and hold the screen for the duration of the 
snap (Figure 1c). After the sender-set time expires, the snap 
is deleted from the receiver’s view and cannot be retrieved, 
much as in the burn your memory away idea [6]. 
However, this ephemerality is not absolute. Mobile phones 
can  take  screenshots,  and  although  in  Snapchat  this  is  not 
easy  because  receivers  must  also  hold  the  screen,  it  is 
possible  (Figure  1d).  In  addition  to  being  physically 
awkward,  it  can  be  socially  awkward,  because  Snapchat 
detects the screenshot and notifies the sender (Figure 1e).  
Summarizing  the  overview  of  the  Snapchat  interface,  we 
see its ephemerality as strongly emphasizing the affordance 
of  default  deletion,  while  screenshots  afford  selective 
saving  with  notification.  These  affordances  are  quite 
different  from  other  media,  where  persistence  [5,  38]  and 
permanence 
recordability, 
reviewability, and replicability [8]. Thus, we would expect 
practices  in  Snapchat  to  be  quite  different  than  in  other 
social media, and in fact a recent study identified that one 
key difference of Snapchat is to allow people to “share the 
moments”  with  close  relationships  [2].  Our  goal  is  to 
understand  why  and  how  this  occurs,  focusing  on  these 
affordances around deletion and selective saving.  
METHOD 
Snapchat’s ephemerality makes it difficult to collect actual 
message content; further, analyzing the content itself would 
give  limited  insight  into  users’  perceptions  of  Snapchat 
affordances, their motivations for using Snapchat, and their 
subjective experiences with it. Thus, we chose to conduct a 
series  of  semi-structured 
interviews  about  people’s 
Snapchat use and motivations. 
Participants 
Participants were recruited in Spring 2015 from a large east 
cost  U.S.  university  through  an  online  research  recruiting 
system.  We  chose  college  students  as  our  participants 
because  they  are  the  most  frequent  Snapchat  users.  In  all, 
we we recruited 25 Snapchat users, 8 male and 17 female, 

typically 

[39] 

afford 

1664

SESSION: MOBILE DESIGN AND USAGE

lasted 

from  28–54  minutes 

all aged 18–24, 60% Caucasian, 16% Asian, 12% South or 
Central  American,  8%  European,  and  4%  African-
American.  Participants  received  either  two  experimental 
participation credits or $10 as compensation for their time. 
Data Analysis 
Through  a  number  of  pilot  interviews,  we  developed  an 
interview  guide  that  asked  participants  general  questions 
about their Snapchat use, characteristics of their contacts on 
Snapchat,  communication  content  and  goals  in  Snapchat, 
comparisons  of  Snapchat  to  other  tools  and  social  media, 
and reflections on why and how they use Snapchat.  
(M=42:31, 
Interviews 
SD=7:01). They were audio-recorded, transcribed verbatim, 
and  edited  to  remove  identifiers  and  other  references  that 
may identify the participants and/or anyone they mentioned 
during  the  interview.  Each  transcript  was  then  numbered, 
and quotes are reported as (Pn) in the sections below. 
After  reading  the  transcripts  multiple  times  to  become 
acquainted with the data, transcripts were imported into the 
Dedoose  qualitative  data  analysis  tool  and  divided  into 
meaningful  units.  Two  of  the  authors  then  did  a  close 
reading  of  the  transcripts  while  writing  memos  and 
identifying key themes, as a part of an open-coding process 
[35] in which we coded distinct concepts and categories in 
the data. The two authors met several times to discuss and 
reconcile these codes. Once the final codebook was set, two 
authors  independently  coded  a  random  subsample  of  the 
data,  with  good  interrater  reliability  (Cohen’s  kappa  of 
.806). 
After open-coding, the two authors did axial coding where 
they  examined  relationships  between  key  themes,  to  help 
refine  categories  as  well  as  ensure  a  close  association 
between  participants’  responses  and  emerging  analyses. 
This  axial  coding  process  allowed  us  to  organize  and  re-
organize  the  codes  based  on  the  relationship  between  the 
codes and themes that connected them; in this process, we 
also  drew  on  existing  theories  to  inform  the  organization 
and  interpretation  of  the  themes.  Lastly,  we  did  selective 
coding [7, 35] to illuminate themes and organize the results.  
PRACTICES AROUND EPHEMERALITY IN SNAPCHAT 
Four  main  themes  emerged  from  the  data  that  were  both 
connected  to  ephemerality  and  frequently  mentioned  by 
participants:  the  presence  of  more  intimate  networks;  the 
prevalence  of  mundane  communication  with  those  close 
contacts;  the  reduction  in  self-consciousness  in  such 
communication; and the negotiation around saving what is 
normally ephemeral content. We discuss each in turn. 
Smaller, More Intimate Networks 
Perhaps because people must have a screen name or phone 
number of another Snapchat user in order to be able to add 
this person as their contact, Snapchat contacts are closer on 
average than they are in most other media [2]: “Facebook is 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

 
a lot more acquaintances. Mostly people in my sorority that 
I’m not trying to be friends with, I think...Snapchat is more 
close  friends  and  romantic  interests  (P10).”  Snapchat 
contact networks are also much smaller in size: “I only have 
50 friends on Snapchat but on Facebook I have over 1,100 
‘friends,’  acquaintances…  I  use  that  as  more  of  a 
networking site (P1).” These differences help shape the way 
participants see Snapchat versus other channels: 
E-mails are for professors. E-mails are for presidents, vice 
presidents, or an e-board member that I do need to reach 
out  to.  E-mails  are  for  a  kid  in  the  library  or  something. 
Text  messages  are  for  my  family  or  my  best  friend  who  I 
can always reach out to. Text messages or calls you expect 
them to get back to you within hours, you know?...Snapchat 
is definitely for just my age group, especially ones who are 
close to me and who know me very well. Facebook is just 
for everyone else. (P16) 
Overall,  participants  use  Snapchat  for  interacting  with  a 
select  group  of  people,  those  with  whom  they  are  closely 
connected. As the above quote suggests, Snapchat is not the 
only  way  close  relations  connect,  but  it  is  common: 
participants  considered  Snapchat  as  one  of  their  most 
frequently used social applications on their mobile phones, 
along  with  Facebook,  messaging  tools  like  GroupMe  and 
other social media like Instagram. 
Everyday Talk with Close Relationships 
Compared to those tools, participants described Snapchat as 
particularly  well-suited  for  everyday  talk.  The  idea  of 
everyday talk is closely related to “the mundane, everyday 
interaction  between 
that  constitutes  a 
majority of offline conversations in daily life [9, 16]. Such 
talk  takes  many  forms,  but  can  be  broadly  classified  into 
supragenres of superficial talk, informal talk, task talk, and 
deep  talk  [9,  40].  Participants  described  using  Snapchat 
primarily for superficial and informal types of talk, types of 
talk that are associated with close relationships [16, 40]. 
Superficial  talk  refers  to  conversation  focused  on  the 
discussion  of  topics  of  limited  depth  with  the  purpose  of 
passing  time.  Examples  of  superficial  talk  include  topics 
like current events, the weather, or a kind of talk to avoid 
being  rude.  Superficial  talk  on  Snapchat  can  be  a  catalyst 
for initiating and maintaining connections:  
[Snapchat  interactions  mostly  are]  just  one  or  two  snaps 
back  and  forth,  you  see  their  face,  you  exchange  a  laugh 
even  though  it’s  not  like  personally  ...  A  little  with  just 
keeping connected but like I said before it’s I think it’s kind 
of on superficial level. (P11) 
Informal talk refers to conversation devoted to topics such 
as  catching  up  on  daily  events,  joking,  and  other  light 
conversations  between  friends.  Informal 
is  also 
common in Snapchat: “I don’t know. I feel like texting is a 

two  partners” 

talk 

1665

talk 

that 

talk  refers 

require  more 

to  conversations 

things.  Knowing 

bit more formal, where Snapchat … is a lot less formal like, 
‘Oh, I sent you this.’ (P17).” 
Participants were much less likely to use Snapchat for kinds 
of 
intense  coordination  or 
communication. Task talk refers to conversation regarding 
decision-making and instructions for accomplishing a task. 
Such  talk  occurs  less  on  Snapchat  than  on  text-messaging 
platforms like iMessage or GroupMe: 
I  don’t  plan  through  Snapchat.  I  definitely  do  more  plans 
through text, or GroupMe. Or, if I have a funny comment to 
say, I’ll post it to the group. Mostly plans. (P18) 
Deep 
involving  sharing 
problems,  complaining,  and  having  serious  discussions 
about personal and important topics. Participants highlight 
the  lack  of  deep  talk  on  Snapchat  and  explain  that  most 
deep talk occurs in other systems like SMS: “If something 
was  actually  wrong,  someone  would  like,  you  would  text 
someone about it versus snapchatting them about it (P6).” 
Deletion Makes Space for the Mundane 
One  reason  for  the  prevalence  of  everyday,  informal 
communication in Snapchat is that default deletion supports 
sharing  mundane 
that  content  will 
disappear  quickly  gives  people  the  license  to  share  more 
than they would in a more ‘permanent’ medium: 
If  I  really  think  I  look  good  on  that  day,  I  will  send  it  to 
everyone. Snapchat is only five seconds long and I feel it’s 
more acceptable than Facebook. (P16) 
Default deletion also matches well with the idea that not all 
digital  possessions  are  equally  worth  saving  [22,  24,  25, 
30].  Some  preserved  digital  objects  are  valuable  for 
triggering  reminiscence  [22,  24],  but  in  daily  family  life, 
digital objects are perceived as less salient [25]. This may 
be because much digital content has its primary value in the 
moment: 
I won’t look back at someone’s old photos. I don’t do that 
frequently.  I’m  just  interested  in  the  moment  and  I  don’t 
care about it after I see it, so Facebook, I’m not going to 
look  back  on  someone’s  old  photos.  A  Snap  story  will  go 
away.  I  don’t  really  want  to  see  it  again.  In  a  week  from 
now I don’t really care what someone did last weekend, but 
in the moment it’s nice to see what they’re doing. (P23) 
Automatic  archiving  takes  up  both  device  and  mental 
resources  [29].  People  do  not  want 
to  accumulate 
meaningless  content  in  their  digital  collection,  making 
Snapchat more appropriate than more permanent media for 
this  sort  of  everyday  talk:  “I  wouldn’t  want  all  those 
random pictures or messages taking memory space...it’s a 
little overwhelming sometimes I guess. (P22).” 
It  is  also  considered  inappropriate  to  fill  others’  digital 
collections  with  less  meaningful  artifacts.  Snapchat  helps 

SESSION: MOBILE DESIGN AND USAGE

Through  sharing  mundane  content  and  funny  everyday 
moments, these conversations support relational continuity, 
acting  as  “symbolic  forces  for  creating,  sustaining,  and 
manifesting  relationships”  [9].  Ephemerality’s  support  of 
mundane  interaction  and  the  friend  adding  interface  that 
encourages  people  to  articulate  mainly  close  relationships 
work together to meet relationship maintenance goals: 
Snapchat  is  more  like  a  convenient  easy  way  to  tell  your 
really  good  friends  what  you’re  doing  right  now,  quickly, 
easy, because they’re your friends you care about it. (P14) 
Performance with Less Self-consciousness 
Sending ugly faces is an example of a more general theme 
that  emerged,  that  Snapchat  allows  people  to  “let  [their] 
guard  down  (P02).”  Concerns  over  self-presentation  were 
less salient than in other communication tools: 
There  are  definitely  things  on  Snapchat  that  people  will 
video  or  take  a  picture  of  me  that  I  wouldn’t  want  on 
Instagram or Facebook. ... Especially Facebook, I want to 
take cute photos to make them think that I’m somewhat put 
together… (P10) 
We  use  Goffman’s  dramaturgical  “front  stage/back  stage” 
metaphor  [15]  and  Hogan’s  exhibition  metaphor  [19], 
which have been used to conceptualize self-presentation in 
social media [42, 43], to better understand the relationship 
between affordances of Snapchat and users’ goals. 
Letting One’s Guard Down with Familiar Audiences 
Goffman conceptualizes self-presentation as a “front stage” 
performance for audiences where people selectively present 
themselves  based  on  social  norms,  expectations,  and 
audience preferences. In contrast, the “back stage” refers to 
a behavioral setting in which people rehearse what goes on 
a  front  stage  and  are  comfortable  lowering  their  guard. 
Developed  for  face-to-face  interactions,  the  metaphor  has 
been  applied  in  social  media  with  friends  and  with 
followers playing the role of audience [3]. 
One factor that influences participants’ lowered concern of 
self-presentation  in  Snapchat  is  the  composition  of  a 
network.  As  discussed  earlier,  audiences  in  Snapchat  are 
typically people users know well and who are specifically 
targeted for particular snaps: 
I feel a lot of self-presentation on Snapchat is like it’s not as 
much a priority when you’re just sending individual snaps 
to  people  just  because  the  people  I  usually  send  to  are 
people I’m really comfortable with talking to and also the 
stuff I send is going to be gone after a while. (P8) 
In other media, audiences are much broader, leading to self-
presentation concerns: 
Yeah,  there’s  definitely  things  you  put  on  Snapchat  ...and 
you  might  be  a  little  drunk  or  something  or  just  you 

 
here  because  “Snapchats only last for around ten seconds 
and  then  you  can  choose.  If  you  found  something  really 
funny, you can choose to screenshot it and save it but for a 
Facebook  post  or  a  message,  it  lasts  forever  pretty  much. 
It’s  always  on  the  list  of  all  the  posts  so  it  just  can  get  a 
little overwhelming with the long long list of posts (P22).” 
Few Affordances for the Meaningful 
Default  deletion  also  acts  as  a  constraint  to  discourage 
more involved communication. It restricts archiving, which 
supports  reference  and  grounding  activities 
that  are 
important to task talk and deep talk: 
I feel like, if I’m going to have like, a real conversation over 
text with someone, or like a more, a relatively more serious 
conversation or like, even organize or plan something. I’d 
rather  do  it  over  text,  just  because  like,  it’s  there  to  like, 
look back at. Or reference. (P06) 
Other Snapchat affordances also work against task and deep 
talk.  Pictures  are  not  seen  as  well-suited  for  the  longer 
conversations  that  can  accompany  these  kinds  of  talk:  “I 
usually  won’t  have  a  long  conversation  through  pictures 
(P23),” and in the text accompanying pictures, people “only 
have space of one line to talk (P11).” 
Mundaneness Supports Relationship Maintenance 
The relative prevalence of mundane talk points to the kinds 
of  communication  functions  Snapchat  supports  best.  In 
particular, mundane talk is important for maintaining close 
relationships  because 
feeling  of 
interactional  co-presence  [9,  16],  even  when  partners  are 
not  physically  co-present  [33].  This  type  of  talk  enables 
people  to  implicitly  participate  in  each  other’s  lives  and 
keep relational continuity [9]. The very occurrence of such 
talk, not only its content, can create a sense of connection 
and  closeness,  which  can  lead  to  deeper  interpersonal 
relationships 
[36,  37].  Participants  described  using 
Snapchat in these ways: 
To inform others who you’re with, where you are. To share 
information.  To  make  someone  laugh.  Reconnect  with 
somebody. It’s easy for long distance to keep in touch with 
my  friends  from  other  schools,  to  keep  them  updated  with 
what’s going on without me having to take a lot of time out 
of my and explain what’s new. (P23) 
The point about laughing is also important, as participants 
often described wanting to share fun, humor, or creativity, 
to  make  people  laugh  and  “smile  throughout  the  day 
(P03).”  Sharing  enjoyable  content  has  value  for  both  self 
and others, especially in close relationship contexts [13]. In 
Snapchat,  mundane  content  like  a  funny  face  becomes  a 
powerful vehicle to deliver these positive emotions. 
We  have  a  thing  where  we  send  each  other  really  really 
ugly  faces  and  we’ll  do  it  a  couple  of  minutes  at  a  time, 
send each other time photos. That’s really fun. (P08)  

it  helps  create  a 

1666

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

 
wouldn’t  want  that  to  be  on  Facebook  for  employers  and 
family members. (P2) 
Ephemerality Mitigates Long-term Exhibition Concerns 
Ephemerality  also  plays  a  key  role  in  people’s  self-
presentation, as indicated by P8’s comment above that “sent 
stuff”  disappears.  The  typical  social  media  affordance  of 
automatic  archiving  means  that  communication  content, 
such  as  posting  a  status  on  Facebook,  uploading  a  picture 
on  Instagram,  or  writing  a  tweet  on  Twitter,  will  leave 
records in the system unless users intentionally delete them. 
Hogan  distinguishes  between 
the  ephemeral  act  and 
recorded  act,  and  argues  that  digital  traces  also  have 
presentation functions [19]. He uses an exhibition metaphor 
to make an ontological distinction: a performance in a strict 
sense is a real-time synchronous presentation of behaviors, 
while  an  exhibition  is  an  asynchronous  presentation  of 
digital artifacts. The metaphor highlights that that system is 
usually in charge of the presentation situation, which incites 
fear  of  permanent  display  that  leads  to  self-censorship  in 
the moment [43]:  
Comparing it to Snapchat, I would say you need to be much 
more careful about how you use Facebook messenger than 
Snapchat,  because,  like,  [on]  Facebook  stories,  you  can 
scroll through the log with everyone you ever talked to on 
Facebook, and look what was said. (P7) 
If we strictly abide by Hogan’s definition of exhibition, all 
asynchronous viewing practices, including Snapchat, would 
be  considered  “exhibitions.”  However,  several  aspects  of 
the design and use of Snapchat lead these exhibitions to be 
read as performances. First, even though the snap is viewed 
later, it is situated in sender’s present status: “[Snapchat] is 
just  like  I’m  here  right  now,  it’s  I’m  doing  this  right  now 
(P14).” We argue that this is in part because pictures must 
be captured through the Snapchat interface and thus reflect 
current, situated activities [2], and in part because although 
people do view the snap asynchronously, the delay is often 
short  because  people  tend  to  attend  to  snaps  quickly:  “I 
check [Snapchat] periodically throughout the day …when I 
receive a snap chat, and then I’ll send one back (P18).” 
Second, default deletion makes Snapchat unlike most social 
media systems where users’ content persists and other users 
might  access  it  or  the  system  might  re-present  it.  Instead, 
the  user  has  control  of  the  duration  of  the  exhibition;  the 
system  enforces  the  user’s  decisions.  This  combination  of 
short-term  display  and  user  control  also  reduces  self-
consciousness: 
If  it’s  …  a  boy  you  like,  you  don’t  want  to  send  just  a 
picture [through text messaging], because he’s gonna have 
it and he’s like ‘oh, girl, if I look at it for a longer time, she 
doesn’t look that [good-looking]’—whatever, you know, but 
if it’s Snapchat, you can even put like oh three seconds only 
and then they’re oh and it’s already gone. (P14) 

1667

similar 

to  a 

In  this  sense,  the  affordance  of  ephemerality  makes 
Snapchat  communication  more 
live 
performance  rather  than  a  recorded  act,  and  this  expands 
people’s range of potential performances. People described 
being  at  liberty  to  do  things  they  might  not  do  in  other 
situations,  even  face  to  face—“When I’m Snapchatting my 
friends  I  would  just  make  silly  faces  and  break  out  of  my 
own shell. Outside of my comfort zone. Whereas when I go 
out  in  regular  clothes,  interacting  with  regular  people,  I 
would  keep  it  together  (P16).”—and  even  at  their  own 
expense,  as  with  the  “ugly  faces”  mentioned  earlier.  This 
freedom  provides  additional  support  for  the  kinds  of 
everyday  talk  and  relationally  oriented  communication 
described earlier. 
At  a  theoretical  level,  Snapchat  helps  illuminate  the 
boundary between performance and exhibition. The nature 
and duration of the content, along with the locus of control 
over presentation and audience, all help in shaping people’s 
understanding of communication tools. 
To Screenshot or not to Screenshot: Selective Saving 
So far we have focused on the ephemerality that is built into 
Snapchat  by  the  default  deletion  affordance  and  how  it 
influences  people  to  enact  mundane  communication  while 
lowering  concerns  of  self-presentation.  However, 
the 
potential for screenshotting in Snapchat clearly violates the 
promise  of  ephemerality  and  the  sender’s  control  over  the 
interaction. Why, then, do people still largely behave as if 
the data were truly ephemeral?  
One answer is that, because people recognize the value of 
the ephemerality and practices that we have described, the 
default  norm  is  to  not  screenshot:  “Snapchat  is  to  send 
things that get deleted, disappear after five, eight seconds. 
If you screenshot it then you defeat the purpose of it (P24).” 
However, this norm is not absolute: 
If [the snap] is of some funny contents I took a snap of a 
funny poster, that’s completely fine, or if it’s something else 
that’s funny or something’s name, there’s nothing they can 
do with that to cause any kind of harm or anything bad to 
the sender but as soon as it involves any kind of information 
that  you  wouldn’t  want  someone  else  to  have  saved,  then 
it’s bad. ...And then it also depends who does the snapshot. 
If  it’s  one  of  your  best  friends  and  snapshots  one  of  that, 
you’re not really worried. But then if it’s someone random, 
that’s—by  random  I  mean  a  friend  that  you’re  close  with 
but not that close with, it doesn’t, or someone that you’re 
not even that friendly with, it doesn’t make sense for them 
to Snapchat something personal to the sender. So then it’s, 
it  would  mostly  require  you  to  text  them  like  yo,  why’d 
you—you’ll delete that, or why’d you snapshot that? Why’d 
you snapshot that? (P12) 
In this section, we unpack this norm, and the exceptions to 
it, 
lens  of  Nissenbaum’s  framework  of 

through 

the 

SESSION: MOBILE DESIGN AND USAGE

to  be 

later:  “if 

remembered 

cool  picture...  Something  that  you  want  to  look  at  in  the 
future (P15).” 
Thus, content with archival value was more likely to be fair 
game. This might include fun or creative content: “I would 
[screenshot] a personal message if I thought it was funny, 
assuming that it’s not super personal (P1),” or content that 
there’s  some 
needed 
information  that  probably  should  have  been  sent  as  an 
iMessage  like  a  location  or  something  then  I  would 
screenshot it just to remember it (P22).” 
Archival Value Versus Respecting Others’ Rights 
Overall,  these  norms  around  screenshotting  are  aimed  at 
balancing the value of saving with the potential for harm to 
the  sender.  When  the  potential  for  harm  is  high,  as  with 
personally  revealing  content2,  the  norm  is  clearly  not  to 
share:  “If  anyone  sent  me  anything  of  them  naked  or 
something, I would never [screenshot] (P2).” 
Otherwise, as with P1 above, people weighed the value of 
the content with the concerns of the sender: “another case 
is when someone sends … something you'd want to have at 
a  later  date,  but  not  necessarily  something  that  was 
unflattering  to  the  person  that  was  sending  it,  or  anyone 
else (P7).” The fact that information could, in principle, be 
transmitted was in the back of people’s minds: 
I  feel  like  a  lot  of  people  will  do  that.  Like  send  gross 
pictures because it’s funny which I wouldn’t do otherwise. 
So  I  guess  that’s  kind  of  fun  and  you  can  send  whatever. 
But  you  can  also  screenshot  it  so  it’s  not  that  reassuring 
that they go away. (P25)  
Granular Alignment of Affordances with Norms 
Still, Snapchat users walk this line and usually succeed. We 
believe this is because the affordances of Snapchat—default 
deletion and selective saving with notification—help people 
negotiate  these  values  more  seamlessly  than  in  most 
systems. 
For  example,  Hull  et  al.  applied  the  contextual  integrity 
framework to analyze how Facebook’s interface and access 
control  features  lead  to  privacy  management  issues  [20]. 
There,  violations  of  norms  happen  most  often  in  joint 
contexts, such as when a user shares a photo that also has 
her friends in it. In this case, privacy concerns are not just 
with  the  person  who  shared  the  photo,  but  also  with  her 
friends,  especially  if  they  have  been  tagged  by  the  photo 
owner.  From 
integrity, 
distribution norms indicate that it is generally acceptable to 

the  perspective  of  contextual 

                                                             
2 We  did  not  see  evidence  supporting  media  critiques  about  Snapchat 
encouraging activities like sexting. Participants did not report any sexting 
in  their  use  and  stated  that  no-sexting  is  a  norm  for  appropriate  use  of 
Snapchat,  consistent  with  findings  from  a  recent  survey  [34]  and  recent 
media reports. 

sender, 

(types 

attributes 

recipient), 

that  pose  different  norms 

 
contextual integrity [27]. Nissenbaum posits that norms are 
highly context-specific and that individuals move in and out 
of  distinct  contexts 
for 
information  sharing.  “Distribution,”  which  refers  to  the 
transfer of information between parties, is a key concern of 
these  norms,  influenced  by  three  main  forces:  “actors 
(subject, 
of 
information), and transmission principles (constraints under 
which information flows) [28].” 
Ephemerality Drives the Default Norm: Don’t 
The default deletion affordance leads to a key transmission 
principle  that  drives  the  no-screenshots  norm:  snaps  are 
meant to be temporarily seen but not saved, in part because 
of the risk of distribution to third parties: “If someone takes 
a Snapshot of my photo, then I can guess…that they’ll most 
likely show it to someone else (P23).” 
When  this  norm  is  violated  and  the  receiver  saves  the 
information  without  the  sender  wanting  them  to,  this 
violates the transmission principle. In response, participants 
often reported confronting the violator, which is also in line 
with the contextual integrity framework [27]. 
I would confront the person, either text them or in person, 
just in a mature way say, ‘It’s really important to me that 
you delete that photo,’ and hope that they delete it. (P23) 
However,  ephemerality  is  not  the  only  factor  defining  the 
context  in  terms  of  privacy  management  in  Snapchat.  In 
many cases screenshotting is allowed or even expected. 
Screenshots are for Closer Friends 
The  main  actors  around  screenshotting  norms  are  senders 
and  recipients,  and  the  nature  of  their  relationship  helps 
determine  whether  the  no-screenshotting  norm  applies. 
Participants  reported  that  for  the  same  snap,  it  would  be 
okay for some contacts to take a screenshot but not others. 
Relationship  closeness  was  the  main  criterion,  because 
although  on  average  Snapchat  friends  are  close,  not  all  of 
them  are:  “I  wouldn’t  screenshot  if  it  was  someone  I  was 
not close with. That’s reserved for close friends (P10).” 
Other actors’ factors, such as the gender of the sender and 
receiver, could also affect these norms: 
I would never screenshot something a boy sent me. That’s 
weird, 
think  I’m  weird  because  I 
they’re  going 
screenshotted it. (P10) 
Selective Saving is for Meaningful, Appropriate Content 
Participants also reported that content attributes influenced 
norms  around  screenshotting.  In  general,  saving  mundane 
content  was  inappropriate,  even  for  close  friends:  “If 
they’re boring, just saying ‘hello,’ then I wouldn’t have any 
use  for  screenshotting  that  (P15).”  Instead,  saved  content 
should  be  “out  of  the  ordinary.  Not  just  a  picture  of 
someone’s face and hello. Either like a funny message or a 

to 

1668

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

in  fact, 

that  arise 

third  parties—and, 

from  default  deletion  mean 

 
share  photos  of  one’s  social  life  with  one’s  friends. 
However, tagging her friends and putting the photo on her 
newsfeed results in much wider distribution than the friends 
may  expect.  The  problem  is  that  although  this  could  be 
perceived  as  a  violation  of  expectancy,  it  is  not  clearly  a 
violation of the norm of the system [20]—and this is hard to 
disentangle  in  a  system  like  Facebook  with  design  goals 
around sharing with networks. 
These  kinds  of  situations  can  arise  in  Snapchat  as  well. 
Photos  may  contain 
the 
distribution  norms  of  Snapchat  suggest  these  sometimes 
should be shared if those third parties would get value out 
of  it:  “I  think  that’s  okay,  in  a  basis  that  the  person  who 
screenshots  that  is  showing  the  third  person  in  order  to 
prove  something  good  about  this  person  (P16).”  But  the 
norms 
that 
information  about  third  parties  disappears  quickly  unless 
there are real reasons to keep the photos and keeping them 
is unlikely to harm others. 
These norms, combined with the directedness of snaps and 
the  smaller  networks  in  Snapchat  versus  Facebook,  make 
the  affordances  and  effects  of  information  sharing  much 
more transparent in Snapchat than Facebook. Ephemerality 
defines  the  default  information  flow,  where  sharing  does 
not  imply  co-ownership,  with  the  default  of  not  to 
screenshot.  If  a  receiver  assumes  ownership,  which  opens 
the  possibility  of  transmitting  it  to  others,  the  original 
owner  is  notified.  In  this  sense,  sharing  and  information 
flows  are  similar 
to  face-to-face  because  of  shared 
awareness  around  shared  content:  everyone  knows  who 
knows  what.  This  translucence  around  ownership  and 
transmission rules [10], plus its relatively direct mapping to 
the  way  people  negotiate  sharing  information  in  face-to-
face settings, helps explain why many people have adopted 
Snapchat 
informal  but  personal 
communication with friends they have offline. 
Summary and Limitations 
In 
findings  on 
communicative  practices  in  Snapchat  and  how  they  are 
influenced  by  ephemerality:  the  co-existence  of  default 
deletion  by  the  system  and  intentional  archiving  by  users 
shapes  social  interaction,  affecting  users’  motivation,  self-
consciousness, 
and  privacy  management  behavior. 
Snapchat’s  ephemerality  is  perceived  as  less  effective  for 
formal  conversations,  so  participants 
to  share 
everyday,  mundane  talk  for  maintaining  relationships. 
Default deletion is seen to avoid unintended audiences and 
long-term  exhibition  of  content,  encouraging  kinds  of 
sharing  rare  in  other  social  media.  The  closer  contact 
network  in  Snapchat  also  encourages  everyday  talk  and 
self-unconsciousness.  

summarize  our 

section,  we 

to  have 

frequent 

this 

tend 

than  most 

three  main 

systems,  which 

Note that, as Bayer et al. also did [2], we recruited college 
students  at  one  university,  and  although  several  of  our 
findings align well with theirs, it’s possible that both studies 
are  biased  by  this  sampling  strategy.  Several  participants 
remarked about differences in use between college students 
and teenagers; younger users may think of risks and norms 
differently and studying this would be an interesting avenue 
for future work. A few participants also mentioned that they 
used  Snapchat  differently  with  close  friends  versus 
romantic partners. Looking more closely at how perceptions 
and  norms  differ  based  on  the  specifics  of  particular 
relationships  would  be  another  interesting  line  of  future 
work. 
DESIGNING EPHEMERALITY 
Using  Snapchat  as  a 
lens,  our  findings  show  how 
ephemerality and default deletion lead to different practices 
and  values 
implement 
permanence.  However,  ephemerality  is  not  new:  most  of 
our  offline  interactions  are  ephemeral.  What  is  new  is  the 
intentional  design  choice  of  ephemerality  in  an  era  when 
persistence  is  common.  By  deleting  messages  quickly  and 
implements  a  straightforward 
automatically,  Snapchat 
notion  of  ephemerality.  However,  ephemerality 
is  a 
nuanced  concept  that  can  be  realized  in  many  different 
ways.  In  this  section  we  discuss  realizing  ephemerality 
along 
for 
implementing  ephemerality,  degrees  of  ephemerality,  and 
ephemerality not of content, but of articulated network ties. 
Mechanisms of Ephemerality: Interfaces vs. Data 
Instead of deleting data, many systems make it essentially 
ephemeral  through  aspects  of  their  interface  design.  For 
example, 
the 
Facebook newsfeed interface makes it hard to retrieve old 
content. In other parts of the Facebook interface, the view is 
less  ephemeral:  Graph  Search  and  Timelines  both  provide 
more  access  to  past  data  [21].  However,  because  the 
newsfeed  is  the  primary  interface  element,  its  temporal 
limitation-based  ephemerality  encourages  people 
to 
perceive data that crosses beyond recent feed as “the past” 
and less interesting [43]. Temporal restrictions also play a 
role  in  increasing  value  and  specialness  in  Odom  et  al.’s 
digital  heirlooms  work  [29]  and  Chi  et  al.’s  memory 
matchstick [6]. 
Another natural way to implement ephemerality—one that 
might  align  well  with  our  experiences  of  older  physical 
content—would  be  to  degrade  the  precision  of  older  data. 
This 
is  sometimes  proposed  as  a  privacy-preserving 
mechanism in the database domain [12], but is largely un-
explored in user interfaces. Gulotta et al. designed a series 
of  prototypes  that  presented  digital  data  as  decaying  over 
time, with portions fading out or being literally replaced by 
their constituent bits [17]. In that study’s context of digital 
legacy,  participants  were  confounded  by  these  interfaces, 

the  reverse  chronological  scrolling  of 

dimensions:  mechanisms 

1669

SESSION: MOBILE DESIGN AND USAGE

 Figure 2. Ephemerality as a nuanced concept can be 
realized in different dimensions, including (1) data 
ephemerality, (2) interface ephemerality, and (3) 

contact/network ephemerality. Further, these are not 

binary choices, but matters of degree. 

appropriate for which lifespans? More generally, the idea of 
degrees  of  ephemerality,  or  fidelity,  or  access,  might  be  a 
better fit for the way humans actually experience memory. 
Associations  and  details  fade,  while  recall  is  altered  by 
current circumstances and psychological needs [4]. To fully 
explore this space, not only prototyping and user studies are 
needed,  but  also  theoretical  work  on  psychological  and 
sociological meanings of physical versus digital belongings 
[31], as well as human memory versus digital memory. 
Ephemeral Contacts and Other Spaces for Ephemerality 
So  far  we  have  discussed  ephemerality  primarily  around 
data, and in so doing assumed that contacts are permanent. 
However, in our daily life, contacts and networks are often 
not  persistent  but  ephemeral,  especially  at  the  beginning. 
We might talk to strangers in social events like conferences, 
parties, and workplaces, building an acquaintance—but not 
interact  with  them  until  next  we  meet.  Many  people 
articulate  these  connections  in  networks  like  Facebook, 
Twitter, or LinkedIn. However, for all the reasons described 
earlier around exhibition, context collapse of large, diverse 
networks,  and  risks  of  unwanted  information  distribution, 
this  can  negatively  affect  people’s  ability  to  communicate 
on  these  networks.  Further,  this  can  lead  to  unwanted  or 
inappropriate  communication:  imagine  that  a  person  you 
meet in a conference keeps sending you pictures about what 
she is doing—which Facebook actually affords, but which 
the focus on closer relationships in Snapchat largely avoids. 
One  potential  solution  is  to  bound  the  interaction  by 
connecting  only  in  relevant  contexts,  around  relevant  data 
and  issues;  here,  ephemerality  may  play  a  role.  Imagine  a 
context-based  social  networking  system  where  a  digital 
connection (following, friending) only exists in the current 
context where the connection has meaning, and disappears 
outside  of  the  context.  Such  a  design  may  make  the 
interactions  in  the  current  context  more  salient,  and  help 
people manage their audiences in Goffman’s metaphor [15]. 
Facebook Groups and Google+ Circles offer these benefits, 
but in a persistent way that requires user effort. 

 
wondering why they would be appropriate—but in a design 
context where temporary showing has value, interfaces like 
this  that  make  data  permanent  but  limited  start  to  make 
more sense. Snapchat, for instance, could choose to highly 
blur  expired  snaps  rather  than  delete  them  entirely.  This 
might  better  support  the  conveyance  of  connection  that 
makes everyday talk powerful for maintaining relationships, 
while  still  being  a  safe  platform 
for  performative 
communication  that  minimizes  worry  about  information 
leakage.  
We  can  imagine  other  ways  to  implement  ephemerality. 
Snapchat deletes snaps after one view: what about a system 
“You  Only  Live  Twice”  that  affords  viewing  content  a 
small  number  of  times?3 Would  being  able  to  preview  the 
nature of the content, then review it once at leisure before it 
disappears,  be  helpful?  Confusing?  Redundant  with 
screenshots?  A  more  speculative  idea  would  be  to  add  an 
explicit  cost  for  looking  into  the  past,  especially  at  data 
created by other people. Like YouTube, a system might ask 
people to watch a five second ad; many systems ask people 
to  complete  microtasks  via  captchas;  a  very  popular 
business  model  for  apps  is  to  encourage  purchases  that 
increase  one’s  access  or  capabilities  (Candy  Crush, 
anyone?). People might  use  these in ways that might help 
systems identify more meaningful older content; they might 
avoid 
the 
ephemerality of systems; or might see them as the worst of 
worlds, where they can’t view the past but future employers 
can. The point isn’t that these particular ideas are good or 
bad; the point is that there is a large design space to explore 
around mechanisms of ephemerality. 
Degrees of Ephemerality 
Ephemerality can also be a matter of degree. In Snapchat, 
where  ephemerality 
through  default 
deletion,  the  range  is  fairly  wide:  person-to-person  Snaps 
last  less  than  10  seconds,  while  snaps  on  stories  last  24 
hours.  Even  in  the  range  of  1  to  10  seconds,  people 
perceived  differences:  “If  you’re  putting  a  picture,  don’t 
make it 10 seconds long. I think that’s annoying. I used to 
do 5 but now I’m down to 3 because even 3 seconds, that’s 
a  long  time.  No  one’s  going  to  look  at  my  picture  for  3 
seconds (P25).” Participants also reported setting very short 
times for particular snaps to indicate that they were not for 
screenshotting.  
This raises the question of what the effect of ranges of time 
(or rates of blur, or cost) would be. When should a message 
disappear in one hour, one week, one month, or one year? 
What does that mean to users, and what kinds of content are 
                                                             
3 Snapchat  does  have  a  “replay”  feature  that  allows  users  can  replay  an 
opened  snap,  but  only  once  per  day  per  user.  Further,  since  the  original 
version  of  this  paper  was  written,  Snapchat  added  the  idea  of  charging 
people to replay Snaps. It will be interesting to see how that is received. 

them,  which  would 

implemented 

is 

in  practice 

increase 

1670

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

 
Instead,  systems  might  automatically  create  ephemeral 
networks or ephemeral connections to networks. Location-
based  networks  such  as  YikYak  demonstrate  the  potential 
value  of  ephemeral  connection  to  a  group.  The  automatic 
creation of networks or groups specific to locations, times, 
or events might more effectively support people’s needs to 
both separate audiences and to communicate with them. For 
example, it might be interesting to have a “newsfeed view” 
of the people in a group, or at an event, to give members a 
glimpse into the lives of other members before, during, and 
perhaps shortly after the event the group was created for.  
Designing for contact ephemerality also raises questions of 
mechanism  and  extent.  Should  ephemeral  contacts  be 
deleted,  de-emphasized,  or  hidden?  When  should  the 
system do this: based on expiration time—for example, one 
day  after  the  context  is  over—or  based  on  interaction 
inactivity?  And,  as  with  saving  meaningful  content  in 
Snapchat, designing for ephemeral contacts should consider 
how  to  help  people  move  from  ephemeral  contacts  to 
persistent, articulated ties. Some ephemeral interactions are 
associated  with  more  permanent  goals  like  relationship 
development, collaboration, and building social capital. For 
instance,  a  new    acquaintance  in  a  conference  could  be  a 
future friend or collaborator, and we might want to save her 
as a permanent contact, at least at a certain point. Secondly, 
even  in  situations  where  networking  goals  are  not  salient 
initially,  inadvertent  but  repeated  interactions  could  be  a 
foundation  of  social  networking,  as  represented  in  the 
“everyday encounter” concept. Motorcyclists build a sense 
of community belonging based on traffic encounters on the 
road [11], and company employees tend to become online 
friends if they encounter each other more frequently in the 
workspace [41].  
Thus,  we  argue  that  careful  designs  that  help  people 
articulate  ephemeral  contacts  into  permanent  ones  are 
important.  Systems  like  Facebook  and  LinkedIn  support 
this,  but  at  a  coarse  level.  What  we  emphasize  here  is 
designs  that  support  the  ephemeral  stages  that  most 
relationships  develop  from,  helping  people  increase  the 
value  and  reduce  the  problems  that  come  from  digitally 
articulating relationships. 
BE  EPHEMERAL  OR  BE  PERSISTENT:  OWNING, 
GIVING, SHARING, SHOWING, AND TAKING 
So  far,  we  have  focused  on  the  value  of  ephemerality, 
addressing  why  people  value  it  and  how  designers  might 
achieve  it.  But  we  don’t  argue  that  we  should  all  start  to 
design for ephemerality and replace persistence as a system 
default.  We  see  ephemerality  as  a  feature,  a  property  or  a 
“materiality”  of  a  system,  which  exists  independent  of 
users, but whether and how it works relies on its perceived 
utility,  as  seen  and  acted  on  by  users.  This  is  captured 
through the affordance perspective [14], which we use next 
to  discuss  theoretical  implications  of  this  tension  between 

1671

 
Figure 3. In Email and SMS, the sender is the owner; sending 
a message creates a copy that gives the receiver ownership of 
the copy. In Instagram, or Facebook Wall, the uploader is the 
owner, who can share persistent access with the receiver. The 

receiver can take ownership of a copy of the digital object 

(e.g., save function, screenshots), but the sender is not 

notified. In Snapchat, the digital object is ephemeral, and 
both sender and receiver only have temporary access, unless 
they screenshot to take ownership and the sender is notified. 
ephemerality  and  persistence  that  go  beyond  specific 
systems (which eventually become obsolete). 
Previous  research  has  shown  that  persistence  affords 
recordability  [18]  and  reviewability  [8],  which  influence 
information  sharing  in  an  organizational  context  [38],  the 
ability to pass on digital artifacts in families [29], and long-
term  exhibition  of  self  on  social  media  [19].  What  does 
ephemerality afford in these processes? More studies need 
to  address  this  question  to  have  a  clear  answer;  here  we 
outline an ownership perspective for thinking about the role 
and nature of ephemerality in a given context.  
In traditional media like text messages or email, the content 
generator  is  the  original  owner,  and  when  she  sends  a 
message to a receiver, a digital copy is sent to the receiver’s 
mailbox, SMS client, or other data repository. This giving a 
copy of the object makes the receiver also an owner of the 
associated content [32]. In data-persistent social media like 
Instagram, uploading a picture creates a data access point in 
the  system’s  server.  The  picture  uploader,  as  the  original 
owner,  shares  persistent  access  to  the  object  with  others 
rather than giving them a digital copy. In this situation, it is 
not  clear  whether  sharing  access  to  the  object  also  means 
giving  (in  Facebook,  tagging  a  photo  with  someone  who 
later  puts  the  photo  in  her  Timeline  is  more  like  giving, 
though  the  original  owner  still  has  the  right  to  delete  it, 
removing it from others’ Timelines). As long as it is visible 

SESSION: MOBILE DESIGN AND USAGE

coordination,  information  sharing,  and  “deep”  kinds  of 
relationship  talk—further  cementing  it  as  a  place  for 
informal,  everyday  interaction.  The  fact  that  Snapchat’s 
design  leads  to  a  network  populated  mostly  with  closer 
relationships  also  contributes  to  these  findings  around 
everyday talk and self-unconsciousness.  
These  effects  of  ephemerality  persist  despite  the  potential 
for screenshots, in which receivers come to own their own 
copy of content. This is because Snapchat notifies senders 
when  the  copy  is  made;  such  awareness  supports  nuanced 
norms  around  who  is  allowed  to  capture  which  data,  and 
when,  and  leads  to  repair  activities  when  norms  are 
violated. The combination of default deletion and selective 
saving  with  notification  raises  a  number  of  useful 
distinctions  around  ownership  of  digital  content:  the 
difference  between  sharing  and  showing  information,  and 
between senders giving and receivers taking ownership. 
Finally,  although  default  deletion  is  a  big  departure  from 
automatic  archiving,  it  only  scratches  the  surface  of  how 
ephemerality  might  support  users’  goals  and  interactions. 
Designs  might  vary  the  duration,  fidelity,  and  cost  of 
accessing  data,  modifying  either  the  data  itself  or  its 
presentation.  Content  is  not  the  only  domain  that  might 
benefit 
from  ephemerality;  group  memberships  and 
personal  relationships,  too,  might  usefully  fade  over  time. 
Building  on  other  work  around  ephemerality  and  digital 
possessions,  this  study  helps  to  illuminate  a  rich  design 
space  for  people  and  systems  to  work  together  in  sharing 
data to support individual, platform, and social needs. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This  work  is  supported  in  part  by  the  National  Science 
Foundation through IIS-0910664 and IIS-1405634. We also 
thank  Jessie  Taft  and  Olivia  Wherry  for  help  with  the 
research,  as  well  as  our  anonymous  reviewers  for  helpful 
comments on previous versions of the paper. 
REFERENCES 
1.  Liam J. Bannon. 2006. Forgetting as a feature, not a 

2. 

bug: the duality of memory and implications for 
ubiquitous computing. CoDesign 2, 1: 3–15. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15710880600608230 
Joseph B. Bayer, Nicole Ellison, Sarita Y. 
Schoenebeck, Emily B. Falk. 2015. Sharing the Small 
Moments: Ephemeral Social Interaction on Snapchat. 
Information, Communication & Society, 1-22. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2015.10843
49 

3.  Natalya N. Bazarova, Jessie G. Taft, Yoon Hyung 

Choi, and Dan Cosley. 2012. Managing impressions 
and relationships on Facebook: Self-presentational and 
relational concerns revealed through the analysis of 
language style. Language and Social Psychology 32, 2:  

showing  practices 

 
to  others,  however,  they  can  take a copy  anytime  without 
letting  the  original  sender  know  (for  example,  taking  a 
screenshot  of  a  picture  in  Facebook  does  not  notify  the 
original poster). 
However, the flow is different in Snapchat. Here we point 
out  a  distinction  between  temporary  access  and  persistent 
ownership. By default, snaps disappear quickly for both the 
sender and receiver. Therefore in the default situation, both 
sides  will  have  a  very  short  temporary  access  to  the  data 
and neither has persistent ownership. Instead, the sender is 
just  showing  the  data  to  the  receiver.  The  sender  can 
convert  her  temporary  access  to  persistent  ownership  by 
saving the snap to her mobile phone memory. The receiver 
can also take persistent ownership and become an owner of 
their  own  copy  by  screenshotting  the  snap,  though,  unlike 
Facebook,  the  sender  is  notified  that  the  receiver  has 
become an owner. 
Figure  3  illustrates  how  system  features  like  copying, 
access control, and saving afford a number of different data 
distribution practices: giving ownership by sending a copy, 
sharing by granting persistent access, showing by granting 
temporary  access,  and 
taking  ownership  by  saving 
accessible  data.  These  practices  have  different  values.  For 
example, 
in  Snapchat  encourage 
mundane  communication  in  close  relationships,  provide 
less  pressure  on  self-presentation,  and  motivate  users  to 
perform for values they described such as being funny and 
interesting. 
By  highlighting  sharing  versus  giving,  temporary  versus 
permanent,  and  receiver  versus  sender  agency,  Snapchat 
helps  to  both  illustrate  and  address  some  of  the  issues 
Odom  el  al.  unpack  around  the  ownership  of  digital 
possessions  [31].  Most  such  work  around  information 
sharing in social media focuses on the agency of the sender; 
Snapchat makes plain the space for receivers to take agency 
as  well,  leading  to  complex  distributional  norms  around 
taking  ownership  by  screenshotting.  How  these  ideas 
translate to other contexts will be interesting future work in 
both theory and design.  
CONCLUSION 
Ephemerality  as  instantiated  in  Snapchat  has  a  number  of 
effects  on  communication.  Default  deletion  of  content 
makes  it  easier  to  share  everyday,  mundane  talk  that  is 
valuable  in  the  moment  for  maintaining  relationships  but 
not  worth  saving.  Knowing  that  content  disappears  by 
default  also  reduces  self-consciousness  in  communication: 
with  less  need  to  worry  about  unintended  audiences  and 
long-term exhibition of content, people are freer to “let their 
guard  down”  and  share  creative,  funny,  even  self-
deprecating  content  they  would  hesitate  to  put  on  other 
social  media.  The  fact  that  content  disappears  makes 
Snapchat 
talk  around 

task-oriented 

less  useful 

for 

1672

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

 

121–141. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0261927X12456384 
4.  Susan Bluck and Nicole Alea. 2002. Exploring the 
functions of autobiographical memory: Why do I 
remember the autumn. In Critical advances in 
reminiscence work: From theory to application, Jeffrey 
Dean Webster and Barbara K. Haight (eds.). Springer 
Publishing Company, 61–75. 

5.  Alvan Bregman and C Haythornwaite. 2001. Radicals 

of presentation in persistent conversation. In 
Proceedings of the 34th Annual Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, 1-10. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HICSS.2001.926499 

6.  Pei-Yu Chi, Xiao Xiao, Keywon Chung, and Carnaven 

Chiu. 2009. Burn your memory away: one-time use 
video capture and storage device to encourage memory 
appreciation. In CHI '09 Extended Abstracts on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA '09). ACM, 
New York, NY, USA, 2397-2406. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1520340.1520342 

7.  Robert B. Cialdini. 1993. Inﬂuence: The psychology of 

persuasion. New York: Morrow. 

8.  Herbert H. Clark and Susan E. Brennan. 1991. 

Grounding in communication. In Perspectives on 
Socially Shared Cognition, Lauren B. Resnick, John M. 
Levine and Stephanie D. Teasley (eds.).  American 
Psychological Association, 127–149.  

9.  Steve Duck, Deborah J. Rutt, Margaret H. Hurst, and 

Heather Strejc. 1991. Some evident truths about 
conversations in everyday relationships: All 
communications are not created equal. Human 
Communication Research 18, 2: 228–267. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1111/j.1468-
2958.1991.tb00545.x 

10.  Thomas Erickson and Wendy A. Kellogg. 2000. Social 

translucence: an approach to designing systems that 
support social processes. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. 
Interact. 7, 1 (March 2000), 59-83. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/344949.345004 
11.  Mattias Esbjörnsson, Oskar Juhlin, and Mattias 

Östergen. 2003. Motorcycling and social interaction: 
design for the enjoyment of brief traffic encounters. 
In Proceedings of the 2003 international ACM 
SIGGROUP conference on Supporting group 
work (GROUP '03). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 85-
94. DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/958160.958174 

12.  Benjamin C. M. Fung, Ke Wang, Rui Chen, and Philip 

S. Yu. 2010. Privacy-preserving data publishing: A 
survey of recent developments. ACM Comput. 
Surv. 42, 4, Article 14 (June 2010), 53 pages. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1749603.1749605 

1673

13.  Shelly L. Gable, Harry T. Reis, Emily A. Impett, and 
Evan R. Asher. 2004. What do you do when things go 
right? The intrapersonal and interpersonal benefits of 
sharing positive events. Personality and Social 
Psychology 87, 2: 228. 
http://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/0022-3514.87.2.228 

14.  William W. Gaver. 1991. Technology affordances. 

In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '91), Scott P. 
Robertson, Gary M. Olson, and Judith S. Olson (Eds.). 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 79-84. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/108844.108856 

15.  Erving Goffman. 1959. The presentation of self in 

everyday life. Random House. 

16.  Daena J. Goldsmith and Leslie A. Baxter. 1996. 

Constituting relationships in talk a taxonomy of speech 
events in social and personal relationships. Human 
Communication Research 23, 1: 87–114. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-
2958.1996.tb00388.x 

17.  Rebecca Gulotta, William Odom, Jodi Forlizzi, and 

Haakon Faste. 2013. Digital artifacts as legacy: 
exploring the lifespan and value of digital data. 
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '13). ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 1813-1822. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2466240 

18.  Jeffrey T. Hancock, Catalina Toma, and Nicole Ellison. 

2007. The truth about lying in online dating profiles. 
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '07). ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 449-452. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1240624.1240697 

19.  Bernie Hogan. 2010. The presentation of self in the age 

of social media: Distinguishing performances and 
exhibitions online. Bulletin of Science, Technology & 
Society 30, 6: 377-386. DOI=http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1177/0270467610385893 

20.  Gordon Hull, Heather Richter Lipford, and Celine 
Latulipe. 2011. Contextual gaps: Privacy issues on 
Facebook. Ethics and Information Technology 13, 4: 
289–302. DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10676-010-
9224-8 

21.  Anne Kaun, and Stiernstedt Fredrik. 2014. Facebook 
time: Technological and institutional affordances for 
media memories. New Media & Society 16, 7: 1154–
1168. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1461444814544001 
22.  David S. Kirk and Abigail Sellen. 2010. On human 

remains: Values and practice in the home archiving of 
cherished objects. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. 

SESSION: MOBILE DESIGN AND USAGE

 

Interact. 17, 3, Article 10 (July 2010), 43 pages. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1806923.1806924  

32.   Sandra Petronio. 2012. Boundaries of privacy: 

Dialectics of disclosure. Suny Press. 

23.  Paul M. Leonardi and Diane E. Bailey. 2008. 

Transformational technologies and the creation of new 
work practices: Making implicit knowledge explicit in 
task-based offshoring. Management Information 
Systems Quarterly 32, 2: 411–436. 

24.  Michael Massimi and Ronald M. Baecker. 2011. 

Dealing with death in design: developing systems for 
the bereaved. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI '11). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1001-
1010. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979092 

25.  Michael Massimi, William Odom, Richard Banks, and 

David Kirk. 2011. Matters of life and death: locating 
the end of life in lifespan-oriented hci research. 
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '11). ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 987-996. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979090 

26.  Viktor Mayer-Schönberger. 2011. Delete: the virtue of 

forgetting in the digital age. Princeton University 
Press. 

27.  Helen Nissenbaum. 2009. Privacy in context: 

Technology, policy, and the integrity of social life. 
Stanford University Press. 

28.  Helen Nissenbaum. 2011. A contextual approach to 

privacy online. Daedalus 140, 4: 32–48. 

29.  William Odom, Richard Banks, David Kirk, Richard 

Harper, Siân Lindley, and Abigail Sellen. 2012. 
Technology heirlooms?: considerations for passing 
down and inheriting digital materials. InProceedings of 
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI '12). ACM, New York, NY, 
USA, 337-346. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2207723 

30.  William Odom, James Pierce, Erik Stolterman, and Eli 

Blevis. 2009. Understanding why we preserve some 
things and discard others in the context of interaction 
design. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '09). 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1053-1062. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1518701.1518862 

31.  William Odom, Abi Sellen, Richard Harper, and Eno 
Thereska. 2012. Lost in translation: understanding the 
possession of digital things in the cloud. 
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '12). ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 781-790. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2207789 

1674

33.  Artemio Ramirez and Kathy Broneck. 2009. ‘IM me’: 

Instant messaging as relational maintenance and 
everyday communication. Social and Personal 
Relationships 26, 2–3: 291–314. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1177/0265407509106719 

34.  Franziska Roesner, Gill T. Brian, and Tadayoshi 

Kohno. 2014. Sex, lies, or kittens? Investigating the 
use of snapchat’s self-destructing messages. Financial 
Cryptography and Data Security, 8437: 64–76. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-45472-5_5 
35.  Abigail J. Sellen and Steve Whittaker. 2010. Beyond 

total capture: a constructive critique of 
lifelogging. Commun. ACM 53, 5 (May 2010), 70-77. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1735223.1735243 

36.  Stuart J. Sigman. 1991. Handling the Discontinuous 
Aspects of Continuous Social Relationships: Toward 
Research on the Persistence of Social Forms. 
Communication Theory 1, 2: 106–127. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-
2885.1991.tb00008.x 

37.  Victoria Schwanda Sosik and Natalya N. Bazarova. 

2014. Relational maintenance on social network sites: 
How Facebook communication predicts relational 
escalation. Computers in Human Behavior 35:124–131. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2014.02.044 

38.  Jeffrey W. Treem and Paul M. Leonardi. 2012. Social 
media use in organizations: Exploring the affordances 
of visibility, editability, persistence, and association. 
Communication Yearbook 36: 143–189. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2129853 

39.  Steve Whittaker. 2003. Theories and methods in 

mediated communication. In The Handbook of 
Discourse Processes, Arthur C. Graesser, Morton Ann 
Gernsbacher and Susan R. Goldman (eds.). Routledge, 
243–286. 

40.  Scott Wright. 2012. From third place to third space: 
Everyday political talk in non-political online spaces. 
Javnost-the Public 19, 3: 5–20. DOI=http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1080/13183222.2012.11009088 

41.  Bin Xu, Alvin Chin, Hao Wang, Lele Chang, Ke 

Zhang, Fangxi Yin, Hao Wang, Li Zhang. Physical 
Proximity and Online User Behavior in an Indoor 
Mobile Social Networking Application. In Proceedings 
of the IEEE International Conference on Cyber, 
Physical and Social Computing (CPSCom 2011). 
IEEE, 273–282. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/iThings/CPSCom.2011.
74 

through use: understanding the personal value of social 
media. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems(CHI '14). ACM, 
New York, NY, USA, 2431-2440. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557291 
43.  Xuan Zhao, Niloufar Salehi, Sasha Naranjit, Sara 

Alwaalan, Stephen Voida, and Dan Cosley. 2013. The 

 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

 
42.  Xuan Zhao and Siân E. Lindley. 2014. Curation 

many faces of facebook: experiencing social media as 
performance, exhibition, and personal archive. 
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '13). ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 1-10. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2470656 

1675

