CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Complex Decision-Making in Clinical Practice  

Line Silsand 

Gunnar Ellingsen   

University hospital of Northern 

The Arctic 

Norway 

Tromsoe, Norway  

University of Norway 

 Tromsoe, Norway 

line.silsand@telemed.no 

gunnar.ellingsen@uit.no 

 

 

 

ABSTRACT 
Clinical  Decision  Support  (CDS)  Systems  are  considered 
crucial  for  diagnosis,  treatment  and  care  of  patients. 
However,  practical  benefits  of  such  systems  have  been  far 
below  expectations.  This  paper  explores  how  the  evolving 
interdependencies  in  organizational,  clinical,  political,  and 
behavioral terms influence the design and implementation of 
CDS.  The  paper  discusses  how  these  interdependencies 
complicate  clinical  use  of  CDS  where  cross-departmental 
patient  pathways  increasingly  dominate  approaches  to 
dealing with patients with complex conditions.  

Empirically,  we  report  from  an  acute  geriatric  patient 
pathway  project.  The  aim  was  to  design  and  implement  a 
decision-support  form  for  triage  of  elderly  patients  in  the 
emergency  unit.  The  study  emphasizes  the  intertwined 
collaborative  nature  of  healthcare  work,  and  the  resulting 
need  to  consider  the  whole  context  when  designing  and 
implementing  CDS tools. The contribution is to emphasize 
the “extended design” perspective to capture how workplace 
technologies  and  practices  are  shaped  across  multiple 
contexts and prolonged periods.   

Author Keywords 
Decision  support;  healthcare  work;  patient  pathways; 
ethnography; information infrastructure.  

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.3 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: Group and 
Organization  Interfaces  –  Computer-supported  cooperative 
work. 

INTRODUCTION 
While decision support systems in health care are considered 
crucial for diagnosis, treatment, and care of patients [26], the 
practical  benefits  of  such  systems  have  proven  to  be  far 
below  expectations  [6,8,11,26].  Clinical  Decision  Support 
(CDS)  systems  are  used  to  integrate  clinical  and  patient 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be  honored. 
Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or  republish,  to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA  
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819952 
 

information  to  provide  support  for  decision-making  in 
patient  care  as  well  as  to  generate  case-specific  advice 
[8,12,21].  

In 2007, Aarts, Ash, and Berg [2] reported that less than 10% 
of  US  hospitals  had  implemented  the  decision  support 
system  “computerized  physician  order  entry”  (CPOE), 
which allows a physician to enter medical orders and monitor 
their  results.  This  tendency  seems  to  be  representative  of 
western  healthcare organizations in general and Norway in 
particular, as several studies and reports indicate low uptake 
of electronic decision support systems in hospitals in recent 
years [6,12,17,33,37,40]. Moreover, the lack of diffusion of 
CDS  systems  is  associated  with  the  complexity  that  arises 
from the nature of decision making, the intellectual challenge 
of  creating  knowledge,  technical  dimensions  of  delivering 
CDS,  and  social  aspects  of  incorporating  changes  into 
clinical care [8,11,17,34,37]. 

These discouraging results indicate that we need a different 
approach  to  managing  the  challenges  of  decision  support 
systems.  As  a  response,  we  suggest  that  a  socio-technical 
approach  is  needed  for  shedding  light  on  the  dynamics 
between decision support systems and the specific nature of 
the work these systems are intended to support. In particular, 
we  want  to  explore  how  the  evolving  interdependencies  in 
organizational,  clinical,  political,  and  behavioral  terms 
influence  the  design  and  implementation  of  CDS  systems. 
Further,  the  paper  discusses  how  these  aspects  complicate 
the  adoption  of  CDS  systems  where  cross-departmental 
patient  pathways  increasingly  dominate  approaches  to  care 
of  patients  with  complex  conditions  [17,34].  In  this  paper, 
we  conceptualize  patient  pathways  as  planned  and  pre-
booked  steps  combining  both  administrative  and  clinical 
prescriptions, as distinct from typical medical guidelines, in 
order to manage patient trajectories [28].  

From  this  perspective,  we  ask  the  following  research 
question:  What  are  the  key  challenges  of  designing  and 
implementing decision support systems in clinical practice?  

With  this,  we  challenge  the  way  many  decision-support 
systems  have  traditionally  been  designed,  namely  for  one 
particular  profession  (i.e.  physicians)  in  one  particular 
setting.  Accordingly,  the  contribution  of  this  paper  is  to 
emphasize  an  “extended  design  and 
implementation” 
perspective  of  decision-support  systems,  to  capture  how 

993

workplace  technologies  and  practices  are  shaped  across 
multiple contexts and over extended periods.  

To  conceptualize  the  dynamics  of  how  various  healthcare 
professionals,  activities  and  decision-support  tools  are 
interwoven in the support of the patient’s trajectory through 
the  healthcare  system,  we  draw  on  a  work  practice 
perspective from the CSCW field [4,10,13,22]. However, we 
supplement this perspective with the concept of information 
infrastructure,  which  has  been  used  to  study  the  design, 
implementation, and use of large-scale information systems 
[15,19,38].  

Empirically our study is based on the “acute geriatric patient 
pathway  project”  established  in  September  2011  by  a 
university  hospital  in  Norway.  In  the  initial  phase  of  the 
project, a decision-support form was introduced for triage of 
patients in the emergency unit. The first version was a paper 
form, which was replaced later in the process by an electronic 
form in the Electronic Patient Record (EPR). This allowed 
detailed  insight  into  how  a  clinical  decision  support  tool 
gradually evolved in practice. 

The  rest  of  the  paper  is  organized  as  follows:  The  next 
section  describes  the  theoretical  framework  for  this  paper. 
The  method  section  briefly  introduces  the  setting  and  the 
paper’s  methodological  foundations,  followed  by  an 
explanation of the  methods  for the empirical research. The 
section  named  “CASE”  contains  the  empirical  findings 
presented as the history of the design and implementation of 
the decision-support system. These sections are followed by 
discussion of the findings in relation of the chosen theoretical 
framework, and followed by the conclusion.   

CONCEPTUALIZING DECISION SUPPORT 
Like other complex organizations, the healthcare sector has 
an  increasing  need  to  implement  ICT  systems  that  can 
support  clinical  and  organizational  decision-making 
activities.  Health  ICT  systems  are  expected  to  serve 
organizational  goals    to  fit  into  work  processes,  and  to  be 
usable  and  safe.  Generally,  the  move  toward  Electronic 
Patient Record (EPR) systems has led to the development of 
guidelines,  care  paths,  and  decision-support  devices 
providing reminders and recommendations within the EPRs. 
In particular, well-designed CDS systems have the potential 
to improve healthcare quality and patients’ outcomes, as well 
as  to  increase  efficiency  and  reduce  healthcare  costs  [2,5] 
[12,20,26,29]. Along with the growth of standardized patient 
pathways,  a  key  issue  concerns  the  decision  to  initiate  a 
pathway  combining  both  administrative  and  clinical 
prescriptions for a particular patient. Accordingly, the use of 
patient  pathways  addresses  a  need  to  identify  the  patients 
who  will  benefit  from  a  particular  pathway,  due  to  limited 
resources  within  the  healthcare  service  in  general  [17,28]. 
Hence, sorting patients becomes important before initiating 
a  pathway  and  often  starts  as  triage  of  patients  at  the 
emergency  unit.  Triage  is  the  process  of  sorting  patients 
based  on  their  need  for  immediate  medical  treatment  in 
relation to their chance of benefiting from such care, and may 

994

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

seem to be a straightforward activity for healthcare personnel 
based  on  standardized  classification  schemes.  However, 
previous studies [7,28] emphasized the collaborative process 
of sorting patients, and investigated how different formal and 
informal  sorting  mechanisms  are  in  play.  While  we 
appreciate  the  thorough  investigations  by  Møller  &  Bjørn 
[28]  and  Bjørn  &  Rødje  [7],  our  study  differs  because  we 
explore the design and implementation of a decision support 
tool. 

and  patient-related 

Today, there is an array of different clinical decision support 
(CDS) systems in healthcare practice. CDS systems  can be 
defined  as  providing  clinicians  with  computer-generated 
clinical  knowledge 
information, 
intelligently  filtered  or  presented  at  appropriate  times,  to 
enhance  patient  care.  Clinical  knowledge  can  be 
incorporated  in  CDS  systems  based  on,  for  instance, 
available  best  evidence,  which  is  represented  in  guideline 
recommendations. Many different types of clinical tasks can 
be  supported by  CDS  systems,  for  example  use  of  patient-
monitoring  devices  such  as  Electrocardiogram  or  pulse 
oximeters that warn of changes in a patient’s condition [21]. 
However, the scope of this paper is limited to the design and 
implementation  of  a  CDS  form  to  be  integrated  in  an 
Electronic Patient Record (EPR). )  

One  example  of  CDS  integrated  in  EPRs  is  the  system  for 
computerized  physician  order  entry  (CPOE),  designed  for 
use by physicians, which can send reminders or warnings for 
deviating  laboratory  test  results  and  can  check  for  drug 
interactions,  dosage 
and  other  prescribing 
contraindications such as a patient’s allergies [3,21].  

errors, 

Another  example  of  CDS  is  electronic  systems  or  forms, 
integrated  in  EPRs,  used  to  provide  support  for  decision-
making  in  patient  care  as  well  as  to  generate  case-specific 
advice at various stages in the clinical process. For complex 
cognitive tasks, for example diagnostic decision-making, the 
aim of the CDS can be to assist, rather than to replace, the 
clinician. When a patient's case is complex, or the healthcare 
practitioner  making  the  diagnosis  is  inexperienced,  a  CDS 
system  can  help  in  formulating  diagnoses  and  can  give 
treatment and care suggestions based on patient data and the 
system's knowledge base [6,8,12,21,26]. Accordingly, in this 
paper  the  decision-support  form  can  be  compared  to  the 
latter  example  of  use,  as  the  form  was  intended  to  provide 
support to junior physicians assessing elderly patients in the 
emergency unit.  

Despite widespread agreement on the importance of systems 
supporting  clinical  treatment  and  care  processes,  the 
development  and  implementation  of  these  systems  have 
failed to achieve their potential when the systems were put 
into  practical  use.  It  is  not  easy  to  suggest  a  cause-effect 
explanation of the low uptake of electronic decision support 
systems in hospitals. Several studies point to the complexity 
that  arises  from 
the 
intellectual  challenge  of  creating  knowledge,  technical 
dimensions  of  delivering  CDS,  and  social  aspects  of 

the  nature  of  decision-making, 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

incorporating  changes  into  clinical  care    [6,8,11,17,34,37].  
Moreover, CDS systems are still not widely accepted within 
clinical  practice,  especially  if  use  of  CDS  exacerbates  the 
increasingly time-pressured patient care process, which may 
occur  [3,6,8,11,37].  However,  relatively 
little  sound 
scientific evidence is available to explain why systems fail. 
Hence,  there  is  a  need  for  realistic  complex  studies  that 
examine  the  user-CDS  interaction  and  its  impact  on  the 
clinician, the  workflow, and  other organizational processes 
and outcomes [6,17].  

This  suggests  we  need  a  better  understanding  of  the 
sociotechnical  challenges  of  designing  and  implementing 
decision  support  systems  where  we  manage  to  grasp  the 
dynamics  between  the  systems  and  the  specific  nature  of 
work to be supported. Health care work is far from clear-cut, 
and far from the glossy pictures where individual physicians 
assess  diagnosis  and  prescribe  treatments  of  patients  [26]. 
We need a broader approach where we take into account the 
patient’s  trajectory  through  the  healthcare  system,  the 
various  professionals  involved  along  the  way  and  the 
particular activities necessary to assist the patient along the 
journey. Accordingly, the CSCW field is especially relevant 
to explore and understand decision support in clinical use.  

The  CSCW  field  has  contributed  extensively  in  providing 
how information systems or artefacts can support distributed 
collaborative work among groups of users, and in mapping 
the  complexities  of  coordinating  daily  activities  and 
documentation practices among healthcare staff [4,10,13]. In 
short, findings from CSCW research suggest that designing, 
implementing  and  using  technology  or  artefacts  involves 
complex,  diverse  and 
locally  situated  socio-technical 
challenges  and  intended  and  unintended  organizational 
consequences [16].  

The  CSCW  field  has  proved  to  be  a  strong  framework  for 
conducting and analyzing workplace studies and single site 
design  and  implementation.  However,  while  providing  the 
tools for focusing on the micro-mechanisms of collaboration 
in  a  specific  context,  the  “here  and  now”,  it  has  somehow 
lacked the broader picture of understanding the collaboration 
of  many  and  various  professionals,  material,  and  systems 
across 
development, 
implementation, and adoption [22,29]. The “here and now” 
or  “local  sensibility”,  understood  as  smaller  scale 
interactions  for  design  restricted  to  particular  settings  and 
timeframes,  has  been  important  to  the  historical  research 
agenda  of  CSCW,  for  good  reasons  [29].  However,  “local 
sensibility”  contrasts  with  today’s  need  for  understanding 
cross-organizational workflows over time and space. 

contexts, 

different 

during 

Monteiro et al. [29] note that several researchers point to how 
important  influences  from  other  levels  and  moments  of 
technological  design  and  implementation  may  be  ignored 
when  one  focuses on one  specific local or time period.  An 
important ambition of CSCW is geared towards improving 
the design of computer-based systems by acquiring a deeper 
understanding of the collective and collaborative character 

995

of work processes and how they may be better supported by 
more  appropriately  designed  systems.  To  capture  the 
intertwined  and  complex  work  processes,  often  stretched 
across space and time, in the design and implementation of 
technology,  it  is  necessary  to  supplement  the  “local 
sensibility” with an “extended design” perspective [29].  

systems 

[19,29,30,38]. 

Therefore,  we  enhance  the  CSCW  perspective  with  the 
notion of information infrastructure, which has been used to 
study  design,  implementation,  and  use  of  large-scale 
information 
Information 
infrastructures are never seen as standalone entities, but are 
integrated  with 
and 
communication 
technologies,  and  with  non-technical 
elements across many local settings. Therefore, analyses of 
information infrastructures need to consider a broad range of 
socio-technical 
and 
implementation process [15].  

information 

systems 

design 

other 

issues 

shaping 

the 

A  basic  principle  is  that  an  information  infrastructure  is 
never built from scratch; rather, it evolves from the installed 
base  of  existing  systems  and  practices  in  a  specific 
contextual  setting.  As  a  part  of 
information 
infrastructures  are  characterized  by  openness  to  a  number 
and types of users and interconnected contexts.  Accordingly, 
the infrastructure shapes and is shaped by the work practice 
in  an  on-going  co-construction  process  between  technical 
and social elements stretched across space and time [29,38].  

this, 

In  this  regard,  many  studies  do  not  refer  to  infrastructural 
design  as  construction,  but  rather  conceptualize  it  as  an 
“evolving  socio-technical  system”  [19]  or  infrastructuring 
[25,30]  that  needs  to  be  carefully  cultivated  [1].  Hence, 
information  infrastructures  cut  across  many  local  settings 
and  in  this  sense  represent  a  broad  definition  of  a  patient 
pathway.  

METHOD 

The research site 
The paper reports from a patient pathway project, named “the 
acute  geriatric  patient  pathway”,  at  a  university  hospital  in 
Norway. The project was “owned” by the Internal Medicine 
Clinic,  which  includes  the  Specialist  Acute  Geriatric  Unit 
(SAGU).  The  Internal  Medicine  Clinic’s  director  was  the 
top-level leader of the project. However, a project manager 
who worked as a clinical adviser led the daily organization 
of  the  project.  The  project  manager  had  extensive  clinical 
competences  as  an  expert  nurse,  as  well  as  formal  project 
manager competences.  The project steering group consisted 
of clinicians  from different professions  such as  physicians, 
nurses,  and  secretaries  from  the  Internal  Medicine  Clinic, 
mainly  SAGU,  and  from  the  Emergency  Unit.  Project 
meetings  were  held  regularly,  but  there  were  also  ad  hoc 
meetings when necessary. In addition, there were meetings 
with  the  project  steering  group  and  clinicians  who  were 
introduces to the CDS form in their clinical practice.  

The  university  hospital  is  a  specialist  hospital  providing 
advanced  medical  treatment  and  care,  and  currently  has 

around 6000 employees. The university hospital consists of 
10 different clinics for patient treatment and care, each with  
their  own  administrative  and  clinical  management.  The 
Emergency  Unit,  which  is  part  of  the  Emergency  Medical 
Service Clinic, is the gateway to the hospital. Accordingly, 
patients with all kinds of illnesses requiring acute medical or 
surgical  care  are  admitted  and  assessed  at  the  Emergency 
Unit, and then discharged or transferred to a specialist ward 
for  treatment  and  care.  When  patients  arrive  at  the 
emergency  unit,  traditionally  a  nurse  makes  the  initial 
assessment  (triage  to  sort  the  patients  according  to  their 
immediate  need  for  treatment)  and  consults  a  physician 
based  on  the  patient’s  condition  and  its  severity.  Mainly, 
junior  physicians  conduct  further  examinations,  with  back-
up  from  more  experienced  physicians.  If  the  patient  is 
hospitalized, the (junior) physician decides which specialist 
ward  is  appropriate  according  to  the  patient’s  medical 
condition.  

The  Emergency  Unit  receives  approximately  1000  patients 
per month, and strives to keep the  waiting time as short as 
possible to ensure the patients subsequent treatment and care 
from the correct specialist ward. Accordingly, the clinicians 
work under high pressure to assess a large number of patients 
in  a  minimum  of  time.  Moreover,  a  quarter  of  the  1000 
patients  assessed  per  month  are  aged  over  75.  A  large 
proportion of the elderly patients  have a  medical condition 
that requires surgical treatment, or specific organ symptoms 
that enable a streamlined process of admission to the correct 
specialist  ward.  However,  a  significant  proportion  of  the 
elderly patients have to be admitted to a specialist ward with 
a  tentative  diagnosis  because  their  medical  condition  is 
difficult  to  determine.  Because  of  their  age,  most  of  these 
patients are admitted to SAGU. SAGU is an eight-bed ward 
for elderly patients with acute confusion or acute functional 
deterioration.  The  ward  is  a  defined  medical  unit  with  an 
interdisciplinary  team  approach  (e.g.  specialist  nurses, 
geriatrists, speech therapists, physiotherapists, occupational 
therapists).  A  major  part  of  the  healthcare  practitioners 
working  in  the  ward  are  specialized  in  geriatric  care  to 
provide increased attention to patients’ level of functioning 
and specific treatment of diagnoses common in older people.  

Research approach 
The  study  adheres  to  an  interpretive  research  approach 
[27,39]  where  the  epistemological  belief  emphasizes  the 
understanding of social processes by getting involved inside 
the world of those generating them and viewing an empirical 
phenomenon  from  different  perspectives.  This  implies  that 
different sources of field data are all taken into account in the 
interpretation  process.  The  method  includes  a  relatively 
detailed case story, which allows the readers to gain insight 
in the field data, followed by an examination of the data for 
potential  analytical  themes  presented  as  headlines  in  the 
discussion.  The  analysis  was  based  on  a  hermeneutic 
approach.  To  improve  the  understanding  of  the  empirical 
data, the data  was continuously presented and discussed in 
informal meetings with the project manager, physicians, and 

996

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

nurses  involved  with  the  project,  the  second  author  and 
members of the research group. This was an iterative process 
between  issues  to  be  interpreted,  the  context,  the  authors’ 
preconceptions,  and  the  theoretical  perspectives  chosen  for 
this study. Our understanding at one stage  thus became the 
preconception for understanding the next stage in data [27]. 
It should be noted that the first author had previously worked 
as  a  nurse  at  the  hospital’s  internal  medicine  clinic,  and 
accordingly had significant insight into visible and invisible 
norms and guidelines of clinical practice within the clinic.   

Methodologically,  we  find the concept of biography  useful 
for  framing  our  research  [31,32].  The  biography  approach 
focuses  upon  socio-technical  processes  in  innovation,  and 
studies the accumulated history of artefacts  in its historical 
context and across its life cycle. The life cycle of the product 
involves many stages from “birth” through implementation, 
in  which  the biography  focuses on the  transformations and 
translations that a product goes through during its life cycle 
[31].  The  BoA  underscores  the  importance  of  moving 
beyond episodic studies of settings of technology design or 
organizational implementation to the evolution of workplace 
technologies  over  multiple  cycles  of  design  and 
implementation. The biographic perspective offers a way to 
clarify the interdependencies between the individual and the 
socio-historical,  and  reflects  the  necessity  to  engage  more 
coherently with the ways in which the broader context shapes 
innovation  processes  and  outcomes.  This  derives  from  a 
concern to reassemble the macro and micro levels of analysis 
[23].  

Data collection 
The  empirical  data  were  collected  from  February  2012  to 
April  2015.  The  first  author  conducted  the  data  gathering 
process primarily through participant observation in project 
meetings, workshops with physicians, at the emergency unit, 
and participating in informal meetings with project members, 
in total 75 hours of fieldwork. Moreover, the first author has 
conducted  10  in  situ  interviews  with  project  members  and 
clinicians involved and has collected project documents from 
the  initial  phase  of  the  project  and  throughout  the  research 
period.  

The emergency unit was central during clinical observation 
(one week of day shifts), in which the first author observed 
the clinical work in general – for instance how the clinicians 
cooperated  with  each  other  and  with  clinicians  from  other 
hospital units. The observation also included bedside use of 
the  form  when  junior  physicians  assessed  acute  geriatric 
patients.  

The permission for the first author to be an observer created 
opportunities  to  follow  the  project  manager’s  way  of 
working  in  the  clinical  field  e.g.  motivating,  aligning,  and 
engaging clinicians to participate in the project. The project 
manager was obliging, allowing the first author to share her 
office one day a week. Working in physical proximity to the 
project manager gave the first author an opportunity for rich 
discussions  about  the  evolving  project  and  its  obstacles, 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

participating in ad hoc meetings, formal as well as informal 
discussions  with  other  project  members  and  clinicians. 
Furthermore, being an observer of the evolving project led to 
acquaintance  with  the  particular  medical  practice  and  its 
organizational challenges.  

CASE  

The need for decision support  
Four underlying factors supported the acute geriatric patient 
pathway project.  

First,  the  population  aged  74  and  above  in  the  hospital’s 
catchment area is expected to increase by 20% over the next 
10 years, which will likely represent a significant demand for 
acute geriatric medical admissions in years to come.  

Second, the clinical problems and needs of older patients are 
often substantially different from those of younger patients. 
Older  people’s  needs  are  more  complex  with  potentially 
coexistent  medical,  functional,  psychological,  and  social 
care needs. The clinical picture for older patients with acute 
or  sub-acute  medical  illness,  often  presented  in  a  non-
specific manner, may emerge as functional deterioration or 
acute confusion within hours or days. This makes diagnosis, 
treatment and monitoring of older patients more complex and 
difficult than for younger patients [36]. 

Third,  it  is  extremely  important  to  act  early  and  provide 
appropriate  treatment  for  elderly  patients,  because  they 
generally  have  a  lower  functional  reserve  than  younger 
adults  do.  Accordingly,  frail  elderly  patients  admitted  to 
hospital as an emergency should have access to a specialist 
geriatric medical unit [36].  

Fourth, there was also a concern related to the utilization of 
the multi-disciplinary approach, because age was often used 
as  the  main  criterion  for  admission  of  elderly  internal-
medicine  patients  to  SAGU.  Consequently,  the  eight  beds 
were  often  occupied,  but  not  always  by  acute  geriatric 
patients.  The  overbooking  reinforced  a  negative  cycle 
because patients in need of the multidisciplinary team were 
admitted to other inpatient units. Therefore, the management 
of the internal medicine clinic emphasized that age could not, 
and should not,  be the only admission criterion for SAGU. 
Moreover,  the  internal  medicine  clinic’s  management  and 
the SAGU’s specialist geriatric physicians asked for criteria 
to help the junior physicians in the emergency unit to identify 
the  elderly  patients  who  would  benefit  most  from  the 
geriatric  multidisciplinary  approach.  Overall,  there  was  no 
doubt among the healthcare practitioners, in both SAGU and 
the  emergency  unit,  about  the  importance  of  selecting  the 
correct elderly patients for admission to SAGU.  

Designing the decision-support form (November 2011 – 
April 2012)  
Designing the decision-support form was considered the first 
step in generating an acute geriatric patient pathway. The aim 
of the  form was to support the physicians  with no geriatric 
specialization,  working  in  the  emergency  unit,  when 
assessing  elderly  patients  with  unclear  symptoms.  The 

discussions  among  the  clinicians  during  project  meetings 
underscored the importance of making the form easy to use 
in terms of distinct criteria for triage of the elderly patients, 
and easy to fill in because of the hectic working conditions 
in the emergency unit. The initial challenge in designing the 
form  was  the  absence  of  existing  criteria  or  guidelines  to 
distinguish  geriatric  patients  with  acute  confusion  or  acute 
functional  deterioration  from  elderly  patients  with  acute 
organ-specific  illness,  e.g.  low-hemoglobin,  urinary  tract 
infection or cardiac insufficiency, but presented with unclear 
symptoms.  Of  course,  there  are  geriatric  approaches  to 
examining  geriatric  patients  for  various  conditions,  but  the 
clinicians  considered  these  assessment  tools  to  be  too 
comprehensive  and  time-consuming  to  use  as  a  first-
guidance tool in demanding circumstances.  

However,  the  process  of  defining  and  agreeing  upon  the 
correct  criteria  was  performed  by  specialist  geriatric 
healthcare  personnel,  evidence-based  literature,  interviews 
with  specialist  geriatric  healthcare  personnel  in  other 
hospitals, and feedback from the physicians in the intended 
user  group.  Still,  it  was  a  cumbersome  process  lasting 
approximately  5  months.  During  this  period,  several 
meetings were conducted with the project steering group and 
clinicians  to  discuss  which  criteria  should  be  used,  how  to 
interpret different concepts within the form, and how to make 
the form intuitive to use. The project steering group made the 
final decision about the form’s layout. 

Putting  the  decision  support  into  action  (April  2012  – 
June 2012)  
Even  though  the  hospital  had  used  an  Electronic  Patient 
Record system (EPR) for nearly 15 years, the first version of 
the  form  was  paper-based  (Figure1).  Based  on 
the 
cumbersome process of agreeing upon the form’s layout, the 
project steering group anticipated several changes that would 
be easier to manage “on paper” than changing a form in the 
electronic  patient  record  system.  On  the  other  hand,  to 
validate the form’s functionality, the project steering group 
depended on physicians actually using the form. 

 

Figure 1. Segment of the paper form 

 

997

Moreover,  the  project  steering  group  thought  it  was 
important to support the use of the form by other healthcare 
professions  working  in  the  emergency  unit,  as  well. 
Consequently,  the  project  steering  group  had  to  map  the 
general  workflow 
the 
emergency unit, to tailor the form into existing routines.  

in  receiving  acute  patients  in 

The pilot study lasted for two months from the end of April 
2012 to the end of June. The introduction of the paper-based 
form in practice took place as follows: Despite the presence 
of  a  hospital-wide  EPR,  the  emergency  unit  used  an 
interdisciplinary paper-based pre-record during the patient’s 
stay in the emergency unit.  

information  about 

The  purpose  of  the  pre-record  was  to  gather  necessary 
bedside 
the  patient’s  observations, 
examinations, medication, and recommended follow-ups in 
a single document, making it easy to access for all involved 
healthcare practitioners in the emergency unit. Moreover, a 
copy  of  the  pre-record  was  sent  with  each  patient  to  the 
relevant inpatient ward in order to inform the next healthcare 
practitioners  in  line  about  the  patient’s  condition.  The  pre-
record bridged the time span from the patient’s arrival at the 
hospital  to  when  healthcare  practitioners,  physicians,  and 
secretaries  had  completed  the  electronic  documentation. 
However, the first step of preparing for a patient’s arrival in 
the  emergency  unit  was  to  tag  the  pre-record  with  the 
patient’s  barcode  of  personal  information,  and  put  the  pre-
record in a front cover. A nurse or a secretary performed this 
task. When the patient left the emergency unit – discharged 
or  admitted  to  an  inpatient  clinic  –  the  secretaries  scanned 
the pre-record into the EPR. If the patient was hospitalized, 
the  nurses  ensured  that  a  copy  of  the  pre-record  and  other 
papers  belonging  to  the  patient  were  gathered  in  the  front 
cover and accompanied the patient.   

When  the  new  acute  geriatric  decision-support  form  was 
introduced into the described workflow, the secretaries were 
assigned  the  responsibility  for  putting  the  form  into  the 
patient’s folder before (s) he arrived at the emergency unit. 
Secretaries were on duty from 07:30 to 22:00 from Monday 
to Friday. Therefore, nurses had to be involved in putting the 
paper  in  the  folder  at  night  (from  22:00-07:30)  and  at 
weekends. Hence, when a physician assessed the patient, the 
decision-support form would be on top in the familiar folder, 
and it was easy for the physician to remember to use it. After 
filling in the form, the physician put it, along with the pre-
record, into the front cover. The physician or a nurse handed 
the  patient’s  front  cover  (with  the  form  inside)  to  the 
secretaries’ office, where all the papers were scanned into the 
EPR. Because the aim of the pilot study was to test whether 
the  chosen  criteria  supported  the  physicians  in  sorting  the 
elderly  patients  correctly,  the  forms  had  to  be  put  on  a 
marked  shelf  at  the  secretaries’  office.  This  allowed  the 
group  manager  to  collect  the  completed  forms  and,  in 
cooperation with the physicians who had used the forms, the 
project steering group could analyze how the form had been 
completed.  In  addition,  the  project  steering  group  could 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

compare to what extent forms were filled in, in relation to the 
number  of  patients  aged  over  75  who  arrived  at  the 
emergency unit during the pilot study.  

The result from the pilot study indicated that the  form  was 
appropriate  as  a  decision-support  tool.  The  physicians 
reported to the project steering group that they were satisfied 
with the form’s functionality – and even asked for the form 
in cases in which the form had been left out of the patient’s 
folder  by  mistake.  In  project  meetings,  the  physicians  said 
that  they  used  the  form  at  the  patient’s  bedside  when 
assessing patients, but they also reported filling in the form 
after the examination of the patients was done – especially in 
cases  where  it  was  obvious  that  the  patient  did  not  need 
specialist  geriatric  treatment.    During  the  pilot  study,  160 
forms  were  handed  in  and  327  patients  aged  over  75  were 
assessed  in  the  emergency  unit.  Accordingly,  the  project 
steering group received enough completed forms to evaluate 
the tools usability.  

Still,  analysis  of  the  used  forms  demonstrated  some 
weaknesses that needed to be addressed. A minor revision of 
the  form’s  layout  was  conducted  before  the  form  was 
transformed into an electronic version. 

Transforming the paper-based form into the EPR system 
(August 2012 – November 2012) 
By November 2012, the electronic form (Figure 2) was ready 
to be implemented in the EPR system. Converting the paper-
based form into an electronic version made the layout more 
user-friendly, according to feedback given by the physicians 
who had used the form in clinical situations. In the electronic 
form,  the  instructions  on  how  to  use  the  criteria  were 
minimized as a response to comments such as “too much to 
read – it won’t be used…” In addition, a new option, “Do not 
know”,  was  included  for  each  sub-criterion  for  use  when 
specific patient information was difficult to obtain. Although 
the  layout  was  improved,  taking  the  electronic  form  into 
ordinary  use  revealed  different  kinds  of  contextual 
challenges. 

The electronic version of the decision-support form was very 
much  like  a  plain  document  archived  in  the  EPR.  The 
physicians had to upload the form through an array of steps 
in  the  EPR  before  getting  access  to  the  form:  First,  by 
logging into the EPR system; second, accessing the patient’s 
record by searching for the particular patient’s name or date 
of birth; and third, opening the document folder and choosing 
the  correct  form  for  acute  geriatric  decision  support.  The 
software  did  not  support  triggers  such  as  “pop-up  alarms” 
when patients aged over 75 were registered at the hospital. 

Figure 2. Segment of the electronic form 

 

998

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

In  practice,  the  electronic  form  made  it  difficult  for  the 
secretaries  and  nurses 
to  provide  a  direct  reminder 
corresponding  to  the  one  they  had  generated  when  they 
placed  the  paper-based  form  into  the  front  cover  of  the 
patient’s folder. The secretaries and nurses could no longer 
directly remind the physicians about using the electronic   

stopped  visiting  the  emergency  unit  to  collect  completed 
forms  on  a  regular  basis.  The  visits  might  indirectly  have 
reminded the clinicians to use the form. When the form had 
been  introduced  into  ordinary  use,  the  clinicians  in  the 
emergency  unit  had  to  be  prompted  to  use  the  form  by 
mechanisms other than the activities of the pilot study.  

form  because  the  physicians  had  to  log  into  the  computer 
with their own password to their own user account to find the 
electronic  form.  Accordingly,  the  physicians  were  more  or 
less  left  on  their  own  in  remembering  to  use  the  form  and 
when to use it, in contrast to the network supporting the paper 
form. Moreover, the forms were meant to facilitate the next 
step in the acute geriatric patient pathway, and to serve as a 
“ticket” to SAGU. However, the form was put into clinical 
use before the overall pathway was established. 

Accordingly, the physicians in the emergency unit spent time 
filling out the form, even though the form did not ensure the 
acute geriatric patients the necessary  “ticket” because  beds 
were not always available in SAGU. As a result, the use of 
the form did not play a major role for the physicians in the 
emergency  unit  in  terms  of  ensuring  the  acute  geriatric 
patients the optimal treatment and care.  

Another  situation  that  occurred  related  to  the  discrepancy 
between demand and supply of acute geriatric beds was that 
patients  were  “tagged”  as  acute  geriatric  patients  and  then 
enrolled  in  random  inpatient  clinics  –  the  one  with  an 
available bed. This led to a significant increase in “satellite” 
acute geriatric patients all over the hospital’s wards. This, in 
turn,  led  to  growing  dissatisfaction  among  the  specialist 
geriatric  physicians  because  they  became  responsible  for 
several  more  patients  all  around  the  hospital,  a  significant 
increase  in  the  number  of  patients  compared  to  their 
resources. Moreover, they had to perform doctor’s rounds in 
unknown  wards,  cooperating  with  unknown  healthcare 
personnel, who were not trained to take care of acute geriatric 
patients.  

“A great number of acute geriatric patients became visible 
through  use  of  the  form,  but  the  hospital  did  not  have  the 
capacity nor the organizational structure to take care of the 
patients  moving  to  the  next  step  of  the  pathway”  (Quote, 
Doctor).   

to  an  electronic  version, 

Despite  further  improvement  when  the  paper  form  was 
converted 
the  physicians 
complained that the electronic form was difficult to use “at 
hand”,  mainly  because  it  was  time  consuming  to  access 
through  the  EPR  system.  The  project  steering  group  was 
confronted with this statement and made an effort to analyze 
the  problems  involved  in  using  the  form.  Even  if  the  form 
could  be  uploaded  and  retrieved  from  the  EPR  system  in 
different  situations,  the  system  did  not  support  multi-
disciplinary use. It did not allow the secretaries to upload the 
form and attach it to the patient’s EPR as they had done with 
the  paper  form.  In  a  way,  the  electronic  form  disappeared 
into the EPR. Moreover, after the pilot, the project manager 

Moreover,  by  the  time  the  electronic  form  had  been  taken 
into  ordinary  use  there  had  also  been  a  change  of  junior 
physicians in the emergency unit. The clinical education of 
junior  physicians 
involves  a  rotation  schedule,  and 
accordingly  the  new  doctors’  “clinical  backpack”  did  not 
contain  the  history  of  the  form,  or  the  pilot  study,  which 
included  training  in  using  the  form.  Because  the  form  was 
“hidden” in the EPR system, use of the form depended very 
much  on  instructions  to  every  new  physician  at  the 
emergency  unit  about  when  and  how  to  use  it.    It  is  also 
important to  mention that  by  this  time, it  was not a  formal 
task for the project steering group or the project manager to 
inform new physicians and train them to use the form, as well 
as informing other clinicians involved with geriatric patients. 
At  this  stage,  this  important  task  had  more  or  less  been 
handed over to the management at the clinical units involved.    

Back to basics (November 2012 to March 2015) 
During  the  first  year  of  using  the  electronic  form,  the 
anticipated  number  of  used  forms  decreased  dramatically. 
The acute geriatric form, despite the requirement for filling 
in the form as a “ticket” to SAGU, had been used for only 
40% of all patients admitted to SAGU. In meetings between 
the  project  steering  group  and  clinicians  from  the  clinical 
units  involved,  several  complicating  issues  were  reported.  
An explanation for the radical decline was the challenges of 
implementing  the  acute  geriatric  form  into  the  physicians’ 
workflow  at  the  emergency  unit.  There  were  also  reported 
organizational  challenges;  e.g.,  elderly  patients  with 
complex  health-related  problems  and  symptoms  from 
multiple  organs  had 
to  be  moved  between  several 
organizationally  separated  wards  because  there  was  no 
coordinated  patient  pathway  underpinning  the  care  and 
treatment of this particular patient group. This required extra 
coordination  from  other  healthcare  professionals  because 
first, they had to find a bed for the patient in an appropriate 
ward, and second, the healthcare personnel had to coordinate 
the patient’s transfer between wards, like a piece in a board 
game,  waiting  for  an  available  bed  in  SAGU.  Negotiation 
about how to distribute responsibility for patients when the 
appropriate ward was full was unfortunately the situation for 
many patients. However, given the complex and often vague 
presentation of frail elderly patients’ medical condition, this 
was  not  acceptable  for  the  patient  group.  As  previously 
described,  if  the  patient  was  “tagged”  acute  geriatric  and 
SAGU  did  not  have  an  available  bed  for  this  patient,  the 
situation involved a significant workload for the physicians 
who  had  to  do  their  doctor’s  round  in  several  other 
departments.  Because  of  all  the  unintended  consequences, 
the  project  steering  group  and  the  superior  leader  of  the 
project  made  an  overall  evaluation  and  withdrew  the 

999

electronic  acute  geriatric  form  from  the  EPR.  From 
November 2013, the form reverted from an electronic form 
in  the  EPR  to  a  paper-in-pocket  format  that  served  as 
“guiding  prioritization  criteria.  It  is  fair  to  say  that  the 
hospital  was  “back  to  basics”  in  relation  to  the  daily 
challenges  of  receiving  a  large  group  of  internal  medicine 
patients  with  unclear  symptoms  or  a  non-organ-specific 
clinical picture.  

However,  managers  and  healthcare  professionals  at  the 
internal medicine clinic were still motivated to improve the 
healthcare services for internal medicine patients who did not 
fit  into  the  existing  structure  of  strictly  organ-specific 
departments. Looking at the stranded implementation of the 
acute  geriatric  form  in  a  broader  perspective,  the  hospital 
initiated two new projects in 2013/2014.  The first project’s 
mandate,  released  in  late  2013,  was  directed  towards  an 
organizationally aligned clarification of the responsibility for 
internal  medicine  patients  with  an  unclear  condition  or  a 
clinical  presentation  in  a  non-specific  manner,  mainly 
encompassing patients over 80 years old. The first project’s 
management  recommended  an  organizational  restructuring 
to  make  sure  that  the  particular  patient  group  was  given 
appropriate  treatment  and  care  despite  the  current  organ-
specific  organizing  of  services. 
the 
prioritization  criteria  for  geriatric  patients  with  acute 
conditions were again sought to support physicians who had 
no  geriatric  medical  specialization  when  assessing  elderly 
patients.  

this  effort, 

In 

the 

crossed 

The  second  project,  called  “patient-centered  healthcare 
services”, started in early 2014. The aim was to assess and 
support patients with complex and/or chronic illnesses in an 
early stage of a  medical disorder to prevent hospitalization 
or  to  support  their  discharge  from  the  hospital  to  prevent 
readmission.  This  project 
traditional 
organizational  boundaries  to  ensure  continuity  of  care. 
Nursing coordinators manage the patient-centered healthcare 
services, and tailor an individual pathway for each patient. In 
hospital,  all  departments  are  very  specialized,  and  these 
patients often have multiple conditions – so they often need 
assessment  from  several  medical  specialties.  Currently, 
electronic  tools  do  not  support  the  coordination  of  patient-
centered healthcare services. “In the beginning there is more 
than  enough  work  to  establish  appropriate  links  for 
collaboration across organizational boundaries. We are so 
accustomed  to  work  within  our  own  borders,  so  it  can  be 
difficult  and  associated  with  uncertainty  when  you  start 
working  over  borders.  So,  in  the  beginning  we  must  work 
slowly and gently – it requires a change of attitude – more 
than tools” (quote, nurse coordinator).  

DISCUSSION 
Using  an  information  infrastructure  perspective,  we  will 
discuss  the  design  and  implementation  process  of  a  small 
local  CDS  tool,  and  how  the  process  was  influenced  by 
evolving 
in  organizational,  clinical, 
political,  and  behavioral  terms.  The  evolving  process 

interdependencies 

1000

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

revealed several interdependencies related to the use of the 
decision-support form, all of which were deeply rooted in the 
existing  clinical  practices,  systems  and  the  hospital’s 
management policy. 

The  paradox  of  designing  and  implementing  decision-
support systems 
A compelling question is where and how to start the design 
of decision-support tool envisioned to support the patient’s 
trajectory through complex health practices and which users 
to  include.  In  our  case,  it  seemed  right  to  start  with 
identifying  the  patients  needing  specialized  treatment  and 
care as well as the role of the physicians [7,28]. The reason 
is that clinical decision-support tools are often more easy to 
“sell in” to the clinicians because the aim of the tool was to 
support their clinical work. In this case, the clinicians even 
had  the  opportunity  to  develop  the  form  and  influence  its 
design themselves. Because the first version of the form was 
a  paper  sheet,  making  changes  in  the  form’s  content  and 
layout  was  an  agile  process.  A  side  effect  of  putting  the 
clinicians in the “driving seat” of designing was the way that 
the discussions aligned the clinicians’ understanding of how 
to  use  the  form  and  the  necessity  of  the  patient  pathway. 
Moreover, the discussions contributed to improving clinical 
knowledge,  especially  that  of  the  junior  physicians,  in 
assessing  elderly  patients.  Making  the  physicians  “chief 
designers”  of  the  form  was  useful  in  order  to  mobilize  a 
powerful profession [3,10,13,18].  

However,  the  strategy  of  including  the  physicians  as 
designers  also  limited  the  focus  to  tasks  that  only  the 
physicians do. Accordingly, the project “fell into the trap”, 
in terms of designing a tool tailored for a specific group (i.e. 
the physicians) with less focus on including other healthcare 
professions.    In  the  initial  phase  of  the  project,  the 
insufficient  attention  to  other  healthcare  professions  was 
“concealed”  because  the  paper  form  was  visible  in  the 
collaborative  workflow,  and  the  secretaries  and  nurses 
compensated for the design defects by performing invisible 
work.  They  made  an  effort  to  ensure  the  form’s  clinical 
destiny, even if they did not play a particular role in the actual 
use  of  it.  This  echoes  much  of  the  CSCW  literature  that 
emphasizes the collaborative nature of ICT  [14,35] as well 
as  a  lot  of  hidden  work  and  workarounds  implicated  in  it 
[4,10,13,16].  

Surprisingly,  the  simplified  layout  of  the  electronic  form, 
revised and adjusted in order to be more intuitive in use, was 
not perceived as convenient to use by the physicians. While 
the  form  was clinically relevant, conforming to its purpose 
and  designed  in  collaboration  with  the  intended  users,  it 
became invisible in the coordination process (workflow) in 
the  emergency  unit  compared  to  the  paper-  version  –  it 
“disappeared” into the EPR. The physicians did not receive 
the  invisible  support  provided  by  nurses  and  secretaries  as 
they did when using the paper form [5]. 

This underpins the importance of a CSCW approach in the 
design of artefacts to support patient pathways. CSCW plays 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

an important role toward the design of artefacts by producing 
rich pictures of the collective and collaborative character of 
work  practices  in  particular  settings.  However,  our  data 
suggest  mapping  of  the  “local”  context  several  times,  an 
“extended design” perspective, according to the adjustment 
of  the  artefact  in  design,  which  has  to  include  every 
profession and practice involved with the patient’s trajectory 
[29].  The  single-user  artefact  has  to  be  placed  in  a 
heterogeneous, 
is  not 
necessarily visible in the initial design phase. It is important 
that  every  project  becomes  aware  of  the  ever-changing 
interdependencies  along  with  design,  implementation,  and 
adoption.  Focusing  exclusively  on  the  initial  design  phase 
may relegate important actors and factors in the shaping of a 
technology to the background. Accordingly, the responsible 
organization  for  each  innovation  project  has  to  make  sure 
that the project management get enough time and resources 
to 
ever-changing 
interdependencies [22,29].  

interdependent  context,  which 

challenges 

handle 

the 

of 

the 

tools  shape  organizational 

How  decision-support 
politics 
The electronic form played a role distributed over time and 
space. In the local setting, the emergency unit, the form was 
convenient to use “bedside”, but did not ensure the “tagged” 
patient a bed in the acute geriatric specialist  ward. This, in 
turn, led to negotiations about which ward should receive the 
“tagged”  patient  when  all  beds  in  SAGU  were  occupied. 
Unfortunately,  negotiations  dealing  with  where  to  admit 
patients  because  all  beds  in  the  appropriate  ward  are 
occupied  are  a  well-known  situation  for  healthcare 
coordinators.  Moreover,  as  a  backdrop  for  the  particular 
discussions,  older  patients  with  complex  conditions  very 
often  have  longer  stays  in  hospital  and  often  need  a 
multidisciplinary  treatment  approach,  which  organ-specific 
wards  cannot  necessarily  offer.  Accordingly,  healthcare 
personnel  not  trained  in  geriatric  medicine  often  find  such 
patients  challenging  to  manage.  So,  as  long  as  the  form 
“tagged”  the  patient,  the  collective  responsibility  for 
ensuring best treatment and care based on available resources 
in  a  way  dissolved  into  negotiation  about  where  to  put  the 
patient “on hold” until a bed at SAGU became available.  

Even more, in the EPR system “tagging” of patients as “acute 
geriatric”  evolved  into  an  organizational  question  because 
“acute geriatric” meant that these patients belonged to SAGU 
– regardless of where the patient was admitted. Generally, if 
the  specialist  ward  was  occupied,  the  patient  would  be 
admitted to a collaborative ward, and, more important, this 
ward  was  assigned  the  responsibility  for  the  patient  until 
transferal or admission. Consequently, the “organizational” 
tagging  of  acute  geriatric  patients  became  a  clinical 
“bottleneck” for SAGU’s physicians because it triggered an 
additional workload. The geriatric physicians were assigned 
medical  responsibility  for  patients  dispersed  over  several 
different wards.  

1001

small 

In short, the form was still convenient to use at hand, but in 
a wider perspective, the decision-support form could not be 
seen  as  an  enabler  for  gaining  efficiencies  and  quality  of 
treatment  and  care  for  geriatric  patients  with  acute 
conditions.  The 
local  artifact  had  broader 
organizational  consequences  not  possible  to  predict  in  the 
initial  design  phase  [15,29,30].  An  essential  point  is  that 
electronic  tools  shape  and  are  shaped  by  several  contexts 
simultaneously,  and  therefore  interact  with  healthcare 
practitioners  and  influence  healthcare  practices  in  more 
intertwined and invisible ways than a visible paper artefact 
[4,5,19,28,29]. 

local  decision-support  systems  scale 

How 
infrastructural dimensions 
As a huge number of information infrastructure studies has 
demonstrated, it is difficult to point at a single specific cause 
explaining  why  promoted  designed  artifacts  do  not 
necessarily  materialize  with  the  envisioned  effect  on 
healthcare collaboration, treatment and care [25,29,30,38].  

to 

and 

have 

observed 

identified 

We 
fragmented 
interdependencies of organizational relations as reasons for 
a  result  far  below  the  project’s  expectations.  Nevertheless, 
we  need  to  move  a  step  further,  and  provide  input  to 
prospective  patient  pathway  development  processes, 
particularly addressed to the health care service itself.  

Putting  the  case  in  a  wider  perspective  of  improving 
healthcare through standardized patient pathways, we argue 
that  scaling  complexity  may  appear  despite  apparently 
thorough  planning,  competent  project  leaders,  committed 
management  and  involved  users.  To  some  degree,  this 
complexity  may  be 
the  design  and 
implementation  of  the  decision-  support  tool  itself.  Along 
these  lines,  as  pointed  out  in  the  last  part  of  the  case,  the 
implementation  of  a  small-scale  artifact  in  local  practice 
turns  into  –  or  implicates  –  a  large-scale  reorganization 
process [19,22,23,25,29].  

inherent 

in 

In short, the form was useful at the bedside, but the use of the 
electronic  form  depended  entirely  on  the  memory  of  every 
single physician, in contrast to the collective support of using 
the paper form. Moreover, the electronic form influenced the 
organizational responsibility for the acute geriatric patients, 
which led to an increased workload for the specialist geriatric 
physicians.   

system 

created 

interconnections 

The  case  demonstrates  how  the  implementation  of  a  local, 
situated 
and 
interdependencies with other contexts (“tagging” the patient) 
and how a change in one system evolved in terms of creating 
bridges  between  clinical  practices  and  local  systems  in 
different departments. These issues are difficult to anticipate 
or plan for, but analyzing and discussing the empirical data 
in  an  information  infrastructure  perspective  identify  and 
illustrate  some  implications  for  design  and  implementation 
of electronic systems for clinical decision support [15,29].  

Yet  another  interesting  issue,  barely  described  in  the  last 
phase of the case,  was the  willingness to change  workflow 
and  work  practice:  “[…]...we  are  so  accustomed  to  work 
within our own borders, so it can be difficult and associated 
with uncertainty when you start working over borders. So, at 
the  start  we  must  work  slowly  and  gently  –  it  requires  a 
change  of  attitude”.  As  we  have  already  argued,  evolving 
complexities  are  inherent  in  designing  devices  to  support 
patient  trajectories  and  call  for  reorganization  processes. 
According  to  the  case,  reorganization  processes  challenge 
well-established  working  routines  and  address  attention  to 
issues recapitulated as habits, power and politics – which are 
more difficult to map, but must be given particular attention.   

From  an  information  infrastructure  perspective,  designing 
and  implementing  decision-support  tools  is  an  activity 
distributed  in  both  time  and  space.  Further,  infrastructures 
are  not  designed  from  scratch,  but  in  this  case,  it  was 
necessary  to  zoom  into  the  locally  situated  practice  at  the 
emergency unit as a point of  departure. However, bringing 
one specific period into focus may relegate important actors 
and factors in shaping of work practices to the background. 
Because, information infrastructures evolve, they shape and 
have  to  be  shaped  by  existing  practices  and  systems 
[23,25,29].  Therefore,  studying  and  evaluating  evolving 
infrastructures  in  “short-term  temporal  aspects”  will  not 
capture the essential interconnections and interdependencies 
that occur over time [15,25,29]. 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Unfortunately,  in  this  case,  the  decision-support  form 
became  an  obstacle  in  the  installed  base.  No  overall 
agreement  was  established  for  the  CDS  tool’s  wider 
contextual  use  and  how 
influence  cross-
organizational  practices  and  clinical  work.  In  turn,  what 
characterizes  the  design  and  implementation  of  decision 
support  systems  in  clinical  practice  is  the  need  to  zoom  in 
and out, in contrast to the tendency to focus on “short-term 
temporal aspects” in local contexts [23,29,31].  

it  could 

Our  paper  identifies,  illustrates  and  discusses  important 
interdependencies  in  clinical  practice,  which  all  have 
significant  influence  on  the  design  and  implementation 
process.  Moreover,  the  paper  has  a  longitudinal  narrative 
embedded  in  real-world  clinical  practice,  which  highlights 
the  difficulties  of  making  changes  in  pressured  and 
constrained clinical settings.  Accordingly, the contribution 
of  this  paper  is  to  emphasize  the  “extended  design” 
perspective,  when  designing  and  implementing  decision-
support systems, to capture how workplace technologies and 
practices  are  shaped  across  multiple  contexts  and  over 
extended  periods.  Empirically, 
that  wide 
contextual implications are not implications to be solved by 
the defined project management  mandate  only, but have to 
be addressed by the hospital management as well. 

this  means 

 

 

CONCLUSION 
We have demonstrated how the design and implementation 
of a small locally situated CDS tool scales to infrastructural 
dimensions related to the existing clinical practices, systems 
and the hospital’s management policy. Moreover, the design 
and  implementation’s  interdependencies  need  to  be  solved 
by  large-scale  re-organizational  processes.  The  CSCW 
framework  supports  the  empirical  strategy  of  the  acute 
geriatric patient pathway project  by starting the design in a 
local setting. It was considered useful to trace out the local 
interdependencies as a point of departure. To promote initial 
use, it is important to design a first version of the new artifact 
so it can deliver necessary value to the users, and motivate 
adoption.  However,  as  the  decision-support  form  was 
transformed,  the  “electronic  outfit”  did  not  create  the 
anticipated value for the users, nor for the local physicians in 
the emergency unit or the distributed users in a wider context. 
Moreover,  we 
from 
information  infrastructure  theory  useful  to  dismantle  the 
evolving  complexities:  organizational,  clinical  as  well  as 
human/politics/behavior  interdependencies,  which  are  the 
key  challenges  for  design  and  implementation  in  clinical 
practice.  Generally,  as  we  have  argued,  designing  and 
implementing decision-support tools are inherently complex 
processes and they shape and have to be shaped by existing 
practices  and 
infrastructures 
[9,16,24,29]. Hence, supported by the theoretical framework, 
the  preferred  way  of  making  infrastructures  “grow”  is  by 
using 
[14,15,19,29,38]. 

the  chosen  perspectives 

like  evolving 

infrastructures 

existing 

found 

systems 

the 

2. 

REFERENCES  
1.  Margunn  Aanestad  and  Tina  Blegind  Jensen.  2011. 
Building  nation-wide  information  infrastructures  in 
healthcare through  modular implementation strategies. 
The  Journal  of  Strategic  Information  Systems  20,  2: 
161–176. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2011.03.006 
Jos Aarts. 2012. Towards safe electronic health records: 
A socio-technical perspective and the need for incident 
reporting.  Health  Policy  and  Technology  1,  1:  8–15. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.hlpt.2012.01.008 
Jos Aarts, Joan  Ash, and Marc Berg. 2007. Extending 
the  understanding  of  computerized  physician  order 
entry:  Implications  for  professional  collaboration, 
workflow and quality of care. International Journal of 
Medical  Informatics  76,  Supplement  1:  S4–S13. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2006.05.009 

3. 

4.  Marc  Berg.  1999.  Accumulating  and  Coordinating: 
Occasions  for  Information  Technologies  in  Medical 
Work. Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) 
8, 
373–401. 
http://doi.org/10.1023/A:1008757115404 

4: 

5.  Marc  Berg  and  Pieter  Toussaint.  2003.  The  mantra  of 
modeling  and  the  forgotten  powers  of  paper:  a 
sociotechnical  view  on  the  development  of  process-
oriented  ICT  in  health  care.  International  Journal  of 
Medical 
223–234. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/S1386-5056(02)00178-8 

Informatics 

2–3: 

69, 

 

1002

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

6.  Eta S. Berner. 2009. Clinical decision support systems: 
State  of  the  Art.  AHRQ  Publication  No.  09-0069-EF. 
Rockville, Maryland: Agency for Healthcare Research 
and  Quality.  Retrieved 
from 
https://healthit.ahrq.gov/sites/default/files/docs/page/0
9-0069-EF_1.pdf 

July  19,  2015 

7.  Pernille Bjørn and Kjetil Rødje.  2008. Triage Drift:  A 
Workplace Study in a Pediatric Emergency Department. 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) 17, 4: 
395–419. http://doi.org/10.1007/s10606-008-9079-2 

8.  Wilfred Bonney. 2011. Impacts and Risks of Adopting 
Clinical  Decision  Support  Systems.  In  Efficient 
Decision Support Systems - Practice and Challenges in 
Biomedical  Related  Domain.  InTeh,  328.  Retrieved 
August 
from 
http://cdn.intechweb.org/pdfs/18694.pdf 

2015 

28, 

9.  Claus Bossen. 2011. Accounting and Co-Constructing: 
The  Development  of  a  Standard  for  Electronic  Health 
Records.  Computer  Supported  Cooperative  Work 
(CSCW) 20, 6: 473–495. http://doi.org/10.1007/s10606-
011-9141-3 

10.  Peter H. Carstensen and Carsten Sørensen. 1996. From 
the  social  to  the  systematic.  Computer  Supported 
Cooperative  Work 
387–413. 
http://doi.org/10.1007/BF00136712 

(CSCW) 

4: 

5, 

11.  Michael D. Chase. 2011. A look at the future of clinical 
data  systems  and  clinical  decision  support. 
In 
Engineering a Learning Healthcare System: A Look at 
the  Future:  Workshop  Summary.  National  Academies 
Press, Washington, DC. 

12.  Maya  Das  and  June  Eichner.  2010.  Challenges  and 
Barriers  to  Clinical  Decision  Support  (CDS)  Design 
and  Implementation  Experienced  in  the  Agency  for 
Healthcare Research and Quality CDS Demonstrations. 
Agency 
for  Healthcare  Research  and  Quality, 
Rockville,  MD.  Retrieved  September  2,  2015  from 
https://healthit.ahrq.gov/sites/default/files/docs/page/C
DS_challenges_and_barriers.pdf 

13.  Edeltraud  Egger  and  Ina  Wagner.  1993.  Negotiating 
temporal  orders.  Computer  Supported  Cooperative 
Work 
255–275. 
http://doi.org/10.1007/BF00754330 

(CSCW) 

4: 

1, 

14.  Gunnar  Ellingsen 

and  Eric  Monteiro.  2003. 
Mechanisms  for  producing  a  working  knowledge: 
Enacting,  orchestrating  and  organizing.  Information 
and 
203–229. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/S1471-7727(03)00011-3 

Organization 

13, 

3: 

15.  Gunnar Ellingsen, Eric Monteiro, and Kristoffer Røed. 
2013.  Integration  as 
interdependent  workaround. 
International  Journal  of  Medical  Informatics  82,  5: 
e161–e169. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2012.09.004 

16.  Geraldine  Fitzpatrick  and  Gunnar  Ellingsen.  2012.  A 
Review of 25 Years of CSCW Research in Healthcare: 
Contributions,  Challenges  and  Future  Agendas. 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) 22, 4-
6: 609–665. http://doi.org/10.1007/s10606-012-9168-0 

1003

17.  Paolo  Fraccaro,  Mercedes  Arguello  Casteleiro,  John 
Ainsworth, and Iain Buchan. 2015. Adoption of Clinical 
Decision  Support  in  Multimorbidity:  A  Systematic 
Review. 
1. 
http://doi.org/10.2196/medinform.3503 

JMIR  Medical 

Informatics 

3, 

18.  Paolo  Fraccaro,  Dympna  O׳Sullivan,  Panagiotis 
Plastiras,  et  al.  2015.  Behind  the  screens:  Clinical 
decision  support  methodologies  –  A  review.  Health 
Policy 
29–38. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.hlpt.2014.10.001 

Technology 

and 

1: 

4, 

19.  Ole Hanseth and Kalle  Lyytinen. 2010. Design  theory 
for dynamic complexity in information infrastructures: 
the  case  of  building  internet.  Journal  of  Information 
Technology 
1–19. 
http://doi.org/10.1057/jit.2009.19 

25, 

1: 

20.  Hunt  DL,  Haynes  R,  Hanna  SE,  and  Smith  K.  1998. 
Effects  of  computer-based  clinical  decision  support 
systems  on  physician  performance  and  patient 
outcomes: A systematic review. JAMA 280, 15: 1339–
1346. http://doi.org/10.1001/jama.280.15.1339 

21.  Monique  W.  M.  Jaspers,  Marian  Smeulers,  Hester 
Vermeulen,  and  Linda  W.  Peute.  2011.  Effects  of 
clinical  decision-support  systems  on  practitioner 
performance and patient outcomes: a synthesis of high-
quality  systematic  review  findings.  Journal  of  the 
American Medical Informatics Association 18, 3: 327–
334. http://doi.org/10.1136/amiajnl-2011-000094 

22.  Liv  Karen  Johannessen  and  Gunnar  Ellingsen.  2009. 
Integration 
and  Generification—Agile  Software 
Development  in  the  Healthcare  Market.  Computer 
Supported  Cooperative  Work  (CSCW)  18,  5-6:  607–
634. http://doi.org/10.1007/s10606-009-9097-8 

23.  Mikael  Johnson,  Hajar  Mozaffar,  Gian  Marco 
Campagnolo, Sampsa Hyysalo, Neil Pollock, and Robin 
Williams.  2014.  The  managed  prosumer:  evolving 
knowledge  strategies  in  the  design  of  information 
infrastructures. Information, Communication & Society 
17, 
795–813. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2013.830635 
Luz. 

2006. 
Multidisciplinary Medical Team Meetings: An Analysis 
of  Collaborative  Working  with  Special  Attention  to 
Timing  and  Teleconferencing.  Computer  Supported 
Cooperative  Work 
(CSCW)  15,  5-6:  501–535. 
http://doi.org/10.1007/s10606-006-9035-y 

24.  Bridget  Kane 

Saturnino 

and 

7: 

25.  Helena  Karasti,  Karen  S.  Baker,  and  Florence 
Millerand.  2010.  Infrastructure  Time:  Long-term 
in  Collaborative  Development.  Computer 
Matters 
Supported  Cooperative  Work  (CSCW)  19,  3-4:  377–
415. http://doi.org/10.1007/s10606-010-9113-z 

26.  Kensaku  Kawamoto,  Caitlin  A.  Houlihan,  E.  Andrew 
Balas, and David F.  Lobach.  2005. Improving clinical 
practice  using  clinical  decision  support  systems:  a 
systematic review of trials to identify features critical to 
success.  BMJ  (Clinical  research  ed.)  330,  7494:  765. 
http://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.38398.500764.8F 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

34.  Pavel S. Roshanov, Shikha Misra, Hertzel C. Gerstein, 
et  al.  2011.  Computerized  clinical  decision  support 
systems  for  chronic  disease  management:  A  decision-
review. 
maker-researcher  partnership 
Implementation 
6, 
92. 
http://doi.org/10.1186/1748-5908-6-92 

systematic 
1: 

Science 

35.  Kjeld  Schmidt  and  Carla  Simone.  1996.  Coordination 
mechanisms:  Towards  a  conceptual  foundation  of 
Supported 
CSCW 
Cooperative  Work 
(CSCW)  5,  2-3:  155–200. 
http://doi.org/10.1007/BF00133655 

design.  Computer 

systems 

36.  Simon Conroy and Nicola Cooper. Acute Medical Care 
of  Elderly  People.  Retrieved  August  28,  2015  from 
http://www.bgs.org.uk/index.php/topresources/publicat
ionfind/goodpractice/44-gpgacutecare%20 

37.  Dean F. Sittig, Adam Wright, Jerome A. Osheroff, et al. 
2008.  Grand  challenges  in  clinical  decision  support. 
Journal  of  Biomedical  Informatics  41,  2:  387–392. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2007.09.003 

38.  Susan  Leigh  Star  and  Karen  Ruhleder.  1996.  Steps 
Toward  an  Ecology  of  Infrastructure:  Design  and 
Access  for  Large  Information  Spaces.  Information 
Systems 
111–134. 
http://doi.org/10.1287/isre.7.1.111 

Research 

1: 

7, 

39.  G.  Walsham.  1995.  Interpretive  case  studies  in  IS 
research:  nature  and  method.  European  Journal  of 
Information 
4, 
74–81. 
http://doi.org/10.1057/ejis.1995.9 

Systems 

2: 

40.  Utredning av “en innbygger - en journal”. Komparativ 
analyse av de regionale helseforetak på IKT-området (A 
comparative analysis of the Norwegian regional health 
authorities  ICT  divisions).  2014.  Helsedirektoratet. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.regjeringen.no/contentassets/355890dd28
72413b838066702dcdad88/komparativ_analyse_rhf_ik
t.pdf 

September 

2015 

2, 

 
 

 

 

27.  Heinz K. Klein and Michael D. Myers. 1999. A Set of 
Principles  for  Conducting  and  Evaluating  Interpretive 
Field Studies in Information Systems. MIS Q. 23, 1: 67–
93. http://doi.org/10.2307/249410 

28.  Naja Holten Møller and Pernille Bjørn. 2011. Layers in 
Sorting  Practices:  Sorting  out  Patients  with  Potential 
Cancer.  Computer  Supported  Cooperative  Work 
(CSCW) 20, 3: 123–153. http://doi.org/10.1007/s10606-
011-9133-3 

29.  Eric  Monteiro,  Neil  Pollock,  Ole  Hanseth,  and  Robin 
Williams.  2012.  From  Artefacts  to  Infrastructures. 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) 22, 4-
6: 575–607. http://doi.org/10.1007/s10606-012-9167-1 
2009. 
Infrastructuring:  Toward  an  Integrated  Perspective  on 
the Design and Use of Information Technology. Journal 
of the Association for Information Systems 10, 5: 1. 

and  Volker  Wulf. 

30.  Volkmar 

Pipek 

31.  Neil Pollock and Robin Williams. 2008.  Software and 
Organisations:  The  Biography  of  the  Enterprise-Wide 
System  Or  how  SAP  conquered  the  world.  Routledge. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://books.google.no/books?hl=no&lr=&id=yLp8A
gAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PP1&dq=Pollock,+N.+and+
Williams,+R.+2008.+Software+and+organizations.+&
ots=3Wukh6RuyM&sig=Pw0CmL0cJVCh6KqG_gxY
Mehrw9s&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q&f=false 

August 

2015 

28, 

32.  Neil Pollock, Robin Williams, and Rob Procter. 2003. 
Fitting  Standard  Software  Packages  to  Non-standard 
Organizations: The “Biography” of an Enterprise-wide 
System. Technology Analysis & Strategic Management 
15, 
317–332. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/09537320310001601504 

3: 

33.  Pavel  S.  Roshanov,  Natasha  Fernandes,  Jeff  M. 
Wilczynski,  et  al.  2013.  Features  of  effective 
computerised  clinical  decision  support  systems:  meta-
regression of 162 randomised trials. The BMJ 346: f657. 
http://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.f657 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1004

