CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

A Day in the Life of Things in the Home 

Andy Crabtree & Peter Tolmie 

School of Computer Science 
University of Nottingham 

{Firstname.Lastname}@nottingham.ac.uk 

ABSTRACT 
This  paper  is  about  human  interaction  with  things  in  the 
home.  It  is  of  potential  relevance  to  developers  of  the 
Internet of Things (IoT), but it is not a technological paper. 
Rather,  it  presents  a  preliminary  observational  study  of  a 
day in a life of things in the home. The study was done out 
of curiosity - to see, given the emphasis on ‘things’ in the 
IoT, what mundane interaction with things looks like and is 
about.  The  results  draw  attention  to  the  sheer  scale  of 
interaction  with  things,  key  areas  of  domestic  activity  in 
which  interaction  is  embedded,  and  what  it  is  about 
domestic  life  that  gives  data  about  interaction  its  sense. 
Each of these issues raises  possibilities and challenges for 
IoT development in the home. 
Author Keywords 
Ethnography,  domestic  environment,  mundane  interaction 
with things, Internet of Things. 
ACM Classification Keywords 
J.4  Computer  Applications  -  Social  and  Behavioural 
Sciences: Sociology. 
INTRODUCTION 

“Until quite recently, the development of smart homes … seemed 
appealing  and  immanent  …  Be  that  as  it  may,  those  working 
within the smart home agenda … found themselves oddly side-
stepped by the world at large. For homes have altered in ways 
that  have  largely  passed  them  by  …  All  of  us  are  familiar  with 
these  changes  …  They  are  now  so  ubiquitous  as  to  be 
commonplace:  wi-fi  networks  are  now  the  norm  ….  We  are  all 
used to plugging into the internet on our couches, even in bed … 
the connected home is manifesting this new emphasis” [16]

The  shift  from  the  smart  home  to  the  connected  home  is 
today  marked  by  renewed  interest  in  the  purposing  of 
ubiquitous  computing  technologies  under  the  auspices  of 
the  Internet  of  Things  (IoT).  The  vision  is  less  about 
wholesale  intelligent  homes  and  more  about  embedding 
networked  computing  in  mundane  objects  to  deliver  new 
applications  and  services  to  the  connected  home,  largely 
through the harvesting of personal data [14]. The ACM and 
Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for personal 
or  classroom  use  is  granted  without  fee  provided  that  copies  are  not  made  or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear  this  notice  and 
the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for  components  of  this  work 
owned  by  others  than  the  author(s)  must  be honored.  Abstracting  with  credit 
to 
is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or  republish, 
redistribute 
fee. 
Request 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA  
Copyright  is  held  by  the  owner/author(s).  Publication  rights  licensed  to ACM.  
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00   
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819954 

lists,  requires  prior  specific 

to  post  on  servers  or 

permissions 

from Permissions@acm.org.  

to 

permission 

and/or 

a 

IEEE  archives  make  it  clear  that  a  great  deal  of  technical 
work  is  being  done  on  IoT  infrastructures  and  application 
areas,  and  this  is  complemented  by  a  broad  range  of 
products coming onto the market [e.g., 1]. 
This  study  complements  but  departs  from  studies  of 
interaction  with  digital  things  in  the  connected  home,  as 
exemplified  by  [16],  to  take  a  broad  range  of  non-digital 
things  into  account  as  well.  It  does  so  because  the  IoT 
suggests that computing can be embedded in just about any 
thing,  and  looking  beyond  what  has  currently  been  made 
digital might therefore be useful. We are not, of course, the 
first to study interaction with non-digital things in a bid to 
inform design for the home, though the studies that do exist 
focus (like their digital counterparts) on specific categories 
of  thing  (e.g.,  mail  [15],  mementoes  [25],  messiness  [31], 
etc.).  We  take  a  different  tack  here,  shifting  from  an  in-
depth  look  at  specific  things  in  the  home  to  a  broader 
perspective on things from the point of view of a day in the 
life of mundane interaction with them.  
This shift does not represent a critique of prior studies. To 
reiterate:  the  study  reported  here  complements  prior  work, 
extending ethnomethodological studies of domestic life and 
the ‘artful’ [33] ways in which the ‘domestic routine’ [6] is 
assembled as an ‘unremarkable’ [34] feature of the locally 
accomplished social order. The extension, and contribution 
to  the  literature,  involves  making  visible  the  methodical 
assemblage  of  things  as  a  pervasive  feature  of  the 
accomplishment  of  the  local  order.  This  phenomenon  is 
pointed to in the studies referenced above in, for example, 
the management of domestic work [33] or the handling of 
mail [15], but it is not treated as a topic in its own right and 
so remains implicit; a matter we return to in conclusion. 
Our  study  is  exploratory  and  preliminary  in  nature,  a  first 
pass  through,  opening  up  the  methodical  assemblage  of 
things  as  a  design  topic  and  matter  for  further  study  and 
technical investigation. A first pass through reveals distinct 
categories  of 
things  and  patterns  of  human-thing 
interaction,  most  of  which  have  not  yet  been  touched 
directly  by  digital  technologies,  and  distinct  interactional 
zones where particular categories of things cluster together. 
These findings relate to and further elaborate previous work 
in ubiquitous computing focusing on the ‘stuff’ of the home 
[26]  and  the  how  it  coalesces  within  ‘ecological  habitats’ 
and  ‘activity  centres’  [5].  The  real  world,  real  time 
coherence of these patterns and clusters is provided through 
the methodical assemblage of things as household members 
go about the business of locally ordering domestic life. 

1738

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

METHODOLOGY 
The study we report here involves observations of mundane 
interaction  in  2  ostensibly  middle  class  homes  in  the  UK, 
each containing 2 adults and one child. The homes are our 
own, partly chosen for expediency’s sake but also to make 
doing  the  fieldwork  tractable:  our  aim  was  to  study 
interaction  over  a  24-hour  period  throughout  the  home.  A 
great deal of personal data, and indeed very sensitive data, 
would  therefore  be  gathered.  Working  on  Sacks’  [29] 
methodological maxim “tap into whomsoever, wheresoever 
and  you  find  the  much  the  same  things”  we  figured  we 
would be able to learn as much from our homes on a first 
pass through as from someone else’s. 
It  is  important  to  appreciate  something  of  Sacks’  work  to 
appreciate  what  we  are  driving  at  here  and  to  avoid  any 
misunderstanding that we are suggesting that all homes are 
like  ours.  That  would  be  a  mistake.  Clearly  an 
impoverished  immigrant  household  or  a  household  in  an 
entirely different part of the world (e.g., rural India) would 
look very different to ours in terms of the material resources 
to hand, daily rhythms and routines, situated practices and 
reasoning,  etc.  The  equivalence  does  not  lie  in  what  the 
home  looks  like  however,  but  in  how  the  local  order  is 
brought about. Sacks’ work is instructive in this respect. 
Sacks’ studies of conversation in everyday life identified a 
‘machinery  of  interaction’  [29]  whereby  talk  is  locally 
ordered.  This  machinery 
cohort 
independent’ [28], which is to say it does not matter where 
the  talk  takes  place  or  who  is  doing  it.  The  machinery  is 
used by anyone, anywhere, to order talk ‘here and now’ on 
any  occasion  of  its  occurrence.  Sacks  was  not  wedded  to 
conversation – it just happened to be the material he had to 
hand [29] – and so the point of the maxim is that we might 
examine  the  various  modalities  of  interaction  (verbal, 
embodied, material, digital, etc.) to find some machinery of 
interaction whereby order is locally produced.  
The  equivalence,  then,  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  type  of 
household as it were, but in the machineries of interaction 
household  members  employ  to  produce  local  order  in 
bringing about their everyday lives, wherever it occurs and 
whatever their lives. Thus, in looking at our homes, we are 
looking for some machinery of interaction implicated in the 
production of local order. Just as conversation is infinite in 
its use, what you see in our homes when looking at a day in 
the life of things is a machinery at work in producing our 
local orders of domestic life. Other homes  may well look 
different, but the same machinery will be at work, i.e., the 
methodological  assemblage  of  things  as  a  constituent 
feature of accomplishing the local order.  
It  is  not  the  application  of  the  machinery  that  interests  us 
per se then, though the unique order of domestic life in any 
particular home is of relevance to design as we will touch 
upon  later.  What  concerns  us  here  is  surfacing  the 
machinery  of interaction or  ‘uncovering  the animal hiding 
in  the  foliage’  as  ethnomethodology’s  founder,  Harold 

‘context 

is 

and 

it  [12].  This  aphorism  hints  at 

Garfinkel,  put 
the 
commonplaceness  of  machineries  of  interaction,  that  they 
are seen but unnoticed or taken for granted and so blur into 
the  background  of  everyday  life.  Our  job  here  us  to  tease 
the animal out of hiding. 
To this end we approached data gathering on the basis that 
any  interaction  with  any  thing  –  whether  it  be  digital  or 
physical – would be noted. So, for example, we would not 
just note that we interacted with bread but the whole set of 
interactions  involved  in  getting  it  out  of  the  bread  bin, 
putting  it  on  the  chopping  board,  getting  a  knife  from  a 
drawer, cutting slices, etc.  One of us did the noting with an 
audio  recorder,  the  other  on  video.  In  either  case,  the  aim 
was to articulate and document what we were doing, where, 
and with just what things. While centred on ourselves and 
what we did, data gathering involved our families because 
much of what we do at home inevitably involves our family 
members  (they  even  operated  the  data  recorders  on 
occasion when our hands were full).  
We did not gather the data over a 24-hour period. It soon 
became  apparent  that  articulating  the  things  you  are 
interacting  with  is  enormously  difficult  to  sustain  for  a 
prolonged period, so we spread the study across a week in 
November 2014 breaking it into 3 and 4-hour sections and 
gathering data on a daily basis. It is worth pointing out the 
highly  disruptive  and  intrusive  nature  of  this  exercise. 
Walking  around  the  home  articulating  the  specific  things 
being  interacted  with  by  yourself  and  others  for  several 
hours each day soon became deeply irritating for household 
members, which presents real challenges for similar studies 
in other people’s homes.   
More  serious,  however,  is  the  degree  of  intrusiveness 
involved in doing such a study. We looked at anything that 
was happening and we mean any thing during the recording 
periods,  and  we  were  called  to  account  for  doing  so  on 
occasion even by our own family members. “Do you really 
need  to  record  this!”  was  uttered  more  than  once  and 
reasons had to be given for data recording to proceed, e.g., 
“Please, it’s for science.” Risible as this may be there is a 
serious point here about the accountability of such intrusive 
data  gathering  in  the  home,  and  there  may  well  be 
something  in  that  for  IoT  developers  to  consider  as  they 
won’t get away with it as easily as we did (extremely good 
reason will be required for intrusive data harvesting).  
STUDY FINDINGS 
After  capturing  the  data  we  created  a  report  organised  in 
terms of time, location (e.g., bedroom, bathroom, hallway), 
and  activity  being  done  and  worked  our  way  through  the 
recordings describing the things interacted with as a feature 
of doing the activity. We then colour-coded things to reflect 
different  categories  of  things,  as  this  seemed  a  reasonable 
way  of  managing  the  enormity  of  things  used  in  our 
activities. The categories were drawn from common usage 
in  everyday  life,  particularly  retail  categories  as  these 
allowed us to put things into recognisable families or sets: 

1739

•  Appliances (APP) 
•  Clothes and Soft Furnishings (CSF) 
•  Communications (COM) 
•  Fast Moving Consumer Goods (FMCG) 
•  Furniture (FUR) 
•  Media and Media Equipment (MME) 
•  Services, Fixtures and Fittings (SFF) 
•  Toys (TOY) 
•  Utensils and Other Equipment (UOE) 1 

Having  described  our  interactions  with  things  we  then 
manually counted a) how many things were interacted with, 
b)  how  many  interactions  with  those  things  occurred 
overall,  c)  how  many  specific  things  belonged  to  each 
category, d) how many interactions occurred with specific 
things in a category, and e) how many interactions occurred 
per  category.  We  then  generated  a  series  of  graphs  to 
represent the results. 
Before  we  present  the  graphs  it  is  important  to  note  the 
limitations of this data. It is only partial. We only recorded 
interactions  with  things  that  we  were  party  to  –  other 
activities also occurred during the recording periods, but a 
fieldworker  can’t  be  everywhere  at  once.  Also,  you  get 
what  you  get  on  the  day,  and  some  routine  interactions 
(e.g.,  phone  or  video  calls)  didn’t  occur  at  the  time  of 
recording.  The  counting  of  interactions  is  also  inaccurate. 
Firstly, for reasons that we have already mentioned – that it 
is very difficult to actually describe all the things interacted 
with (try it and see). Secondly, because of the practicalities 
of counting – do you count turning a tap on or off as 1 or 2 
interactions  with  a  thing,  for  example,  or  opening  and 
closing  a  drawer  or  door?  The  upshot  is  that  the  numbers 
presented below massively underestimate interactions with 
things over a 24-hour period; perhaps by as much as 50% 
depending on how they were counted.  
Now  the  statistically  minded  are  going  to  find  this  deeply 
unsatisfactory, but it needs to be taken seriously when we 
say  we  are  not  doing  statistics.  We  are  qualitative 
researchers  and  would  urge  critics  to  read  [8]  before 
assessing  what  is  essentially  an  account  of  situated action 
by  the  methodological  canons  of  quantitative  research.  To 
do otherwise would be to miss the work that the numbers 
do  here.  They  do  not  detail  generalities,  but  situational 
specifics in the 2 homes studied. In doing fieldwork, as [8] 
                                                             
1  While  mundanely  recognisable  these  categories  are,  as 
any such set of devices, open to (endless) revision [27]. We 
categorised computers as appliances insofar as a computer 
is  a  device  and  thus  something  that  might  ordinarily  be 
defined  as  an  appliance,  for  example,  and  email  as 
communication insofar as this is what email is embedded in 
and  achieves,  but  other  categories  could  be  developed  for 
descriptive/analytic purposes. Insofar as there is any value 
to had from such categories here it lies in what they allow 
us show of interaction with things in the home. 

1740

SESSION: HOME AND FAMILY

makes clear, generality is not built into sample size but the 
orderliness  of  situated  action.  The  numbers  are  but  an 
initial  means  of  opening  up  for  inspection  ‘the  animal 
hiding in the foliage’ of situated action [12], i.e., the orderly 
features it is possessed of. While each home is unique the 
orderliness  of  situated  action  is  not  merely  to  be  found  in 
the  2  homes  studied,  but  is  a  methodical  feature  of 
interaction  with  things  in  the  home  more  generally.  This 
observation  does  not  turn  upon  the  numbers,  the  numbers 
are just a first step on the way towards seeing that and what 
it might mean for design. 
A First Step Towards Uncovering the Animal 
In  home  A  we  found  that  228  individual  things  were 
interacted  with  in  a  24-hour  period;  in  home  B  299. 
However, the overall number of interactions with things in 
homes A and B were 1991 and 2494 respectively; Figure 1 
shows how this breaks down per category in home A. We 
present  the  data  from  home  A  here  in  graph  form,  and 
compare it with salient aspects of the data gathered in home 
B as we go along.2  

 

Fig 1. Overall number of interactions per category. 

Interaction  with  Utensils  and  Other  Equipment  was  top  in 
both  homes:  26.9%  in  home  A  and  22.2%  in  home  B. 
Furniture  came  in  2nd  in  both  homes  (17.8%  &  18.7% 
respectively). FMCG’s were 3rd in home A (17.6%), Media 
and Media Equipment in home B (12.5%). 4th was Services, 
Fixtures and Fittings in both homes (13% & 11.7%). 5th was 
Appliances  in  home  A  (8.3%),  FMCG’s  in  home  B 
(11.66%).  6th,  clothes  and  soft  furnishings  in  both  homes 
(7.3%  &  9.9%).  7th,  Media  and  Media  and  Media 
Equipment  in  home  A  (5.8%),  Appliances  in  home  B 
(7.3%).  8th  was  Toys  in  home  A  (2.1%),  which  was 
replaced  by  Living  Things  in  home  B  (3.6%).  9th  was 
communications in both homes (1.2% & 2.4%). 
Each  category  of  thing,  composed  of  multiple  things, 
exhibits  its  own  local  patterns.  165  interactions  with 
Appliances were recorded in home A (Fig.2), 183 in B. The 
bulk  of  these  interactions  were  with  computers  (PCs, 
tablets, phones and peripherals) in both homes and involved 
                                                             
2 As we go through the graphs we will elaborate what kinds 
of  things  were  being  counted  in  each  category.  It  is 
simply not feasible to list hundreds of items here. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

such things as waking them up and logging in as a preface 
to other substantive interactions such as playing media. The 
cooker,  fridge,  and  kettle  were  also  prominent  in  both 
homes, along with lamps in home A. The oddity in Fig.3 is 
a drill, use of which was occasioned by the hanging of some 
pictures on a wall (not an everyday activity). 

 

Fig 2. Interactions with appliances. 

145  interactions  were  recorded  with  Clothes  and  Soft 
Furnishings in home A (Fig.3), 246 in home B. Clothes are 
by far the biggest kind of thing interacted with here, closely 
followed  by  towels  (predominantly  in  hand-washing  in 
bathrooms and kitchens). The rug also stands out in home 
A,  being  a  site  where  a  great  deal  of  children’s  games 
occur,  and  curtains  in  home  B,  which  are  implicated  in 
going into and out of the home. 

 

Fig 3. Interactions with clothes and soft furnishings. 

Communications  (Fig.4)  was  the  least  interacted  with 
category of thing in our study, with only 23 interactions in 
home A and 60 in home B. As noted above, phone use and 
video messaging, both routine occurrences in homes A and 
B,  were  not  captured  during  the  study  period.  Had  they 
been, they would not have made a significant difference to 
this  result;  it  would  still  be  the  least  interacted  with 
category of thing. Email was by far the biggest category of 
communication in both homes. Paper mail came in second 
in  home  A  and  third  in  home  B,  where  it  was  topped  by 
social  media  (with  0.6%  of  interactions  overall).  Text 
messages and other online communications (such as meter 
readings  or  shopping  orders)  made  up  the  remaining 
interactions. 

 

Fig 4. Interactions with communications. 

350  interactions  were  recorded  with  FMCGs  in  home  A, 
291  in  home  B.  These  spanned  an  enormous  range  of 
things,  which  we  have  parsed  into  sub-categories  for 
presentation’s sake (Fig.5). The bulk of interactions revolve 
around foodstuffs in both homes. Interactions with personal 
grooming,  cleaning  products  and  detergents  were  also 
pronounced  in  both  homes,  as  was  interaction  with 
packaging and its recycling. Gas, a service in home A, was 
also prominent in home B, where it has to be bought in in 
bottles rather than by mains supply. 

 

Fig 5. Interactions with fast moving consumer goods. 

Furniture was the second most interacted with category of 
thing  in  both  homes.  354  interactions  were  recorded  in 
home  A,  466  in  home  B.  Interaction  largely  revolved 
around  cupboards,  drawers,  shelves,  work  surfaces,  tables 
and chairs, and reflects the sites where Utensils and Other 
Equipment are  stored and used, and FMCGS are prepared 
and/or consumed (Fig.6). Another anomaly in home B was 
a  pronounced  degree  of  interaction  with  internal  doors, 
which are kept closed to keep cats out of rooms.  

Fig 6. Interactions with furniture.  

 

1741

SESSION: HOME AND FAMILY

revolved  predominantly  around  sinks,  taps  and  toilets  in 
both  homes  (Fig.8a).  Interaction  with  ‘wired  in’  things 
(Fig.8b),  particularly  lights,  sockets,  routers/WiFi,  were 
also predominant in both homes. Interactions with heating 
thermostats were also pronounced in home A, which were 
largely to do with over-riding automatic settings, but not in 
home B. 
43 interactions with Toys were recorded in home A. Toys 
was replaced by Living Things in home B (plants and cats) 
and  91  interactions  were  recorded.  Plastic  toys  and  fluffy 
animals were the largest category of things interacted with 
in home A, and real animals (cats) in home B.  
As  noted  above,  the  biggest  single  category  of  thing 
interacted  with  in  either  home  was  Utensils  and  Other 
Equipment: 536 in home A, 553 in home B. Like FMCGs 
and  Media,  a great  many  things  were  interacted  with  here 
and they have again been parsed into broader categories for 
presentation’s  sake  (Fig.9).  Crockery  was  the  largest 
category  of  thing  interacted  with  in  both  homes,  and  the 
other  things  implicated  in  preparing  and  eating  food, 
cleaning  up,  and  disposing  of  waste  were  similarly 
pronounced in each.  

115  interactions  with  Media  and  Media  Equipment  were 
recorded in home A (Fig.7), 311 in home B. A broad range 
of  things  fell  into  this  category,  not  just  music,  text  and 
film, and again we parse these for presentation’s sake. 

 

Fig 7. Interactions with media and media equipment. 

Fig.7 suggests that interaction with web browsers, links and 
sites is predominant, but in reality this largely dissolves into 
interaction  with  online  media  and  media  players  (largely 
radio and on demand TV). The dissolution makes it visible 
that  there  is  still  a  good  deal  of  interaction  with  physical 
media  in  the  home,  with  approx.  40%  of  interactions 
revolving around paper-based media in home A, 25% in B. 
Services,  Fixtures  and  Fittings  includes  ‘built  in’  things, 
‘plumbed in’ things (Fig.8a) and ‘wired in’ things (Fig.8b). 

Fig 8a. Interactions with ‘plumbed in’ services. 

 

Fig 9. Interactions with utensils and other equipment. 

Before  we  move  on  to  consider  what  these  numerical 
patterns  start  to  show  us  of  the  animal  in  the  foliage,  we 
offer  one  final  graph  that  caught  our  attention.  Fig.10 
depicts  the  overall  number  of  interactions  by  category  in 
which computation is embedded.  

 

 

Fig 8b. Interactions with ‘wired in’ services. 

260 interactions were recorded with things in this category 
in  home  A,  292  in  home  B.  Interactions  with  ‘built  in’ 
things  includes  external  doors  and  windows,  walls,  floors, 
ceilings  and  stairs.  Interactions  with  ‘plumbed  in’  things 

1742

Fig 10. Computational interactions. 

 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Only 8.3% of interactions implicate computers in home A. 
This  figure  rises  to  20.4%  in  home  B.  Despite  the 
difference,  the  profile  of  computational  interactions  in  the 
home  is  the  same  in  each  home:  it  only  penetrates  4 
categories of thing, and it does so in the same ways, with 
Media and Media Equipment being predominant, followed 
by  Appliances,  Services  (both  of  which  are  implicated  in 
the consumption of media) and Communications. It would 
seem  that  there  is  much  scope  to  extend  the  reach  of 
computation in the home. 
MAKING SENSE OF THE NUMBERS 
Fig.11 shows what the numerical patterns ‘look like’ when 
transposed  onto  the  physical  space  of  home  A.  The 
transposition makes it visible that interaction with things is 
manifest in very particular locations or interactional zones 
in the home (the same is true for home B). These are similar 
to  Koile  et  als  [18]  “activity  zones”,  which  “represent 
location  and  motion  contexts”  and  are  “learned  from 
statistics  of  human  behavior.”  They  also  resonate  with 
Crabtree  et  als  [5]  “ecological  habitats”  and  “activity 
centres” – particular locations within the home where things 
coalesce  –  but  are  far  more  diverse  in  character,  covering 
                  

not only media and communications but a whole gamut of 
things interacted with in the home on a daily basis.  
Interactional zones are not rooms (e.g., the master bedroom 
#A  Fig.11,  or  child’s  bedroom #B,  or  spare  bedroom #C, 
etc.).  They  are  distinct  zones  within  rooms  where 
interaction  with  things  naturally  occurs  and  where  things 
cluster  together.  Thus  we  can  see,  for  example,  that  there 
are  2  distinct  zones  of  interaction  in  the  master  bedroom 
(zone #A, Fig.11) – the bed, and the drawers. Similarly we 
can  see  the  particular  categories  of  things  that  cluster 
together 
locations:  media,  communications, 
appliances, services, clothes and soft furnishings, furniture, 
utensils  and  other  equipment,  FMCGs  and  toys  in  and 
around  the  bed;  media,  appliances,  services,  clothes  and 
soft furnishings, furniture, utensils and other equipment in 
and around the drawers. We can see too the proportion of 
interactions  with  particular  categories  of  thing  in  these 
zones: that clothes and soft furnishings are interacted with 
most in and around the bed, for example, and appliances in 
and around the drawers, and that interaction with media and 
media equipment is pronounced in both zones. 

these 

in 

 

Fig 11. Interactional zones and clusters of things. 

 

1743

SESSION: HOME AND FAMILY

Our  initial  descriptions,  which  provided  for  the  numerical 
patterns,  also  allow  us  to  identify  the  particular  things 
interacted with in these zones. Thus, and for example,  we 
can see that the clusters of interaction in and around the bed 
involve  radio  and  online  print  news  (media),  email 
(communications),  tablets  and  phones  (appliances),  wifi 
(services), bed linen (clothes and soft furnishings), the bed 
(furniture), cups and plates (utensils and other equipment), 
food  and  drink  (FMCGs),  and  toys.  Similarly,  we  can  see 
that  the  PC  and  clock  (appliances),  film  and  TV  (media), 
electricity  and  wifi  (services),  clean  clothes  and  dirty 
clothes 
the  drawers 
themselves  (furniture),  and  washing  basket  (utensils  and 
other equipment) coalesce in and around the drawers. 
What  we  see  when  we  transpose  the  numbers  onto  the 
physical  layout  of  the  home  is  distinct  interactional  zones 
within each room. In the child’s bedroom (#B, Fig.11) we 
can see that interaction with things clearly clusters around 
the  bed,  the  bookcase,  the  desk,  and  the  drawers;  in  the 
spare  bedroom  (#C),  the  desk;  in  the  hallway  (#D),  the 
cupboards  and  seat;  in  the  bathroom  (#E),  the  bath,  the 

(clothes  and  soft 

furnishings), 

toilet,  the  sink,  the  cupboards;  in  the  porch  (#F),  the 
mailbox and the door; and in the kitchen (#G), the kitchen 
cupboards,  shelves  and  work  surfaces,  the  cooker,  sink, 
fridge,  kitchen  table,  rug,  bookcase,  settees  and  dresser. 
Furthermore, each of these interactional zones is possessed 
of  its  own  unique  interactional  characteristics:  it’s  own 
unique clustering of things.  
We  would  add  to  this,  that  these  unique  clusters  are 
spatially and temporally distributed. Fig.11 invites us to see 
distinct  patterns,  particular  clustering’s  of 
in 
particular  zones,  but 
the  clusters,  are 
assembled  across  space  and  time  in  interaction.  The 
clusterings are dynamic. Take, for example, the presence of 
FMCGs in the master bedroom and it soon becomes clear 
that they had to get there somehow, from some other zone – 
the kitchen, where tea and toast is made, which implicates 
particular clusters of things (furniture, appliances, services, 
utensils,  etc.)  in  its  achievement.  The  upshot  is  that  the 
clusters  are  not  independent  but  inherently  connected  in 
interaction. 
 

the  patterns, 

things 

Fig 12. Spatially distributed rhythms and routines.

The Animal in the Foliage 
The  ‘connected’  character  of  interactional  zones  and 
clusters orients us to the phenomenon that gives the data its 
real world, real time sense; that is, it’s sense in interaction. 

All  of  the  data  presented  so  far  gains  its  sense  from  the 
particular rhythms and routines that constitute everyday life 
in  the  home,  and  the  mundane  activities  in  and  through 
which  these  are  brought  about.  This  is  not,  of  course,  the 

 

1744

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

first  time  that  attention  has  been  drawn  to  the  salience  of 
domestic  routines  to  design  [e.g.,  5,  6,  34],  but  as  with 
previous  elaboration  of  ecological  habitats  and  activity 
centres, the scope extends far beyond domestic routines in 
which media and communications are embedded. 
Fig.12  illustrates,  for  example,  the  interactional  zones  and 
clusters implicated in the domestic routine ‘getting up in the 
morning’  in  home  A,  which  includes  making  breakfast, 
getting washed and getting dressed. In doing so it surfaces 
the spatially distributed nature of this routine and the zones 
in and across which it takes place. The reader will note the 
absence of definite proportions in Fig.12, as the aim here is 
simply  to  render  the  unique  zonal  clusters  of  interactions 
implicated in the routine.  
What  can’t  be  seen,  but  can  be  recovered  from  our  initial 
descriptions  of  human-thing  interaction,  is  what  is  being 
done  in  and  across  these  zonal  clusters.  Thus,  and  for 
example, the daily ‘get up’ in home A begins with the radio 
being played over wifi on an iPad in the master bedroom; 
visiting the toilet is the next step; then entering the kitchen, 
turning lights and lamps on, filling the kettle, putting bread 
in  the  toaster,  tea  in  the  pot,  getting  cups  and  plates  off 
cupboards  and  shelves,  knives  out  of  drawers,  butter  and 
jam from the fridge; turning the PC on next to the settee and 
putting a child’s programme on, serving them breakfast on 
the settee and taking breakfast for a partner through to the 
bedroom.  Thus  the  routine  unfolds  in  the  details  of 
particular  interactions  with  particular  things  in  and  across 
particular zones in the home until everyone is fed, washed 
and dressed and ready for the next part of the day to unfold.  
It is in the details of our mundane interactions with things, 
done as part and parcel of the routine activities that bring 
the daily rhythms of the home about, that we rub up against 
the  animal  hiding  in  the  foliage.  What  the  zonal  clusters 
reveal  is  that  domestic  rhythms  and  routines  are  brought 
about  not  just  through  human  interaction,  but  through  the 
methodical  assemblage  of  things  in  the  course  of  doing 
interaction.  The  daily  ‘get  up’,  for  example,  starts 
methodically 
interactional 
assemblage  of  things:  bed,  iPad,  seat  on  which  it  sits 
overnight,  browser,  bookmark, 
it 
proceeds through the methodical assemblage of toilet, sink, 
soap,  towel  and  radiator,  off  which  the  towel  is  hung;  it 
moves  on  to  the  methodical  assemblage  of  lights,  kettles, 
cups, plates, cutlery, foodstuffs, works surfaces, etc. 
It might seem strange to speak of methodical assemblages 
with respect to work surfaces, bed, toilets, sinks, lights, etc., 
insofar as the notion of an assemblage hints at the moving 
around  and  putting  together  of  things.  Clearly  we  don’t 
move the bed, the toilet, the work surface, etc., around, or at 
least not routinely, but we do put such things together with 
other  things  in  interaction.  It  is  worth  noting  as  well  that 
while  a  great  many  things  are  fixed-in-place  the  fixing  or 
placement is methodical: you don’t place and fix a toilet in 
your  kitchen,  for  example,  whereas  you  do  place  and  fix 

live  radio  stream; 

through 

the 

particular 

tables,  sinks,  cupboards,  etc.  Where  things  are  placed  and 
fixed in the home is, for the most part, no accident. Rather, 
they are placed methodically with respect to their relevance 
to interaction. 
Methodical  assemblages  of  things  are  multi-faceted  then. 
They consist of methodically placed things and they consist 
of methodical assemblies of things, and methodical uses of 
things.  Methodical  assemblies  consist  of  those  things 
brought to and put together at sites where things fixed-in-
place  reside.  The  kitchen  is  a  classic  example,  where 
cutlery, crockery, pots and pans, foodstuffs and utensils are 
methodically  assembled  on  work  surfaces  in  the  routine 
making  of  food,  though  there  is  more  to  assemblies  than 
this. They are also to be found in the places where things 
live (fridges, drawers, cupboards, shelves, etc.). Methodical 
assemblies  of  things  run  throughout  the  house  and  can  be 
found at any site where things are fixed-in-place. 
Methodical uses of things are also to be found as a feature 
of  methodical  assemblies.  The 
iPad  example  above 
illustrates  this,  and  the  methodical  use  of  things  pervades 
our  domestic  routines.    We  use  toothbrushes,  toothpaste, 
soap,  towels,  knifes,  forks,  plates,  cookers,  fridges,  etc., 
etc., etc., in very particular, methodical ways. We don’t use 
plates  to  read  on,  for  example,  or  butter  knifes  to  shave 
with,  or  cookers  to  sit  on  and  eat  our  dinners.  Method 
pervades  our  use  of  individual  things  and  the  assemblies 
individual  things  are  part  and  parcel  of.  When  we  look  at 
the methodical use of things it is also clear that their use is 
‘account-able’ [11]. Your partner would, for example, call 
you to account if you were to try shaving with a butter knife 
or,  more  prosaically,  if  you  were  to  use  her  cup  to  have 
your  coffee  in  (something  that  would  assuredly  happen  in 
either home A or home B).  
The  strong  point  about  the  account-ability  of  things,  as 
given  in  their  methodical  use  as  features  of  methodical 
assemblies implicating methodically placed things – that is, 
as features of methodical assemblages of things in the home 
that are manifest as zonal clusters – is that they provide for 
the recognisability of interaction. We can see what is going 
on, what is being done, what has been done and even what 
needs  to  be  done,  through  the  methodical  placement, 
assembly and use of things in the home. You can walk into 
your home and a host of events past, present and future are 
available 
the  methodical 
assemblages of things that confront you: the children have 
been  playing  in  the  living  room,  mum  is  about  to  have  a 
bath, the washing needs folding and putting away, etc. 
Now 
that  we  can  ‘read  off’  domestic  events  from 
methodical  assemblages  of  things,  that  they  are  account-
able,  is  the  case  for  all  of  us,  but  it  is  the  case  in  a  very 
unique,  very  local  way.  ‘Your’  home  is  not  the  same  as 
‘my’ home. While you may do much the same as me – get 
up,  get  dressed,  make  breakfast,  etc.  –  how  you  do  them, 
through just what methodical assemblages of things, will be 
different. Some of the assemblages I might recognise, other 

to  you  at-a-glance 

through 

1745

people  might  do  so  too,  but  others  will  be  opaque.  We 
might recognise the things involved in the interaction, but 
not  what  is  being  done,  has  been  done,  needs  to  be  done, 
etc.  Could  you  tell  from  seeing  a  spoon  in  my  sink  at  a 
certain time of day that the cat’s had been fed, for example? 
The  account-ability  of  methodical  assemblages  resides  in 
and reflects the local order of domestic life: how you and 
the people you live with (should you do so) organise life at 
home. That organisation is manifest as and articulates your 
domestic  rhythms  and  routines,  which  are  recognisably 
constituted in your methodical interactions with things and 
the unique methodical assemblages that are produced in and 
through  those  interactions.  This  means  that  zonal  clusters 
are  ‘indexical’  to  the  local  order,  that  they  get  their  sense 
from the local order and that their sense resides in the local 
order,  all  of  which  raises  some  serious  challenges  for  the 
Internet of Things. 
SO WHAT? 
We might begin to open up the implications of our study by 
considering  some  of  the  ways  in  which  issues  might  be 
raised about the approach that has been adopted here and its 
focus.  In  reviewing  this  paper  it  was  suggested  to  us,  for 
instance, that the indexicality of zonal clusters to the local 
order  ignores  how  the  ‘non-local’  is  also  indexed  within 
them.  Such  an  argument  invites  us  to  see  broader  “world 
systems” [22] at work within the local production of order – 
for example, the machineries of capitalist mass production 
and marketing implicated in local interaction with FMCGs. 
On  this  view  there  would  be  a  need  to  tease  ‘degrees  of 
localness’  out  of  our  study  and  the  ways  in  which 
the ‘local’ and ‘non-local’ might be seen to be related.  
Dwelling on the implicative relationship of world systems 
to  local  interaction  with  things  in  the  home  would, 
however,  gloss  over  the  phenomenon  that  our  study 
surfaces: the methodical assemblage of things involved in 
the accomplishment of domestic rhythms and routines. Our 
attention would thus be  diverted from the observable and 
reportable  fact  that  people  build  such  assemblages  in 
interaction, and do so as a matter of course in carrying out 
the  plethora  of  activities  that  make  up  domestic  life.  The 
machinery of mass marketing would, then, be put in place 
of a distinctive machinery of interaction implicated in the 
ongoing,  day-to-day,  accomplishment  of  the  local  order. 
This does not rule out further treatment of the phenomenon, 
social  and  technical,  but  there  is  in  our  view  a  need  to 
proceed with caution if we are not to lose sight of it.  
The  ‘invitation’  to  make  the  local  accountable  to  world 
systems  is  not  all  that  it  appears  on  the  surface  –  i.e.,  a 
matter  of  teasing  out  how  the  machineries  of  capitalist 
production  relate  to  the  local  order.  As  anthropologist 
George  Marcus  (who  has  valorised  the  notion  of  “world 
systems”) reminds us, efforts to tease out the relationship 
between situated action to large-scale social structures (e.g., 
by  tracking  the  “connections  between  sites”  [22])  are 

1746

SESSION: HOME AND FAMILY

life, 

and 

theoretical 

embedded  in  a  particular  social  science  discourse  that  is 
deeply concerned with the “politics of knowledge” [21].  
While  Marcus’  work  has  been  imported  wholesale  into 
design  by  [10]  we  should  not  accept 
this  way  of 
understanding  the  social,  which  transforms  fieldwork  and 
ethnography  more  generally  into  a  reflexive  form  of 
political  critique,  as  given.  It  is  not.  Indeed,  it  is  bitterly 
contested  within  the  social  sciences  [e.g.,  20]  and  in 
systems design [e.g., 7]. The study reported here is rooted 
in a long tradition of empirical studies in CSCW inspired by 
ethnomethodology  spanning  workplaces,  homes,  games, 
etc. Such studies are “incommensurate and asymmetrically 
alternate” [13] to theoretical treatment of whatever colour, 
shade or hue.  
We cannot then make use of theory to add what some might 
see as ‘breadth and depth’ to our study, other than as a topic 
of  ethnomethodological  critique  [19].  There  are  limits  to 
how far this can be taken here so the reader is referred to 
[4] for further treatment of these issues. Suffice to say that 
in  place  of 
insight  we  offer  empirical 
observations and reflections on what they might mean for 
design.  The  key  takeaway  we  offer  is  not  that  people 
ordinarily interact with lots of things in the home and that 
these cluster together in certain sites, but rather that key to 
the  ordering  of  domestic 
routine 
accomplishment  of  domestic  activities,  is  the  methodical 
ways in which household members assemble things.  
This  observation  has  particular  ramifications  for 
the 
development  of  the  Internet  of  Things,  which  is  largely 
marked by the design of individual things to be placed in 
the  home:  the  Internet-enabled  fridge,  washing  machine, 
thermostat,  kettle,  etc.  The  development  of  individual 
things creates a fragmented ecology in which things are not 
connected together; they are only connected to the Internet. 
Where assemblages of things are provided for – e.g., If This 
Then That or Samsung’s ARTIK platform – the provision is 
largely limited to the placement and connection of various 
sensors.  These  are  not  designed  to  ‘fit’  into  or  support 
existing  methodical  assemblages,  but  to  enable  designers 
and/or end users to create to novel assemblages exploiting 
new technological possibilities. 
The  real  world,  real  time  uses  of  things  within  the  local 
production  of  domestic  life  is,  then,  ignored  by  design. 
Things  are  not  being  designed  to  fit  into  and  support  the 
methodical assemblages implicated in the doing of a great 
many domestic activities. This may not be seen as problem; 
new  activities  will  emerge  and  it  is  these  that  design  is 
interested  in.  However,  domestic  life  will  not  simply 
change,  and  whole  swathes  of  it  be  dispensed  with  by 
design  because  designers  do  not  build  the  IoT  to  support 
activities that are key to its ongoing accomplishment. That 
it doesn’t support a great many domestic activities may, on 
the other hand, have a considerable impact on the IoT and 
limit its uptake, just as a failure to design for the orderliness 

the 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

furniture.  Designing 

of human activities has had on other technologies in other 
settings (e.g., [3]).  
Our  study  raises  the  issue  of  designing  for  domestic 
activities by designing methodical assemblages of things – 
multiple things, occupying multiple categories. This means 
that it is not sufficient to design for FMCGs, for example, 
but the other things that are methodically implicated in their 
use need to be taken into account as well, such as utensils 
and 
for  methodically  produced 
assemblages of things is a key design challenge, shifting the 
focus  from  individual  things,  and  novel  assemblages  of 
sensors,  to  embedding  computation  in  a  myriad  mundane 
things situated within the home. In this respect our study 
opens up the IoT design space. 
Our study makes it perspicuous that there is a great deal of 
scope for embedding computation in the home, insofar as it 
is  absent  from  most  categories  of 
things  we  have 
encountered in our study and the things ‘contained’ within 
them.  Manifold  categories  of  things  are  routinely  woven 
together  in  practice.  FMCGs  are  used  in  conjunction  with 
furniture,  utensils,  appliances  and  services,  and  may 
implicate media (e.g., recipes) and communications as well 
(who  hasn’t  checked  their  email  or  answered  the  phone 
while cooking?).  
The strong point here is that it may be possible to identify 
common assemblages of things where particular categories 
of  things  routinely  combine  and  thereby  open  up  fruitful 
areas for development to give real world, real time purpose 
to  specific  IoT  applications.  For  example,  that  particular 
FMCGs  (e.g.,  toothpaste)  are  used  in  combination  with 
particular Utensils and Other Equipment (a toothbrush) and 
Furniture  (a  mirror)  in  a  particular  interactional  zone  (the 
bathroom  sink)  and  that  these  things  could  be  sensed  and 
Internet-enabled to deliver oral hygiene advice.3 
A third and final takeaway from our study suggests that the 
methodical assemblage of things might open up a way for 
designers to get a handle on an old but salient problem to 
IoT applications that rely on sensing human activities. The 
annals  of  ubiquitous  and  pervasive  computing  are  replete 

                                                             
3 In saying this it might be argued that we have swallowed 
the IoT agenda wholesale, that we lack critical insight, and 
would do well to learn when it is appropriate to intervene 
and  when  not  [2].  We  are  not  blind  to  the  issue.  As 
ethnomethodologists  have  argued  since  the  inception  of 
CSCW,  in  undertaking  design  there  is  need  to  determine 
what  to  automate  and  what  to  leave  to  human  skill  and 
judgement  [17].  Nevertheless,  the  proposition  here  still 
holds:  identifying  common  assemblages  of  things  may 
serve  to  inform  IoT  design,  just  as  ‘patterns’  have  been 
invoked on previous occasions to support different design 
initiatives that seek to capitalise on field studies done in the 
workplace [23]. 

with papers detailing efforts to sense activities in the home, 
though  there  is,  despite  developments,  a  strong  sense  in 
which  Tapia  et  als  [32]  comments  on  the  effort  still  ring 
true: 

“Unlike other machine learning and pattern recognition problems, 
there  is  no  ‘right’  answer  when  recognising  activities.  The 
boundaries  when  activities  begin  and  end  are  fuzzy  since  they 
can  occur  sequentially, 
in  parallel,  alternating,  and  even 
overlapping.  Finally,  there  is  significant  variation  in  the  way 
observers would label the same activities.”  

Our studies suggest that there may be a way to get a hold of 
this  “fuzzy”  problem:  that  just  as  methodical  assemblages 
of  things  provide  human  beings  with  the  means  to 
recognise what has or is being done, and even what needs 
to be done next, then so they might provide the means for 
computational machines to recognise it too. 
In  this  respect  our  study  suggests  that  there  are  several 
salient  aspects  of  domestic  activity  that  might  be  sensed. 
Not only the particular things used in interaction, but also 
the  unique  clusters  of  things  that  emerge  in  the  act  of 
assembly, the discrete zones in which these clusters occur, 
and  their  spatial  and  temporal  distribution  might  all  be 
sensed as well to determine what is being done, and where 
IoT automation and actuation are concerned, what needs to 
be done next. 
This,  however,  is  where  the  uniqueness  of  the  local 
domestic  order  bites.  As  noted  above,  even  where  what 
goes on in one home may be much the same as another, just 
how  it  is  done,  through  just  what  assemblage  of  things, 
where it has reached and what needs to be done next may 
not  be  transparent  to  outsiders.  Concomitantly,  the  local 
order may well be opaque to machines and algorithms. As 
[36]  demonstrates,  IoT  devices  may  struggle  to  learn  and 
respond  appropriately  to  the  local  context,  situations  and 
intent  of  users,  and  this  is  in  the  case  of  a  single  device. 
Clearly  sensing  human  activity  at  a  local  level  will  be 
considerably  more  challenging  where  multiple  devices  are 
involved as projected by the IoT.  
Sensing domestic activity at a local level, in distinction to 
trading  in  gross  patterns  across  homes  (as  for  example  in 
demand-side  energy  management),  raises  real  challenges 
for machine learning. The methodical assemblage of things, 
along  with  the  detectable  spatial  and  temporal  ‘states’ 
implicated  in  their  construction,  may  provide  a  fruitful 
means  of  addressing  the  problem.  We  do  not  pretend  that 
this  will  be  easy.  Detecting  that  A,  B,  and  C  things  are 
being interacted with in zone X, that D, E and F things are 
being interacted with in zone Y, and that G, H, I, J, K, L 
and  M  things  are  being  interacted  with  in  zone  Z  doesn’t 
tell a machine what is being done (e.g., getting up). It only 
says what has been interacted with where and when.4  
                                                             
4  Other  studies  we  have  conducted  focusing  on  the 
deployment  of  sensors  in  the  home  suggest  that  it  will  be 
necessary to involve household members in the articulation 

1747

Coupled to this, it is important to note the shift from sensing 
interactions with things to the machine-based production of 
and  reasoning  about  personal  data.  The  sense 
that 
interaction with things has within the local order is not of 
the order ‘this was opened, that was picked up, this was put 
in it’, but of the order that some particular activity is being 
done  (e.g.,  going  to  the  toilet).  What  is  being  sensed  and 
reasoned about is, then, the activities implicated in bringing 
the  everyday  rhythms  and  routines  of  domestic  life  about. 
These are certainly personal and may, as the example above 
demonstrates, be very sensitive. How such data is treated is 
also  an  important  matter  to  consider  within  the  emerging 
IoT  ecology  and  raises  real  challenges  of  ‘human-data 
interaction’ [24, 9]. 
CONCLUSION 
We  are  not  the  first  to  look  at  things  in  the  home  as  a 
resource for design. As Rodden and Benford [26] point out 
domestic  design  has  largely  focused  on  the  “stuff”  of  the 
home,  i.e.,  “all  the  things  that  twitch  around  daily  to 
monthly.”  Our  study  of  a  day  in  the  life  of  things  in  the 
home  complements  and  extends  such  prior  work, 
particularly  work  done 
the  ethnomethodological 
tradition, which has been concerned to explicate and make 
visible the “unremarkable” character of the domestic order 
and how it is brought about locally in the accomplishment 
of the “routine” [34].  
Our  study  does  this  by  offering  empirical  insights  that 
extend upon matters such as the notion of clutter [31] and 
mail handling [15] and other “artful systems” in the home 
[33].  While 
the  methodical 
assemblage of things, the assemblage has not been treated 
as a topic in its own right. Rather, the emphasis has been on 
how  people  design,  arrange  and  integrate  informational 
artefacts: 

these  studies 

in 

implicate 

“  …  the  miscellany  of  to-dos,  bills,  invitations,  appointments, 
school  correspondence,  schoolwork,  etc.  that  must  be  routinely 
handled,  arranged  and  dealt  with  in  the  smooth  running  of  a 
family home.” [33] 

Although  such  studies  share  in  common  with  ours  an 
interest  in  the  organisation  of  domestic  life,  without 
criticism they do not address the methodical assemblage of 
things as a pervasive feature of the situated accomplishment 
of the routine activities that constitute the local order. That 
people  build  such  assemblages,  and  do  so  as  a  matter  of 
course  in  carrying  out  routine  activities,  elaborates  a 
distinctive machinery of interaction that is implicated in the 
ongoing,  day-to-day,  accomplishment  of  the  local  order, 
whether it implicates informational artefacts or not.  
There  is,  then,  a  great  deal  more  to  the  methodical 
assemblage  of  things  than  creating  “organising  systems” 
                                                                                                      
of  sensed  data  to  make  it  legible  [35].  Articulation  work 
provides  a  potential  resource  for  the  problem  of  machine 
learning in this context. 

1748

SESSION: HOME AND FAMILY

[33] of informational artefacts to handle the routine, with 
the  more  of  the  matter  having  direct  implications  for  the 
ongoing  development  of  the  Internet  of  Things.  Thus,  in 
addition to the kinds of design issues that have dropped out 
of previous studies, our current study offers the following 
takeaways: 

•  Our study makes it perspicuous that the “glue” [34] of 
domestic  life  –  the  routine  –  in  all  cases  implicates, 
relies  on  and  exploits  the  methodical  assemblage  of 
things. 

•  Things  are  not  purposed  within 

routine 
individually; this raises the challenge of designing for 
assemblages  of  things  that  span  multiple  categories, 
rather than single things or things within a category. 

the 

• 

•  Future possibilities for IoT development in the home 
might be identified through the empirical elaboration 
of common methodical assemblages of things. 
Insofar  as  the  methodical  assemblage  of  things 
permits  household  members  to  recognise  what  has 
been  done,  is  being  done  and/or  what  needs  to  be 
done  next,  such  assemblages  might  be  purposed  to 
drive the activity sensing and machine learning that is 
needed to drive IoT automation and actuation. 

to 

There  is,  of  course,  a  great  deal  more  that  could  be  said 
about our study and how it relates to other design and social 
science  literatures.  This  is  not  the  place,  however.  The 
purpose of this paper has been to surface a phenomenon of 
broad  relevance 
the  IoT.  A 
phenomenon  that  is  in  plain  view,  ordinarily  seen  but 
unnoticed  or  taken  for  granted,  that  is  at  work  in  your 
home, just as it is in ours, and which is a pervasive feature 
of the local ordering of domestic life wherever it occurs.  
As  Sacks  [30]  put  it  with  respect  to  the  machinery  of 
interaction ordering talk, 

the  development  of 

“  …  the  results  I  offer,  people  can  go  and  see  for  themselves. 
And they needn’t be afraid to. And they needn’t figure the results 
are wrong because they can see them.”  

The same applies to the methodical assemblage of things in 
the home. This is not to say that your home will look my 
home  or  anyone  else’s  -  just  like  conversation,  the 
machinery  can  be  used  in  infinite  ways  -  though  it  may 
transpire  that  commonalities  exist at  least  within  a  culture 
(we would be surprised if they didn’t). Nonetheless, there is 
a need for further work. We have, to reiterate, surfaced the 
phenomenon  here.  The  job  now  is  to  open  it  up  through 
broader study and technological investigation. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The research on which this article is based was funded by 
the EPSRC grant EP/M001636/1. A great many thanks also 
go 
families,  without  whose  goodwill  and 
perseverance this study would not have been possible. We 
would also like to thank the reviewers of this paper for their 
constructive feedback. 

to  our 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

REFERENCES 
1.  4th  Annual 

Internet  of  Things  Awards  2013/14, 

http://postscapes.com/internet-of-things-award/2014/ 

2.  Eric  Baumer  and  Six  Silberman  (2011)  “When  the 
implication is not to design (technology)”, Proc. of CHI, 
pp. 2271-2274, Vancouver, ACM. 

3.  Jon  Bowers,  Graham  Button  and  Wes  Sharrock  (1995) 
“Workflow from within and without”, Proc. of ECSCW 
pp. 51-66, Stockholm, Kluwer. 

4.  Graham Button, Andy Crabtree, Mark Rouncefield and 
Peter  Tolmie  (2015)  Deconstructing  Ethnography, 
Springer. 

5.  Andy  Crabtree,  Tom  Rodden,  Terry  Hemmings  and 
Steve  Benford  (2003)  “Finding  a  place  for  ubicomp  in 
the  home”,  Proc.  of  UbiComp,  pp.  208-226,  Seattle, 
Springer. 

6.  Andy  Crabtree  and  Tom  Rodden  (2004)  “Domestic 
routines  and  design  for  the  home”,  Journal  of  CSCW, 
vol. 13 (2), pp. 191-220. 

7.  Andy Crabtree, Tom Rodden, Peter Tolmie and Graham 
Button (2009) “Ethnography considered harmful”, Proc. 
of CHI, pp. 879-888, Boston (MA), ACM. 

8.  Andy  Crabtree,  Peter  Tolmie  and  Mark  Rouncefield 
(2013) “‘How many bloody examples do you want?’ – 
Fieldwork  and  generalisation,  Proc.  of  ECSCW,  pp.  1-
20, Paphos, Springer. 

9.  Andy  Crabtree  and  Richard  Mortier  (2015)  “Human 
data  interaction:  historical  lessons  from  social  studies 
and CSCW”, Proc. of ECSCW, pp. 1-20, Oslo, Springer. 
10. Paul  Dourish  and  Genevieve  Bell  (2011)  Divining  a 

Digital Future, MIT Press. 

11. Harold  Garfinkel  (1967)  Studies  in  Ethnomethodology, 

Prentice-Hall. 

12. Harold  Garfinkel,  Michael  Lynch  and  Eric  Livingston 
(1981)  “The  work  of  a  discovering  science  construed 
with  materials  from  the  optically  discovered  pulsar”, 
Philosophy of the Social Sciences, vol. 11, pp. 131-158. 
13. Harold  Garfinkel  and  Lawrence  Wieder  (1992)  “Two 
incommensurable, asymmetrically alternate technologies 
of  social  analysis”,  Text  in  Context:  Contributions  to 
Ethnomethodology  (eds.  Graham  Watson  and  Robert 
Seiler), pp.175-206, Sage.  

14. Neil  Gershenfeld,  Raffi  Krikorian  and  Danny  Cohen 
(2004)  “The  Internet  of  Things”,  Scientific  American, 
vol. 291 (4), pp. 76-81. 

15. Richard  Harper,  Venetia  Evergeti,  Lynne  Hamill  and 
Ben  Shatwell  (2003)  “The  social  organisation  of 
communication in the home of the twenty-first century”, 
Cognition, Technology and Work, vol. 5 (1), pp. 15-22. 

16. Richard  Harper  (2012)  “From  the  smart  home  to  the 
connected home”, The Connected Home: The Future of 

Domestic  Life  (ed.  Richard  Harper),  pp.  3-18,  London, 
Springer. 

17. John  Hughes,  Dave  Randall  and  Dan  Shapiro  (1993) 
“From  ethnographic  record  to  system  design:  some 
experiences from the field”, Journal of CSCW, vol. (1), 
pp. 123-141. 

18. Kimberle  Koile,  Konrad  Tollmar,  David  Demirdjian, 
Howard  Schrobe  and  Trevor  Darrell  (2003)  “Activity 
zones for context-aware computing”, Proc. of UbiComp, 
pp. 90-106, Seattle, Springer. 
(1999) 

context: 
ethnomethodology  and  social  theory”,  Human  Studies, 
vol. 22, pp. 211-233. 

19. Michael  Lynch 

“Silence 

in 

20. Michael  Lynch  (2000)  “Against  reflexivity  as  an 
academic  virtue  and  source  of  privileged  knowledge”, 
Theory, Culture & Society, vol. 17 (3), pp. 26-54. 

21. George  Marcus 

(1986) 
Anthropology as Cultural Critique, Chicago University 
Press. 

and  Michael  Fischer 

22. George  Marcus  (1995)  “Ethnography  in/of  the  world 
system:  the  emergence  of  multi-sited  ethnography”, 
Annual Review of Anthropology, vol. 24, pp. 95-117. 

23. David  Martin,  Tom  Rodden,  Mark  Rouncefield,  Ian 
Sommerville  and  Stephen  Viller  (2001)  “Finding 
patterns in the fieldwork”, Proc. of ECSCW, pp. 39-58, 
Bonn, Kluwer. 

24. Richard  Mortier,  Hamed  Haddadi,  Tristan  Henderson, 
Derek McAuley and Jon Crowcroft (2014) “Human-data 
interaction: the human face of the data-driven society”, 
Social Science Research Network, http://papers.ssrn.com 
/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2508051 

25. Daniela  Petrelli,  Steve  Whittaker  and  Jens  Brockmeier 
(2008) “AutoTopography: what can physical mementoes 
tell us about digital memories?”, Proc. of CHI, pp. 53-
62, Florence, ACM. 

26. Tom Rodden and Steve Benford (2003) “The evolution 
of  buildings  and 
the  design  of 
ubiquitous domestic environments”, Proc. of CHI, pp. 9-
16, Ft. Lauderdale, ACM.  

implications  for 

27. Harvey  Sacks 

(1963)  “Sociological  description”, 

Berkeley Journal of Sociology, vol. 8, pp. 1-16. 

28. Harvey Sacks, Emmanuel Schegloff and Gail Jefferson 
(1974)  “A  simplest  systematics  for  the  organization  of 
turn-taking  in  conversation”,  Language,  vol.  50,  pp. 
696-735. 

29. Harvey  Sacks 

(1984)  “Notes  on  methodology”, 
Structures  of  Social  Action:  Studies  in  Conversation 
Analysis (eds. Maxwell, J.M. and Heritage, J.), pp. 21-
27, CUP.  

30. Harvey  Sacks  (1992)  “On  sampling  and  subjectivity” 
I,  pp.  483–488, 

Lectures  on  Conversation,  vol. 
Blackwell.  

1749

31. Laurel  Swan,  Alex  Taylor  and  Richard  Harper  (2008) 
“Making  place  for  clutter  and  other  ideas  of  home”, 
ACM ToCHI, vol. 15, Article No. 9. 

32. Emmanuel  Tapia,  Stephen  Intille  and  Kent  Larson 
(2004)  “Activity  recognition  in  the  home  using  simple 
and ubiquitous sensors”, Proc. of Pervasive Computing, 
pp. 158-175, Linz, Springer. 

33. Alex Taylor and Laurel Swan (2005) “Artful systems in 

the home”, Proc. of CHI, pp. 641-650, Portland, ACM. 

34. Peter  Tolmie,  James  Pycock,  Tim  Diggins,  Allan 
Maclean  and  Alain  Karsenty  (2002)  “Unremarkable 

 

SESSION: HOME AND FAMILY

computing”,  Proc.  of  CHI,  pp.  399-406,  Minneapolis, 
ACM. 

35. Peter  Tolmie,  Andy  Crabtree,  Tom  Rodden,  James 
Colley and Ewa Luger  (2016) “ ‘This has to be the cats’ 
–  personal  data 
in  networked  sensing 
systems”,  Proc.  of  CSCW,  February  27-March  2,  San 
Francisco, ACM. 

legibility 

36. Yang,  R.  and  Newman,  M.  (2013)  “Learning  from  a 
learning  thermostat”,  Proc.  of  UbiComp,  pp.  93-102, 
Zurich, ACM.  

1750

