CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

It’s (Not) Simply a Matter of Time: The Relationship 

Between CMC Cues and Interpersonal Affinity 

Noah Liebman 

Northwestern University 

Evanston, IL USA 

nliebman@u.northwestern.edu 

Darren Gergle 

Northwestern University 

Evanston, IL USA 

dgergle@northwestern.edu 

in 

text-based 

ABSTRACT 
Nonverbal,  paralinguistic  cues  such  as  punctuation  and 
emoticons  are  believed  to  be  one  of  the  mechanisms 
through which interpersonal relationship development takes 
place 
interactions.  We  use  a  novel 
experimental  apparatus  to  manipulate  these  cues  in  a  live 
Instant  Message  conversation.  Results  show  a  positive 
causal relationship of conversation duration and cue use on 
perceived  affinity,  and  the  relationship  is  contingent  upon 
whether  or  not  partners  are  able  to  see  each  other’s  cues. 
Further analysis of the dialogue reveals that reciprocity may 
play  a  central  role  in  supporting  this  effect.  We  then 
demonstrate how one’s cue use is influenced by a partner’s 
cue use, and show that cues are often used in greeting and 
sign-off rituals. 
Author Keywords 
Language use; affinity; instant messaging (IM); computer-
mediated communication (CMC) 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.3  [Information  Interfaces  and  Presentation]:  Group 
and  Organization  Interfaces  –  collaborative  computing, 
computer-supported cooperative work 
INTRODUCTION 
In recent years we have seen an abundance of interactions 
that 
in  computer-mediated  communication 
(CMC)  environments.  We  effectively  argue,  debate,  and 
persuade  one  another  in  forums  and  discussion  threads 
[15,36], we express a wide variety of emotions in blog posts 
[13,32],  have  exchanges  with  people  we  know  as  well  as 
those  we  have  never  met,  and  we  can  form,  maintain  and 
dissolve  relationships 
in  various  online  communities 
[4,34].  We  can  trust  those  we  have  just  met  [41],  and 
deceive those we know well [2,17] – and we can do all of 
these things using text-based communication technologies. 

take  place 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be 
honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or 
republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific  permission  and/or  a 
from 
Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to 
ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02...$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819945

fee.  Request  permissions 

570

support 

to  better 

Yet,  while  recent  literature  and  common  practice  suggests 
that  text-based  communication  is  widespread  and  capable 
of  yielding  positive  relational  outcomes,  we  still  lack  a 
detailed  understanding  of  the  particular  mechanisms  by 
which such outcomes are achieved. When and how do we 
craft  our  messages 
relational 
communication when we have a seemingly diminished set 
of cues available? How do different cues help us to better 
establish positive relationships? 
In this paper we aim to answer these questions by making 
use  of  a  novel  experimental  platform  that  allows  us  to 
surreptitiously  alter  the  messages  being  sent  from  one 
person to another. Our approach permits examination of the 
causal role that paralinguistic cues (e.g., “that’s *reallllly* 
great!!!”)  play  in  the  development  of  perceived  affinity 
between partners by varying the duration of conversations 
and whether or not certain cues are removed. 
In a laboratory study of sixty pairs we show that time spent 
engaged in an instant message conversation and the use of 
paralinguistic CMC cues [26] are both positively associated 
with  perceived  affinity  based  on  previously  validated 
measures. We make use of conditional process analysis [20] 
to  uncover  some  of  the  mechanisms  through  which  these 
effects  operate,  and  we  expand  on  the  relationship  among 
conversation  duration,  cue  use  and  reciprocity.  We  show 
that CMC cues are a causal mechanism through which the 
effect  of  duration  on  perceived  affinity  operates.  We  then 
go  on  to  show  that  the  effect  of  cue  use  is  dependent  on 
whether partners can see each other’s cues, suggesting that 
they  play  a  more  social  and  communicative  role.  Finally, 
we show that cues appear to be more effective when used in 
a reciprocal fashion, and that they are often used toward the 
beginnings  and  ends  of  conversations,  suggesting  a  more 
phatic  role.  We  conclude  by  offering  implications  for 
theory and design. 
BACKGROUND 
In  everyday  face-to-face  communication,  speakers  use  a 
variety  of  verbal  and  non-verbal  behaviors  to  achieve 
interpersonal  outcomes.  For  example,  conversational  pairs 
have been shown to converge in their word use and facial 
expressions as a way to indicate social receptiveness [12], 
and these behaviors are associated with positive outcomes 
such as increased liking and better negotiation results. 
However,  many  of 
relationships 

to  establish 
in  face-to-face  environments  are  simply 

the  behaviors  used 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Partner Cues

(M)

Duration

(X)

Cue 

Removal (V)

Perceived 

Afﬁnity

(Y)

Figure 1. Conceptual representation capturing the 

conditional nature of the mechanisms by which duration 

influences perceived affinity. 

in 

identified 

such  as  body 

text-based  CMC.  Non-verbal 
language, 

and 
unavailable 
facial 
paralinguistic  cues 
expression, and vocal tone are all missing. This deficit, it is 
often  argued,  sets  up  a  rather  pernicious  environment  for 
effective  interpersonal  exchange.  While  older  theories 
suggested  that  relational  development  is  impeded  in  text-
based  environments  [6],  an  emerging  consensus  suggests 
that  speakers  simply  take  more  time  [51]  and  rely  on  a 
different set of cues [28,50] to achieve similar outcomes to 
those in face-to-face environments. Furthermore, patterns of 
linguistic  convergence  have  been 
in  both 
laboratory  settings  [e.g.,  42]  as  well  as  large-scale  online 
environments such as Twitter [7] and Wikipedia pages [8]. 
The Role of Time, CMC Cues and Reciprocity 
The  social  information  processing  (SIP)  model  provides 
guidance  for  understanding  how  relational  development  is 
possible  in  text-based  CMC  [47].  The  SIP  model  was 
originally developed as a critique of earlier deficit theories 
(e.g., [6,29]) and it aimed to account for the proliferation of 
field  data  suggesting  that  users  of  text-based  CMC  were 
able to develop rich and lasting interpersonal relationships. 
The  model  has  been  widely  applied  to  help  explain  a 
number  of  phenomena  in  CSCW  and  social  computing 
including recent work on how non-native speakers interpret 
emotion  in  text  [18],  how  Twitter  users  choose  whom  to 
follow  [22],  and  how  users  choose  media  to  develop 
relationships [40] or deal with conflicts [43], among others. 
Two factors are particularly salient for relational formation 
in text-based CMC according to SIP theory. The first is that 
an appropriate amount of time is needed for the exchange 
of messages [47]. SIP posits that relational development in 
CMC  takes  longer  than  in  face-to-face,  and  suggests  this 
may  be  due  to  the  lower  time  density  of  cues  in  CMC, 
which  makes  the  transmission  of  affective  information 
slower [49, p.535]. Utz [45] expanded this notion to suggest 
that it is the number of nonverbal cues transmitted per unit 
time  that  ultimately  influences  interpersonal  development, 
and  her  correlational  research  suggests  that  both  time  and 
cue  usage  are  associated  with  friendship  development 
within  a  single  text-based  CMC  environment  [45].  The 
notion  that  time  is  an  important  factor  has  been  further 
supported in work on trust in text-based environments [42], 
where  the  evidence  suggests  pairs  can  achieve  equivalent 

levels to face-to-face environments; it simply takes longer 
to achieve [51]. 
Second, SIP posits that users adapt and develop new ways 
to  express  relational  information,  and  in  doing  so  it 
elaborates a richer view of verbal and non-verbal cues than 
other  theories.  Deficit  theories  tend  to  treat  text-based 
exchanges  as  a  simple  collection  of  alpha-numeric 
characters and little more. The SIP model suggests that non-
verbal  cues  from  a  face-to-face  environment  can  be 
replaced by new cues unique to the technology [50], what 
have come to be called CMC cues [26]. These CMC cues 
can  be  chronemic  cues  [27,28,50]  that  capture  the  time-
related  aspects  of  messages  such  as  response  latencies  or 
the time of day when a message was sent, or paralinguistic 
cues [3,25,26] that include the creative use of punctuation 
and  capitalization,  emoticons  (“:-)”),  elongated 
letter 
repetitions (“wheeee”), or kinesic surrogates (“<grin>”). 
Researchers  have  also  highlighted  the  role  of  higher-level 
discourse strategies as they relate to relational development 
in text-based CMC. One such dialogue pattern is reciprocity 
– the extent to which conversational pairs converge in their
use of words or sets of conventions and norms. Reciprocity 
can  take  many  forms,  including  linguistic  style  matching
[14] or similarities based on semantic, syntactic, or stylistic 
properties  of  the  dialogue  [41,42].  It  can  also  vary  in 
granularity from semantic word clusters to individual words 
to  the  timing  of  individual  characters.  In  this  paper  we 
examine  reciprocity  by  looking  for  similar  use  in  sets  of 
cues as opposed to exact cue matching. Studies have shown 
that these adaptations, in the aggregate, are correlated with 
outcomes  such  as  increased  group  cohesiveness  and  trust 
[14,42].  While  the  particular  forms  of  these  adaptations 
vary (for a review see [44]), they all rely on the ability of 
the partner to see the conversations1. 
Toward an Integrated Model 
While  prior  work  has  identified  the  relationship  among 
many pairs of variables, our research aims to integrate these 
separate  findings  into  a  unified  and  integrated  process
model.  Figure  1  presents  the  conceptual  model  under 
investigation that links together notions of time (duration), 
cue  usage  (partner  cues)  and  cue  visibility  (via  cue 
removal)  to  better  reveal  both  when  and  how  perceived 
affinity  develops 
text-based  CMC.  Our  analytical 
approach  is  based  on  conditional  process  analysis  [20], 
which  integrates  mediation  and  moderation  analyses  to 
unveil  the  causal  and  dependent  relations  among  the 
variables in the conceptual path model. 
To  review,  prior  work  has  shown  time  to  be  an  important 
factor  that  enables  positive  social  outcomes  in  text-based 
CMC  environments  [e.g.,  45,51].  This  relationship  is 

in 

1 It should be noted that the degree to which conversational partners need
to  be  cognizant  of  these  patterns  is  an  active  research  area  in  the 
psycholinguistics discipline and the subject of considerable debate. 

571

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

H2a: Pairs that converse in the long duration condition will 
produce a greater number of cues than those that converse 
in the short duration condition (i.e., (cid:3)→(cid:1)). 
H2b:  Pairs  that  produce  a  greater  number  of  cues  will 
exhibit higher perceived affinity ratings (i.e., (cid:1)→(cid:4)). 
If CMC cues are indeed a mechanism through which pairs 
establish positive social outcomes, then we should expect to 
see that conversational duration has an indirect influence on 
perceived  affinity 
through  cue  production.  However, 
visibility is important for both impression formation as well 
as reciprocity. Therefore, we expect this relationship to be 
conditional  on  whether  or  not  the  pairs  can  see  one 
another’s  cues.  In  other  words,  it  is  not  simply  the 
production of cues per se, but rather that both partners can 
see the cues, form impressions, and have the opportunity to 
reciprocate that matters. If this is the case, then we should 
expect:  
H3: Conversational duration will lead to higher perceived 
affinity through the indirect path of cue generation, but only 
when those cues are visible to the partner (i.e., an indirect 
effect of (cid:3)→(cid:1)→(cid:4), conditioned upon (cid:2)) 
Alternatively,  if  we  see  the  influence  of  cue  usage 
regardless  of  cue  visibility,  it  may  suggest  more  of  a 
reflection of internal state resulting from affinity (e.g., I’m 
happy  with  how  things  are  going,  so  I  produce  more 
paralinguistic cues). This is analogous to a smile serving a 
communicative function as opposed to being a reflection of 
an  internal  state  of  happiness  [30].  Another  possible 
alternative  is  that  it  is  simply  homophily  in  language  use 
and not a pair-based social language phenomenon. 
In addition to these path relations, we also explore the role 
of  reciprocity  on  the  production  of  cues  over  the  entire 
conversation  in  order  to  gain  deeper  insight  into  the 
temporal  and  partner-contingent  patterns  of  cue  use.  We 
expect  that  mutual  visibility  and  its  ability  to  support 
reciprocity  is  a  mechanism  through  which  pairs  converge 
on cue use, and therefore: 
H4:  Pairs  who  can  see  each  other’s  CMC  cues  will  use 
similar numbers of cues, while those who cannot will not. 
THE CURRENT STUDY 
To  examine  the  degree  to  which  CMC  cues  can  influence 
perceived  affinity,  and  to  better  understand  the  interactive 
processes  by  which 
this  occurs,  we  designed  an 
experimental paradigm that allowed us to manipulate real-
time transmission of CMC cues to a conversational partner. 
While  previous  research  has  experimentally  manipulated 
nonverbal  cues,  it  has  done  so  largely  through  the  use  of 
pre-constructed stimuli in a non-interactive fashion [e.g.,  

captured in Figure 1 as the direct effect from conversation 
duration 
to  perceived  affinity  ((cid:3)→(cid:4)(cid:5).  As  previously 
discussed, prior work has also revealed connections among 
important process-level constructs such as the link between 
time  and  the  production  of  CMC  cues  ((cid:3)→(cid:1)),  and  the 
relationship  between  the  presence  of  CMC  cues  and 
relational outcomes such as trust and rapport ((cid:1)→(cid:4))2. The 
link between cues and social outcomes has been shown to 
result from impression formation [27,50] that often requires 
visibility  of 
the  cues.  Furthermore,  reciprocity-based 
research  [14,42]  suggests  that  partner-specific  linguistic 
adaptations  such  as  mimicry  are  also  correlated  with 
relational  outcomes  such  as  trust  and  cohesiveness,  and 
they too rely on visibility. 
The goal of our work is to bring these previously discrete 
findings  together  under  an  integrated    model  and  to 
experimentally  identify  the  causal  path  through  which 
duration  influences  perceived  affinity.  We  propose  that 
increased duration leads to increased cue production, which 
in  turn  leads  to  increased  perceived  affinity.  However, 
when the pairs do not see the cues ((cid:2)) and therefore cannot 
form  cue-based  impressions  or  engage  in  reciprocal  cue 
usage, the mediated path through cue generation should no 
longer be effective. In other words, the indirect effect that 
duration  has  on  relational  outcomes  through  CMC  cue 
generation ((cid:3)→(cid:1)→(cid:4)) should be contingent upon the pairs 
being  able 
their  partner’s  cues.  A  key 
contribution  of  our  study  is  the  ability  to  experimentally 
manipulate whether one can see a partner’s cues during the 
conversation,  as  it  allows  us  to  examine  a  conditional 
influence  on  the  degree  to  which  cues  affect  relational 
outcomes such as perceived partner affinity. 
HYPOTHESES 
The 
thinking 
regarding the role of conversation duration, cue usage and 
cue  visibility.  Based  on  the  links  between  time  and  social 
outcomes, we might expect a direct effect whereby:  
H1: Pairs that converse in the long duration (15 minutes) 
condition will have higher perceived affinity ratings of the 
pair  than  those  that  converse  in  the  short  duration  (5 
minutes) condition (i.e., a direct effect from X→Y). 
Increased  conversational  duration  provides  more  time  to 
affiliate  and  produce  a  greater  number  of  cues,  and  prior 
literature  also  suggests  that  greater  cue  production  is 
associated  with  positive  social  outcomes.  Therefore,  we 
should also expect:  

following  hypotheses 

to  witness 

summarize  our 

                                                             
2  In  this  paper  we  only  investigate  one  of  numerous  potential  models. 
Other conversational tasks and settings may exhibit different linkages such 
as bidirectional influence when pairs or groups already know one another 
(e.g., Y→M along with M→Y). Our goal is to establish definitive causal 
relations  for  the  constructs  and  paths  discussed,  and  we  are  not  arguing 
that these are the only possible relationships that may exist. 

572

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Original message sent by 
participant A 

What participant A sees in 
their chat window 

What participant B sees in 
their chat window 

Original message sent by 
participant B 

Hey! 

- 

A: Hey! 

B: What? 

A: Hey. 

B: What?! 

- 

What?! 

this is gonna be so hard :(  

A: this is gonna be so hard :( 

A: this is gonna be so hard 

- 

- 

B: clearly shes good at that 

B: clearly shes GOOD at that 

clearly shes GOOD at that 

Table 1. Illustration showing example messages and how they looked for both the sender and receiver  

when in the condition where the CMC cues were manipulated. 

called 

the 

to 

automatically 

remove 

insights 

environment 

this  can  reveal 

 5,27,28,48,50].  While 
into 
outcomes  such  as  perceptions  of  a  message  sender,  it 
reveals  little  about  the  dynamic  processes  by  which  cues 
influence  relational  outcomes  over  time.  Our  approach 
isolates  the  effect  of  CMC  cues,  yet  retains  the  language 
and timing of naturally occurring instant-message dialogue. 
Our  study  apparatus  makes  use  of  a  customized  instant 
messaging 
Dialogue 
Experimentation  Toolkit,  or  DiET [21].  DiET  is  a  Java-
based  instant  messaging  client–server  package  specifically 
designed to manipulate conversations. We created a custom 
manipulation 
targeted 
paralinguistic cues in real time. This allowed us to perform 
experimental  manipulations  on  naturalistic  conversation 
with no perceivable delay, similar to an approach used by 
[16] in a different context. 
Using  this  customized  instant  messaging  environment,  we 
assigned  some  pairs  to  have  certain  CMC  cues3  removed 
from their conversation. For the pairs in the cues removed 
condition,  we  targeted  several  specific  paralinguistic  cues: 
emoticons,  exclamation  points,  interrobangs  (e.g.,  ?!)  and 
repeated question marks, the use of asterisks for emphasis 
(e.g., “that’s *really* great”), and words in all capital letters 
(e.g.,  “SO  ANNOYING”).  We  focused  on  these  cues 
because they are commonly used [39] and can be detected 
and  manipulated  without  significantly  influencing  the 
semantic meaning of the message. 
Messages were manipulated as follows: exclamation points 
were  replaced  with  periods,  combinations  of  consecutive 
question marks and exclamation points were replaced with 
a  single  question  mark,  asterisks  for  emphasis  and 
emoticons  were  removed,  and  words  written  in  all  capital 
letters were changed to lowercase. When developing these 
manipulations,  we  were  careful  to  minimize  any  impact 
they could have on message meaning. For example, while 
we changed any number of exclamation points to a single 
period, if the string of exclamation points contained one or 
more  question  marks,  the  entire  string  was  reduced  to  a 
question  mark.  This  is  because  a  question  mark  carries 
                                                             
3  For  the  sake  of  brevity,  when  discussing  this  study  we  use  the  term 
“CMC cues” to refer only to the cues that we manipulated rather than the 
full array of CMC cues that users may have in their repertoire. 

is 

more semantic meaning than an exclamation point. We did 
not  see  any  unexpected  shifts  in  meaning  when  we 
reviewed  the  final  transcripts  and  the  changes  that  were 
made by our system. 
To maintain the integrity of the experiment, it appeared to 
participants that their messages were transmitted intact even 
if  cues  were  removed.  In  other  words,  there  was  no 
indication to the sender that their message was being altered 
as only the receiver saw the manipulated text strings. None 
of the participants stated that they were aware that the cues 
were being removed. Table 1 presents some examples from 
the final corpus and shows what the lines in the chat history 
looked like for both the sender and receiver. 
METHOD 
Participants were randomly assigned to two-person groups 
and each group was then randomly assigned to one of four 
experimental  conditions  drawn  from  a  2  ×  2  between-
subjects  design:  The  first  factor 
the  duration  of 
conversation  (5  minutes  vs.  15  minutes),  and  the  second 
factor  is  the  cue  removal  condition  (cues  intact  vs.  cues 
removed). We determined conversation durations based on 
pilot testing, with the shorter time being near the minimum 
needed to complete the task. 
Participants 
Participants (N = 120, 71% female) were students, staff, and 
members  of  the  surrounding  community  of  a  mid-sized 
Midwestern  U.S.  university.  Their  mean  age  was  22.9 
years. Five (8.3%) of the dyads were male–male, 30 (50%) 
were  female–female,  and  25  (41.6%)  were  mixed  gender. 
Participants  did  not  know  or  see  their  partner  before  or 
during  the  study,  and  were  not  made  aware  of  their 
partner’s gender. Additionally, they were instructed not to 
divulge personal information during the conversation. 
Procedure 
The  study  took  place  in  two  physically  separate  rooms. 
Arrival times were staggered and participants arrived at two 
separate locations and were then taken individually to their 
respective  study 
rooms.  Upon  arriving,  participants 
consented  to  enrollment  and  then  completed  a  pre-chat 
demographics  questionnaire.  They  then  engaged  in  an 
instant message conversation with their partner for five or 
fifteen  minutes.  Participants  were  told  how  long  their 

573

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

conversation would be, and were given a warning when one 
minute was left so they could conclude their conversation.  
Because the goal of this study was to understand the ways 
in  which  CMC  cues  are  related  to  beliefs  regarding  pair 
affinity,  we  required  a  conversational  elicitation  task  that 
would  generate  lively  discussions.  Pairs  were  asked  to 
engage in a discussion about a moral dilemma with the aim 
of arriving at a resolution (adapted from [46]). Each partner 
was also given a potential resolution that they could argue 
for  during  the  conversation.  An  example  of  such  a  moral 
dilemma is:  

 “You  and  your  partner  have  a  mutual  friend  who  is 
engaged  to  be  married  in  two  months.  You  both  just 
learned  that  your  friend’s  fiancé  may  have  recently 
cheated  on  your  friend.  You  and  your  partner  are 
discussing what to do with this information. 
The goal of your discussion is to try to agree on what 
to do in this situation. 
For  the  purposes  of  this  discussion,  your  opinion  is 
that you need to tell your friend what you heard.” 

Other scenarios addressed whether friends should hide their 
cohabiting relationship from unsuspecting parents, and how 
to deal with the suspicion that a friend’s sibling was a thief. 
Each partner was instructed to try to convince their partner 
of their assigned position, but only one participant in each 
pair was told that they could better convince their partner to 
take their stance if their partner liked them. To that end, that 
participant  was  given  a  sheet  of  paper  with  suggested 
strategies  to  increase  liking  in  text-based  communication, 
including using the CMC cues we were manipulating: “Be 
positive!;  Use  emoticons  :);  Don’t  wait  too  long  between 
messages;  Show  how  you’re  feeling  –  ‘Vocal  surrogates’ 
like haha or uggghhh are ways to do this; Be expressive – 
feel  free  to  use  CAPS  or  *emphasis*”.  This  was  done  to 
ensure some production of cues and to permit examination 
of  reciprocity  effects,  as  our  pilot  testing  indicated  that 
some  participants  were  unsure  whether  they  were  allowed 
to use a wide variety of cues to express themselves. 
To  maintain  participants’  privacy  and  minimize  any 
potential  gender  effects,  each  participant  was  assigned  a 
unique ID number and username. The usernames were not 
English  words,  did  not  strongly  evoke  another  word,  and 
did  not  evoke  anything  gender  normative.  This  was  done 
with  a  password  generator  for  pronounceable  passwords 
such as Zorest, Pajles, and Jerigl. 
At  the  conclusion  of  the  instant  message  conversation, 
participants recorded responses for two scales that captured 
how  they  believed  their  partner  perceived  the  rapport  and 
likeability of the pair. 
Measures 
We  assessed  the  impact  of  conversation  duration  and  cue 
usage on both outcome and process measures. The primary 

rapport  and 

outcome measure, perceived affinity, was constructed from 
multi-item  response  scales  that  captured  beliefs  about  the 
relational  constructs  of 
likeability.  We 
measured  these  using  partner-based  assessments  (e.g.,  “I 
think  my  partner  believes  I  am…”)  to  better  capture 
relationship-level  dyadic  perceptions  rather  than  direct 
assessments of the other individual. 
Perceived  rapport  was  measured  using  LaFrance’s  6-item 
scale  [31].  Each  of  six  semantic  differential  items  was 
measured  on  a  7-point  bipolar  scale  (e.g.,  with  endpoints 
“out  of  step  –  in  step”  or  “incompatible  –  compatible”). 
Perceived  likeability  was  measured  using  Jones’  4-item 
scale  [23].  Each  of  four  semantic  differential  items  were 
measured  on  a  7-point  bipolar  scale  (e.g.,  with  endpoints 
“not friendly at all – very friendly” or “not understanding at 
all – very understanding”). 
Principal  component  analysis  was  used  to  assess  the 
dimensionality  of  the  questions.  The  Kaiser  criterion  was 
used  and  suggested  a  single  factor  existed.  We  therefore 
combined the rapport and likeability questions into a single 
composite index by taking the mean of all of the items from 
both of the scales. Throughout the remainder of this paper 
we  refer  to  this  variable  as  perceived  affinity,  and  it  was 
normally distributed (M = 4.74, SD = 1.07) and composed 
of highly reliable items (Cronbach’s α = .95). 
A  number  of  process  measures  were  also  computed  from 
the interaction logs. These include the total number of cues, 
the number of cues generated by each participant and their 
partner, and when the cues occurred. These measures serve 
as the basis for secondary analyses such as the reciprocity 
results described below. 
RESULTS 
Our results are presented in three stages. The first stage of 
analysis  presents  descriptive  statistics  that  capture  the 
amount  of  conversation  produced  and  provide  insight  into 
the types of CMC cues produced by the pairs. The second 
stage applies conditional process analysis [20] techniques to 
examine the moderated mediation effect of CMC cues and 
the  cue  removal  condition  (see  Figure  1).  Finally,  we 
conclude  with  an  analysis  of  reciprocal  cue  use  between 
partners,  and  a  temporal  analysis  of  when  cues  are  used 
during  the  conversations  to  glean  additional  insight  into 
when and how the pairs made use of the cues. 

 

Exclamation points 
Interrobangs and repeated 
question marks 
Emoticons 
All caps 
Emphasis 
All cues 

Cues 
Removed 
Condition 
88 
12 

Cues 
Intact 
Condition 
102 
4 

30 
25 
0 
155 

44 
14 
2 
166 

 
Total 

190 
16 

74 
39 
2 
321 

Table 2. CMC cues generated by participants. 

574

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

 
 
 

 

 
 
  Coeff. 

 

 

 

Partner Cues (M) 
t-value 
SE 

p 

Duration (X) 
Partner Cues (M) 
Cue Removal (V) 
Partner Cues × Cue 
Removal (M×V) 
Intercept 
 
 

a 
 
 
 

i1 
 

 

1.744 
--- 
--- 
--- 

-.8433 
 

.434 
--- 
--- 
--- 

.301 
 

4.02 
--- 
--- 
--- 

-2.80 
 

.0001 
--- 
--- 
--- 

.006 
 

F (1,114) = 16.18, p < .001 

 
 

 

 

  Coeff. 

c' 
b1 
b2 
b3 

i2 
 

.3605 
.1498 
.0399 
-.1627 

4.5213 
 

 

 

 

Perceived Affinity (Y) 
SE 

t-value 

p 

.2044 
.0482 
.1897 
.0820 

1.76 
3.11 
.2102 
-1.9858 

.1650 
 
F (4,111) = 3.95, p < .01 

27.4 
 

.081 
.002 
.8339 
.0495 

.0001 
 

Table 3. Model coefficients for the conditional process model presented in Figure 1 and formalized in Eqs. (1.0) and (2.0). 

Descriptive Statistics 
Sixty pairs generated a total of 23,467 words across 2,363 
lines of text chat. The duration of the conversation had the 
expected  effect  on  the  amount  of  content  produced.  The 
pairs  produced  more  words4  in  conversations  of  longer 
duration than those of shorter durations (M15-mins = 577.6 vs. 
M5-mins  =  204.7;  t(58)  =  11.23,  p  <  .001).  Yet,  the  cue 
removal  manipulation  did  not  appear  to  alter  the  overall 
amount  of  words  produced  (Mcues-removed  =  408.3  vs.  Mcues-
intact  =  373.9;  t(58)  =  0.58,  p  =  0.56).  This  is  important 
because it shows that cue removal did not artificially stifle 
conversation. 
The  pairs  also  generated  a  number  of  CMC  cues  in  the 
study.  These  include  exclamation  points,  interrobangs  and 
repeated  question  marks,  emoticons,  all  capital  usage  and 
other  emphasis  cues.  The  mean  number  of  cues  produced 
by each pair was 5.35 (with a mean of 3.33 cues in the 5-
min  condition  and  7.34  in  the  15-min  condition).  Table  2 
presents  the  number  of  cue  types  produced  broken  out  by 
their particular form. The partner in each pair that received 
the list of strategies used a mean of 3.31 cues compared to 
1.83 for those who did not. In total, 9.7% of lines included a 
CMC  cue  based  on  our  operationalization.  Of  the  1,426 
lines  generated  by  participants 
the  cue  removal 
condition,  155  cues  on  105  lines  (7.36%  of  lines)  were 
removed by our system5. 
The Contingent Effects of Duration and Cue Usage 
Conditional  process  analysis 
[20,  p.327],  or  more 
specifically moderated mediation in path analytic terms [9], 
allows  us  to  better  understand  how  time  and  cue  usage 
influence perceived affinity. It reveals the degree to which 
duration directly affects perceived affinity or whether some 
other variables—in this case the production and availability 
of  CMC  cues—appear  to  be  mechanisms  through  which 
duration  acts  upon  perceived  affinity.  We  make  use  of 
                                                             
4  The  same  pattern  of  findings  is  found  when  examining  the  number  of 
lines of chat produced for each of the various conditions. 
5 These rates tend to be in line with rates found in other natural settings. 
For example, 9.7% of English tweets contain at least one emoticon [39], 
while  our  corpus  had  3.1%  of  contributions  contain  an  emoticon,  and 
13.6%  of  lines  contain  any  of  the  cues  we  considered  (including 
exclamation points). 

in 

575

 

 

Hayes’  PROCESS  macro6  to  statistically  analyze  the 
conceptual  model  presented  in  Figure  1,  which  can  be 
formally specified with two equations: 
             M = i1 + aX + eM 
(1.0) 
             Y  = i2 + c'X + b1M + b2V + b3MV + eY   (2.0) 
The results7 of the model are presented in Table 3.  
When  investigating  H1,  we  start  by  seeing  an  effect  of 
duration  on  perceived  affinity,  t(118)  =  2.20,  p  =  .029. 
However, when controlling for the indirect effect of partner 
cues  the  remaining  direct  effect  of  duration  on  perceived 
affinity is no longer significantly different from zero (c' = 
.3605,  p  =  .081).  This  supports  the  idea  that  partner  cues 
resulting  from  duration,  and  not  conversation  duration 
itself, is the mechanism that drives perceived affinity8. 
Further  examination  of 
that 
the  results  demonstrates 
conversation duration leads to greater production of partner 
cues (a  = 1.744, p < .0001), in support of H2a. In addition, 
an  increase  in  partner  cues  also  leads  to  higher  ratings  of 
perceived affinity (b1  = .1498, p = .002), in support of H2b. 
However,  this  relationship  depends  on  whether  or  not  the 
cues were removed. The effect of partner cues on perceived 
affinity is contingent upon whether or not they are removed 
and therefore visible by the partner. This can be seen in the 
partner  cues  ×  cue  removal  interaction  (b3  =  -.1627,    p  = 
.0495), in support of H3. 
Calculating  the  conditional  indirect  effects  of  duration  on 
perceived affinity reveals a more detailed understanding of 
                                                             
6  Readers  may  be  familiar  with  the  related  “causal  steps  approach”  of 
Baron  &  Kenny  [1]  and  we  find  a  similar  pattern  of  results  using  this 
approach; however, the causal steps approach has been challenged due to 
its  low  power  and  lack  of  direct  statistical  inferences  regarding  the 
mediating path [10,19,35]. 
7 While the parameters in the final model are correlated to an extent, they 
did  not  exhibit  multicollinearity  at  a  problematic  level.  The  Variance 
Inflation Factors (VIFs) were < 1.25 for all of the final model parameters. 
This is considered well within the range of acceptable practice. 
8 It should be noted that the remaining direct effect approaches statistical 
significance  (p  =  .081).  While  a  significant  finding  here  would  not 
invalidate  any  claims  made  in  this  paper,  it  would  suggest  that  partial 
mediation  may  be  occurring  and  that  duration  itself  may  also  have  a 
significant impact on the dependent variable. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

find 

support 

statistical 

the  partner  cues  ×  cue  removal  interaction.  The  indirect 
influence  of  partner  cues  on  perceived  affinity  remains 
significant and positive when the cues are intact and visible 
to  the  partner  (.2614  with  95%  bootstrapped  CI’s  [.1030, 
.5065]),  but  it  appears  to  have  no  effect  when  cues  are 
removed  (-.0225  with  95%  CI  [-.3357, 
.2247]);  the 
difference  between  these  conditional  indirect  effects  is 
significant (-.2838 with 95% CI [-.7039, -.0166]). 
In  other  words,  we 
that 
conversational  duration  yields  more  cues,  and  those  cues 
lead to greater perceived affinity, but only when the partner 
can see them. This latter point is particularly important as it 
suggests  that  the  visible  presence  of  cues  are  a  causal 
mechanism,  whereas  prior  literature  has  not  definitively 
demonstrated  either  the  causal  effect  of  increased  cues  on 
affinity or the causal effect of greater affinity on cue usage. 
We  demonstrate  the  former,  but  this  does  not  necessarily 
preclude the latter. 
By  showing  that  cues  are  a  mechanism  through  which 
added time can lead to greater positive social outcomes, we 
provide  evidence  for  the  notion  that  time  plays  a  critical 
role in how people form positive beliefs regarding affinity 
in our task setting, and that cues appear to be a mechanism 
through which this is achieved. 
Social and Paralinguistic Processes 
In addition to establishing the role that CMC cues play in 
developing  perceived  affinity,  it  is  also  important  to 
examine  how  and  when  cues  are  used.  One  important 
question centers on whether cue use takes place in isolation, 
or whether partners converge on a set of expected behaviors 
during  a  conversation.  An  advantage  of  using  natural 
conversations is the ability to test whether a feedback loop 
of  cue  use  is  present.  Previous  work  [14,42]  has  found 
correlations between partner cue use, but here we are able 
to  demonstrate  that  the  number  of  cues  a  participant  uses 
not only depends on how many cues their partner uses, but 
also whether or not they can see those cues. In other words, 
it is not just a result of similarity in general language use. 
To investigate the degree of cue reciprocity occurring, for 
each pair we predicted one partner’s cue use based on the 
other’s. We employed a Poisson regression approach where 
the  response  (Y)  has  a  Poisson  distribution,  and  we  apply 
generalized linear modeling with a log link function (ln(μi)), 
since  cue  usage  exhibits  a  distributional  form  typical  of 
count data. The model can be formally specified as follows: 

logY = i1 + b1X1 + b2X2 + b3X1X2 + eY   (3.0) 

The  model  included  partner  total  cue  use  (X1),  a  binary 
indicator  variable  for  cue  removal  condition  (X2),  and  an 
interaction  of  the  two  terms  (X1,  X2).  The  resulting 
coefficient can be interpreted as the impact of a unit change 
in the predictor on the difference in the log of the expected 
count of one’s own cue usage. 

576

(cid:1)

(cid:9)
(cid:6)
(cid:11)
(cid:2)
(cid:7)
(cid:12)
(cid:3)
(cid:1)
(cid:9)
(cid:13)
(cid:6)
(cid:7)
(cid:3)

Y

10

8

6

4

2

(cid:2)(cid:14)(cid:8)(cid:12)(cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:10)(cid:13)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:13)

 

 

6

 

 

 

 

 

 

4

partner-totalcues

 

 

 

 
0

 

 

2

 

 

 

 

 

 

10

8

Y

6

4

2

8

10

(cid:2)(cid:14)(cid:8)(cid:12)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:11)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:7)

       

       

0

      

      

  

  

    

    

2

   

   

4

 

 

   

   

 

 

6

 

8

(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:8)(cid:10)(cid:7)(cid:6)(cid:8)(cid:13)(cid:9)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:11)(cid:6)(cid:9)

partner-totalcues

10

 

Figure 2. Partner cues influence one’s own cue uses, but only 

when the cues are intact and can be seen. The left panel 

presents the regression line and 95% CI’s when the cues were 
left intact, and the  right panel presents the regression line and 

95% CIs when the cues were removed. 

We find a significant relationship between partner cues and 
one’s  own  cues  (b1  =  0.087,  p  <  .012),  but  this  is  driven 
primarily  by  the  reciprocity  exhibited  in  the  cues  intact 
condition,  as  seen  in  the  significant  interaction  between 
partner cues and cue manipulation (b3 = 0.072, p < 0.029). 
The interaction is illustrated in Figure 2. This graph shows 
that the number of cues someone uses depends on whether 
they can see their partner’s cues. In other words, reciprocity 
appears  to  play  a  primary  role  in  determining  cue  use 
patterns  within  our  pairs.  This  is  in  support  of  H4:  users 
who can see each other’s cues use similar numbers of cues, 
but there is no relationship between partners’ cue use when 
they are unable to see each other’s cues. 
This  interaction  between  cue  reciprocity  and  the  cue 
removal  condition  suggests  a  kind  of  conversation-level 
entrainment  or  style-matching.  If  this  is  taking  place,  we 
would also expect to see that pairs whose cues are not being 
manipulated  will  be  more  likely  to  continue  using  cues 
throughout  a  conversation,  while  those  whose  cues  are 
being removed will have their cue use largely confined to 
the beginning of their conversations, before the norms have 
been entrenched. 
A  histogram  of  the  temporal  distribution  of  cue  use  is 
shown  in  Figure  3.  The  horizontal  axis  is  the  time  into  a 
conversation,  as  a  fraction  of  the  total  length  of  the 
conversation (in lines). The top figure shows that, when a 
conversation’s  cues  are  left  intact,  cues  seem  to  be  used 
more  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  conversation  – 
essentially during greetings and signoffs. The bottom figure 
shows the same distribution when cues are removed. Here 
the number of cues starts off similarly high, but levels off at 
a  low  rate  that  stays  relatively  constant  though  the  rest  of 
the  conversation,  with  a  much  smaller  uptick  toward  the 
end.  These  patterns  are  partially  confirmed  using  χ2  tests 
that  reveal  little  difference  in  the  beginning  third  of  the 
distributions (χ2 (1, N = 274) = 0.068, p = 0.81), while the 
latter third of the distributions appear to be different at the 
trend level (χ2 (1, N = 274) = 3.33, p = 0.056). This further 
suggests some degree of reciprocity may be involved when 
people are crafting messages that include CMC cues. 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Cue distribution by line position (cues not removed)

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Line position

Cue distribution by line position (cues removed)

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

0
3

0
2

0
1

0

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

0
3

0
2

0
1

0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Line position

 

Figure 3. CMC cue distributions (normalized over different 

conversation lengths). 

DISCUSSION 
In this paper we set out to establish the relationship between 
time, CMC cues, and perceived affinity, and integrate these 
findings into a more comprehensive model that captures the 
processes, mechanisms and conditions under which each of 
these  factors  operate.  As  previously  discussed,  prior  work 
has  shown  time  to  be  an  important  variable  related  to 
positive  social  outcomes  in  text-based  environments,  links 
have been drawn between time and the production of cues, 
and  cue  usage  has  been  correlated  to  important  social 
outcomes such as rapport. However, prior work falls short 
of  describing  how  these  variables  interoperate  and  as  a 
result we are left with a fragmented theoretical picture that 
does not capture the contingent relations among the various 
variables.  The 
richer  process-oriented  understanding 
developed  here  also  provides  deeper  insight  into  the  ways 
in  which  these  findings  can  be  applied  to  technological 
systems. 
Theoretical Implications 
We find that conversation duration appears, at first glance, 
to have an effect on perceived affinity: more time facilitates 
better  social  outcomes.  However,  our  results  go  beyond 
demonstrating  the  existence  of  this  effect  to  uncover  the 
conditions  under  which  it  operates,  as  well  as  expose  the 
boundaries  and  limits  of  those  conditions.  An  important 
point to highlight is our finding that the effect of duration, 
which in the past has been trumpeted as a primary driver of 
positive social outcomes, does not appear to have a direct 
effect  upon  perceived  affinity.  Instead,  its  effectiveness 
appears  to  come  from  enabling  conversational  strategies 
that  are  more  directly  related  to  relational  outcomes.  In 
other words, it is not simply a matter of time. 
The  number  of  CMC  cues  that  a  participant’s  partner 
produces  mediates  the  effect  of  duration  on  perceived 
affinity. Put another way, in this study we show that longer 
conversations  yield  more  partner  cues,  and  more  partner 
cues  yield  greater  perceived  affinity.  This  indirect  effect, 

577

however,  is  conditional:  It  depends  upon  the  pairs  being 
able  to  see  the  cues.  When  we  experimentally  remove  the 
ability  of  pairs  to  see  their  partners’  cues,  the  effect 
disappears altogether.  
The  fact  that  the  partner  needs  to  see  the  cues  is  an 
important  piece  of  causal  evidence  in  support  of  the  idea 
that  CMC  cues  themselves  can  directly  influence  one’s 
perception of important social outcomes such as likeability 
and rapport. Prior approaches examining cue generation in 
natural  dialogue  have  not  been  able  to  exclude  reverse 
causality.  For  example,  Scissors  et  al.  [42]  point  out  that, 
based on their findings and methodology, they were unable 
to  say  whether  the  use  of  CMC  cues  influences  positive 
social  outcomes,  or  whether  positive  social  outcomes  lead 
to more cues. While we do not rule out that affinity can lead 
to  increased  cue  usage  (i.e.,  there  may  still  exist  a  bi-
directional  relationship),  we  definitively  demonstrate  that 
increased  and  visible  cue  usage  mediates  the  effect  of 
duration  on  perceived  affinity.  This 
is  because  our 
methodology  allows  us  to  turn  off  specific  dialogue 
behaviors and observe the causal impact that doing so has 
on social outcomes. With our approach we can disentangle 
the direction of the relationship between cues and perceived 
affinity  and  show  that,  at  least  in  this  context,  visible  cue 
usage  influences  perceived  affinity.  The  relationship  may, 
in hindsight, appear unsurprising; but demonstrating causal 
direction is a novel and important contribution to theory. 
The  implications  of  visibility  and  the  role  of  reciprocity 
also merit discussion. Recall that we find that an increase in 
partner  cues  yields  increased  ratings  of  perceived  affinity; 
however,  when  those  cues  are  not  visible  due  to  the  cue 
removal condition, an increase in partner cues is no longer 
effective.  From  the  perspective  of  impression  formation, 
this  makes  sense,  as  we  need  to  “see”  what  was  said  in 
order for the cues to influence our impressions. Reciprocity 
effects,  however,  pose  a  slightly  more  complex  challenge. 
Seeing a partner reciprocate one’s own use of cues can be 
perceived  as  an  indicator  of  affinity.  Alternatively,  a 
participant  that  produces  their  own  cues  and  does  not  see 
them  reciprocated  may  form  a  negative 
impression. 
Unfortunately, our analytical approach does not specifically 
include these dyadic contingencies and therefore we cannot 
say with certainty how reciprocity plays a direct role upon 
perceived  affinity.  However,  we  present  evidence  of 
reciprocal  cue  production  when  the  cues  are  visually 
available, and this suggests that reciprocity plays some role. 
Disentangling this relationship requires additional studies. 
We  also  examined  the  temporal  aspects  of  cue  use  within 
conversations. It is interesting to note that while reciprocity 
appears to be driving much of the cue use (or lack thereof) 
within the pairs, their social function occurred in large part 
during  greetings  and  sign-offs.  It  has  been  suggested  that 
emoticons  may  serve  as  a  form  of  phatic  communication; 
that is, they serve a social function rather than contain much 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

content  [48].  Our  data  corroborate  this:  the  following 
contains numerous cues, but is nearly devoid of content: 

Mavagl:   Hello! 
Ralect:   Hi! 
Mavagl:   How was your day? 
Ralect:   So far, so good 
Ralect:   yours? 
Mavagl:   I'm glad :). Mine was good as well! 

In this example, we can see the extent to which cues are a 
part  of  ritualized  communication  because  this  particular 
pair  is  unable  to  see  each  other’s  cues,  yet  they  both  use 
them  to  open  their  conversation.  This  is  despite  the  more 
general trend of cue use being reciprocal. While we do not 
investigate phatic communication in depth in this work, we 
feel it is a potentially rich area for future work that aims to 
focus on the temporal aspects of cue usage [cf. 33,37,38]. 
Finally,  it  is  worth  mention  that  our  manipulation  only 
removed a small subset of cues; yet, even with removal of 
only  a  small  subset  of  cues  we  were  still  able  to 
demonstrate  their  mediating  role.  In  this  regard  the 
manipulation  demonstrates  strong  causal  efficacy.  Even 
more surprising is that these effects exist despite allowing 
word  choice,  verbal  content,  the  timing  of  the  exchanges, 
and other properties of the discourse to remain intact. That 
being said, verbal content and word choice are quite likely 
to play an influential role – and previous work [48] suggests 
that  some  affective  verbal  content  can  overwhelm  the 
influence of certain CMC cues. So while a cue may serve to 
heighten  a  given  expression,  the  use  of  a  superlative  may 
have even greater impact. Our results rely on assumptions 
of similar verbal content, while it is likely that both content 
and  cue  usage  would  change  in  tandem  during  natural 
dialogue. This aspect of the work merits further exploration. 
Practical Implications 
The SIP model contends that communication media that can 
transmit a higher quantity of cues per time should facilitate 
relationship  development  in  less  time,  and  work  by  Utz 
[45],  in  concert  with  our  findings,  extend  this  idea  to 
relationship  development 
in  a  single  communication 
technology.  Our  analysis  shows  that  cues  can  lead  to 
positive  perceptions  regarding  social  outcomes.  Taken  in 
isolation  from  our  other  findings,  this  suggests  that  text-
based technologies that allow for higher cue density may be 
better suited to enabling relationship formation.  
From a design perspective, it is important to know whether 
nonverbal  cues  in  CMC  are  primarily  useful  to  help  form 
relationships,  or  whether  they  are  useful  to  maintain  and 
strengthen existing ones. In our work, even in the short time 
in the laboratory, we found that cue use was associated with 
the formation of positive impressions regarding pair affinity 
for  individuals  that  do  not  know  one  another.  Thus,  our 
findings  are  potentially  important  for  systems  that  aim  to 
support  text-based  relational  development  on  important 
social, relational and group outcomes (e.g., team assembly 
and new group formation, online dating, etc.). 

578

Another  practical  application  a  richer  understanding  of 
nonverbal cues in text-based communication can provide is 
in  automated  chat  agents.  Many  industries  have  begun 
using  automated  chat  agents  as  part  of  their  customer 
support chains. The ability of such agents to establish and 
maintain high levels of sociability can have a direct impact 
on companies and customers alike. Certain behaviors, like 
limiting the use of paralinguistic cues to the beginning and 
ends  of  conversations,  and  using  them  at  a  rate  and  in  a 
contingent fashion similar to that of the human interlocutor, 
may help make the automated agent easier to get along with 
or  feel  more  humanlike.  Such  an  agent  could  also  have  a 
richer  computational  model  that  would  enable  it  to  better 
interpret the state of a conversation. 
FUTURE WORK AND LIMITATIONS 
There  are  a  number  of  important  limitations  and  avenues 
for future research. First, when examining the role of cues, 
we were only able to manipulate them in one way: removal. 
It would be interesting to investigate the effects of adding 
cues,  as  well.  This  presents  challenges,  however,  because 
while  we  did  remove  cues,  we  did  our  best  to  retain  all 
semantic  meaning.  For  example,  while  an  exclamation 
point became a period, a group of mixed exclamation points 
and question marks became a single question mark, thereby 
interrogative  nature  of 
retaining 
the  sentence. 
the 
Algorithmically 
inserting  CMC  cues  while  retaining 
semantic meaning is a much more challenging proposition. 
Second, we suspect that, as a laboratory study in which the 
conversation topic is given, participants may have been less 
willing  to  fully  exploit  the  affordances  of  text-based 
communication.  This  may  have  pushed  cue  use  and 
perceived  affinity  outcomes  down. 
to 
considering broader deployments and different contexts of 
use,  future  work  should  try  to  replicate  our  results  among 
other  populations  and  with  other  task  types.  Many  of  the 
participants in our study were associated with a university, 
which  means  that  they  skewed  younger  and  female.  This 
population  is  known  to  use  CMC  differently  than  other 
groups [52]. In order to make more generalizable claims, a 
sample  that  is  more  representative  of  all  CMC  users  is 
needed.  Another  promising  future  direction  would  be  to 
integrate  richer  models  of  paralinguistic  cue  usage  into 
models 
that 
relational 
development 
large-scale  online 
communities and environments [e.g., 11,24]. 
Third,  the  tasks  used  in  this  study  contained  emotional 
content and asked participants to be persuasive. Because we 
chose a task with high emotional content, it is possible that 
the topic may have exposed more CMC cues than would be 
expected  in  a  less  emotional  conversation.  This  was 
partially  by  design,  as  we  wanted  a  strong  experimental 
manipulation, but may have introduced a bias that makes it 
harder  to  generalize  to  CMC  use  in  general.  Similarly, 
persuasion  may  have 
induced  certain  conversational 
strategies  beyond  what  would  have  naturally  been 

longer-term 
in 

In  addition 

that 

takes  place 

examine 

the 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

employed.  Whether  or  not  the  interpersonal  dynamics  in 
this study differ from those in other types of conversations 
is left to future work. 
Finally, it is important to keep in mind that this is simply 
one  experiment  and  one  way  of  specifying  a  potential 
model. The study was designed to help identify the causal 
path  through  which  duration  influences  perceived  affinity. 
The  finding  that  visible  cue  usage  plays  a  mediating  role 
does  not  preclude  the  fact  that  as  affinity  grows  it  could 
also  influence  cue  usage.  In  other  words,  demonstrating 
causality  in  one  direction  does  not  necessarily  mean 
causality  does  not  occur  in  the  other  direction  as  well.  In 
fact,  it  is  quite  likely  that  in  other  conversational  settings, 
task environments, etc. a bi-directional influence may exist. 
Uncovering  this,  however,  will  require  new  experimental 
techniques and additional studies. 
CONCLUSION 
The  contributions  of  this  work  are  three-fold.  First,  we 
make use of conditional process analysis to elaborate some 
mechanisms  by  which  duration  and  cue  usage  effects 
operate.  Second,  we  demonstrate  that  social  reciprocity 
likely plays a role: seeing cues influences someone to use 
them  themself.  Finally,  we  offer  a  novel  experimental 
paradigm in which CMC cues are manipulated in order to 
make stronger causal claims about the role of CMC cues in 
text-based social interaction. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We thank the reviewers for their insightful feedback on this 
work.  We  also  thank  Danielle  Pierre  and  Allison  Ho  for 
their assistance with data collection, and Yoram Kalman for 
his helpful discussions of the work. This work was funded 
by National Science Foundation grant #0953943.  
REFERENCES 
1.  Reuben M. Baron and David A. Kenny. 1986. The 
moderator–mediator variable distinction in social 
psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and 
statistical considerations. Journal of personality and 
social psychology 51, 6, 1173. 
Jeremy Birnholtz, Jamie Guillory, Jeff Hancock, and 
Natalya Bazarova. 2010. “on my way”: Deceptive 
Texting and Interpersonal Awareness Narratives. 
Proceedings of CSCW ’10, 1-4. 

2. 

3.  Samuel Brody and Nicholas Diakopoulos. 2011. 

Cooooooooooooooollllllllllllll‼‼‼‼‼‼‼: Using word 
lengthening to detect sentiment in microblogs. 
Proceedings of EMNLP ’11, 562–570. 

4.  Moira Burke and Robert E. Kraut. 2014. Growing 
closer on Facebook. Proceedings of CHI ’14, 4187–
4196. 

5.  Kristen Byron and David C. Baldridge. 2007. E-Mail 
Recipients’ Impressions of Senders’ Likability: The 
Interactive Effect of Nonverbal Cues and Recipients’ 
Personality. Journal of Business Communication 44, 2, 
137–160. 

579

6.  Richard L. Daft and Robert H. Lengel. 1984. 

Information richness: a new approach to managerial 
behavior and organizational design. Research in 
Organizational Behavior 6, 191–233. 

7.  Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Michael Gamon, 

and Susan Dumais. 2011. Mark my words!: Linguistic 
style accommodation in social media. Proceedings of 
WWW '11, 745–754. 

8.  Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Lillian Lee, Bo 
Pang, and Jon Kleinberg. 2012. Echoes of power: 
Language effects and power differences in social 
interaction. Proceedings of WWW '12, 699–708. 
Jeffrey R. Edwards and Lisa S. Lambert. 2007. 
Methods for integrating moderation and mediation: A 
general analytical framework using moderated path 
analysis. Psychological Methods 12, 1, 1–22. 

9. 

10.  Matthew S. Fritz and David P. Mackinnon. 2007. 

Required sample size to detect the mediated effect. 
Psychological Science 18, 3, 233–239. 

11.  Eric Gilbert and Karrie Karahalios. 2009. Predicting tie 

strength with social media. Proceedings of CHI '09, 
211–220. 

12.  Howard Giles, Justine Coupland, and Nikolas 

Coupland (eds.). 1991. Contexts of Accommodation. 
Cambridge University Press. 

13.  Alastair J. Gill, Robert M. French, Darren Gergle, and 

Jon Oberlander. 2008. The Language of Emotion in 
Short Blog Texts. Proceedings of CSCW '08, 299–302. 

14.  Amy L. Gonzales, Jeff Hancock, and James W. 

Pennebaker. 2010. Language Style Matching as a 
Predictor of Social Dynamics in Small Groups. 
Communication Research 37, 1, 3–19. 

15.  Rosanna E. Guadagno and Robert B. Cialdini. 2005. 

Online persuasion and compliance: Social influence on 
the Internet and beyond. In The social net: The social 
psychology of the Internet, Yair Amichai-Hamburger 
(ed.). Oxford University Press, New York, 91–113. 

16.  Joshua Hailpern, Marina Danilevsky, Andrew Harris, 
Karrie Karahalios, Gary Dell, and Julie Hengst. 2011. 
ACES: Promoting Empathy Towards Aphasia Through 
Language Distortion Emulation Software. Proceedings 
of CHI '11,  609-618. 

17.  Jeff Hancock, Jeremy Birnholtz, Natalya Bazarova, 

Jamie Guillory, Josh Perlin, and Barrett Amos. 2009. 
Butler lies: Awareness, deception and design. 
Proceedings of CHI '09, 517–526. 

18.  Ari M.J. Hautasaari, Naomi Yamashita, and Ge Gao. 

2014. “Maybe it was a joke”: Emotion detection in 
text-only communication by non-native English 
speakers. Proceedings of CHI '14, 3715–3724. 

19.  Andrew F. Hayes. 2009. Beyond Baron and Kenny: 

Statistical Mediation Analysis in the New Millennium. 
Communication Monographs 76, 4, 408–420. 

20.  Andrew F. Hayes. 2013. Introduction to Mediation, 

Moderation, and Conditional Process Analysis. 
Guilford Press. 

21.  Patrick G.T. Healey and Gregory J. Mills. 2008. A 

Dialogue Experimentation Toolkit. Language, 
Cognition, Culture. 

22.  C.J. Hutto, Sarita Yardi, and Eric Gilbert. 2013. A 
longitudinal study of follow predictors on twitter. 
Proceedings of CHI '13, 821–830. 

23.  Eli Jones, Jesse N. Moore, Andrea J. S. Stanaland, and 

Rosalind A.J. Wyatt. 1998. Salesperson Race and 
Gender and the Access and Legitimacy Paradigm: 
Does Difference Make a Difference? The Journal of 
Personal Selling and Sales Management 18, 4, 71–88. 

24.  Jason J. Jones, Jaime E. Settle, Robert M. Bond, 

Christopher J. Fariss, Cameron Marlow, and James H. 
Fowler. 2013. Inferring Tie Strength from Online 
Directed Behavior. PLoS ONE 8, 1, e52168. 

25.  Yoram M. Kalman and Darren Gergle. 2010. CMC 

Cues Enrich Lean Online Communication: The Case of 
Letter and Punctuation Mark Repetitions. Proceedings 
of MCIS '10. 

26.  Yoram M. Kalman and Darren Gergle. 2014. Letter 
repetitions in computer-mediated communication: A 
unique link between spoken and online language. 
Computers in Human Behavior 34, 187–193. 

27.  Yoram M. Kalman and Sheizaf Rafaeli. 2011. Online 
pauses and silence: Chronemic expectancy violations 
in written computer-mediated communication. 
Communication Research 38, 1, 54–69. 

28.  Yoram M. Kalman, Lauren E. Scissors, Alastair J. Gill, 

and Darren Gergle. 2013. Online chronemics convey 
social information. Computers in Human Behavior 29, 
3, 1260–1269.  

29.  Sara Kiesler and Lee Sproull. 1992. Group decision 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

handbook of research methods in psychology, Vol 2: 
Research designs: Quantitative, qualitative, 
neuropsychological, and biological, H. Cooper, P.M. 
Camic, D.L. Long, A.T. Panter, D. Rindskopf and K.J. 
Sher (eds.). American Psychological Association, 313–
331. 

36.  David R. Millen and John F. Patterson. 2002. 

Stimulating Social Engagement in a Community 
Network. Proceedings of CSCW '02, 306–313. 

37.  Sean Rintel and Jeffery Pittam. 1997. Strangers in a 

strange land: Interaction management on Internet 
Relay Chat. Human Communication Research 23, 4, 
507–534. 

38.  Michael Schandorf. 2012. Mediated gesture: 
Paralinguistic communication and phatic text. 
Convergence: The International Journal of Research 
into New Media Technologies, 19, 3, 319-344. 

39.  Tyler Schnoebelen. 2012. Emotions Are Relational: 

Positioning and the Use of Affective Linguistic 
Resources. Dissertation at Stanford University. 

40.  Lauren E. Scissors and Darren Gergle. 2013. “Back 
and Forth, Back and Forth”: Channel Switching in 
Romantic Couple Conflict. Proceedings of CSCW '13, 
237–248. 

41.  Lauren E. Scissors, Alastair J. Gill, and Darren Gergle. 
2008. Linguistic mimicry and trust in text-based CMC. 
Proceedings of CSCW '08, 277–280.  

42.  Lauren E. Scissors, Alastair J. Gill, Kathleen Geraghty, 
and Darren Gergle. 2009. In CMC We Trust: The Role 
of Similarity. Proceedings of CHI '09, 527–536.  
43.  Lauren E. Scissors, Michael E. Roloff, and Darren 
Gergle. 2014. Room for Interpretation: The Role of 
Self-esteem and CMC in Romantic Couple Conflict. 
Proceedings of CHI '14, 3953–3962. 

44.  Catalina L. Toma. 2014. Towards Conceptual 

Convergence: An Examination of Interpersonal 
Adaptation. Communication Quarterly 62, 2, 155–178. 

45.  Sonja Utz. 2000. Social Information Processing in 
MUDs: The Development of Friendships in Virtual 
Worlds. Journal of Online Behavior 1. 

46.  Joseph B. Walther, Tracy Loh, and Laura Granka. 
2005. Let Me Count the Ways: The Interchange of 
Verbal and Nonverbal Cues in Computer-Mediated 
and Face-to-Face Affinity. Journal of Language and 
Social Psychology 24, 1, 36–65. 

47.  Joseph B. Walther. 1992. Interpersonal Effects in 

Computer-Mediated Interaction A Relational 
Perspective. Communication Research 19, 1, 52–90. 
48.  Joseph B. Walther and Kyle P. D’Addario. 2001. The 

Impacts of Emoticons on Message Interpretation in 
Computer-Mediated Communication. Social Science 
Computer Review 19, 3, 324–347. 

49.  Joseph B. Walther and Malcolm R. Parks. 2002. Cues 

Filtered Out, Cues Filtered In. In Handbook of 
interpersonal communication, M.L. Knapp and J.A. 
Daly (eds.). 529–563. 

580

making and communication technology. 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes 52, 1, 96–123. 

30.  Robert E. Kraut and Robert E. Johnston. 1979. Social 

and emotional messages of smiling: An ethological 
approach. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology 37, 9, 1539–1553.  

31.  Marianne LaFrance. 1979. Nonverbal Synchrony and 
Rapport: Analysis by the Cross-Lag Panel Technique. 
Social Psychology Quarterly 42, 1, 66–70. 

32.  Gilly Leshed and Jofish Kaye. 2006. Understanding 

How Bloggers Feel: Recognizing Affect in Blog Posts. 
Proceedings of CHI ’06, 1019-1024. 

33.  Christian Licoppe and Zbigniew Smoreda. 2005. Are 

social networks technologically embedded?: How 
networks are changing today with changes in 
communication technology. Social Networks 27, 4, 
317–335. 

34.  Pamela J. Ludford, Dan Cosley, Dan Frankowski, and 

Loren Terveen. 2004. Think Different: Increasing 
Online Community Participation Using Uniqueness 
and Group Dissimilarity. Proceedings of CHI '04, 631–
638. 

35.  David P. MacKinnon, JeeWon Cheong, and Angela G. 

Pirlott. 2012. Statistical mediation analysis. In APA 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

50.  Joseph  B.  Walther  and  Lisa  C.  Tidwell.  1995. 
Nonverbal cues in computer‐mediated communication, 
and 
relational 
communication. Journal of Organizational Computing 
5, 4, 355–378.  

chronemics  on 

51.  Jeanne M. Wilson, Susan G. Straus, and Bill McEvily. 

the 

effect  of 

2006. All in due time: The development of trust in 
computer-mediated and face-to-face teams. 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes 99, 1, 16–33. 

 
 

52.  Alecia Wolf. 2000. Emotional Expression Online: 

Gender Differences in Emoticon Use. 
CyberPsychology & Behavior 3, 5, 827–833. 

 
 
 
 
 

581

