CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Distinguishing between Personal Preferences and Social

Inﬂuence in Online Activity Feeds

Amit Sharma

Dept. of Computer Science

Cornell University

Ithaca, NY 14853 USA
asharma@cs.cornell.edu

Dan Cosley

Information Science
Cornell University

Ithaca, NY 14853 USA

drc44@cornell.edu

ABSTRACT
Many online social networks thrive on automatic sharing of
friends’ activities to a user through activity feeds, which may
inﬂuence the user’s next actions. However, identifying such
social inﬂuence is tricky because these activities are simulta-
neously impacted by inﬂuence and homophily. We propose
a statistical procedure that uses commonly available network
and observational data about people’s actions to estimate the
extent of copy-inﬂuence—mimicking others’ actions that ap-
pear in a feed. We assume that non-friends don’t inﬂuence
users; thus, comparing how a user’s activity correlates with
friends versus non-friends who have similar preferences can
help tease out the effect of copy-inﬂuence.
Experiments on datasets from multiple social networks show
that estimates that don’t account for homophily overestimate
copy-inﬂuence by varying, often large amounts. Further,
copy-inﬂuence estimates fall below 1% of total actions in all
networks: most people, and almost all actions, are not af-
fected by the feed. Our results question common perceptions
around the extent of copy-inﬂuence in online social networks
and suggest improvements to diffusion and recommendation
models.

Author Keywords
Inﬂuence; Preferences; Homophily; Social Networks;
Activity Feed

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.1.2 Models and Principles: User/Machine Systems—Hu-
man Factors

INTRODUCTION
In many social media, people consume and give feedback on
items. For example, on Last.fm, people express their prefer-
ences for songs by listening to or loving them. These actions
are shared to their friends or followers through an activity
feed that aggregates the actions of a user’s friends.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW ’16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02...$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819982

1091

A fundamental question in these online social networks is
how friends inﬂuence people’s preferences and decisions.
Such inﬂuence operates through many mechanisms, includ-
ing social proof, conformity, mimicry, and personal liking
(see [17] for a review) and can affect our consumption of in-
formation [36, 37], preferences for cultural items [40, 43],
adoption of new products [2], behaviors around health [13],
and even decisions to vote [11]. Inﬂuence has also captured
the popular imagination, as a powerful force that makes con-
tent spread virally through a social network [26, 16]. Measur-
ing the extent of this inﬂuence, then, is an important problem
in understanding diffusion in social networks.
In general, observational data from social networks, both of-
ﬂine and online, do show correlation in friends’ activities,
or locality in their preferences within a social network [44].
Studies in Twitter [39], Wikipedia [19], Flickr [14], and Sec-
ond Life [8] consistently ﬁnd that a user’s probability of
adopting an item increases with the number of friends who
have done so before.
However, this locality may not be due to social inﬂuence be-
cause other social processes might also lead to the same cor-
relation. Notably, people are more likely to form social ties
with people who are similar to them, via the homophily se-
lection process [35]. Thus, even in the absence of any social
inﬂuence, underlying similarity between people may lead to
observed similarities in their preferences on items that could
lead to overestimates of social inﬂuence.
Untangling this knot is a problem that has vexed sociologists
for decades.
In general, without either strong assumptions
about inﬂuence mechanisms (e.g., [45, 34, 15]) or strong
knowledge of latent variables that indicate homophily (e.g.,
[2]), a structural analysis of the causal graphical model [38]
encoding inﬂuence and homophily shows that distinguishing
them is impossible [42].
In this paper, we make principled assumptions about both the
inﬂuence mechanism and indicators of homophily to develop
a method for identifying inﬂuence that is well-suited for con-
tinuous activity data from online social networks. Since ac-
tivity feeds are a primary interface element in most social net-
works that expose people to their friends’ updates [47, 33, 10,
7] and facilitate social learning [12, 20], we look speciﬁcally
at how inﬂuence might ﬂow through these feeds. That is,
we study whether exposure to friends’ activities through an

aggregated feed makes a user more likely to copy or mimic
them; we call this mechanism copy-inﬂuence due to the feed.
For indicators of homophily, instead of using demographic or
other latent attributes as in Aral et al. [2], we directly use
people’s decisions on items to model their underlying prefer-
ences, and look at whether people copy friends’ actions more
than we would expect based on their underlying preferences.
That is, if a user sees that her friend on Last.fm loved a song,
does it make her more likely to love it as well? Or would she
have loved it anyways?
Our method is based on the observation that feeds rarely show
activity of non-friends to a user. Thus, comparing how of-
ten a user copies actions from her friends’ feed to how often
she copies actions from a simulated feed constructed from ac-
tions of a matched set of non-friends with preferences similar
to her friends provides a statistical procedure for estimating
inﬂuence.
We ﬁrst show that this procedure distinguishes copy-inﬂuence
from preference similarity using semi-synthetic data based on
a dataset we collected from Last.fm. We then apply it to real
activity data from Last.fm, Goodreads, Flixster, and Flickr.
Our results on this broad range of websites and item domains
reveal three main takeaways about the role of copy-inﬂuence
in online social networks.
First, we ﬁnd that naive estimates of copy-inﬂuence do over-
estimate it, often substantially, and that the degree of overes-
timation varies widely across datasets and kinds of actions.
We argue that this variation is likely due to differences be-
tween sharing networks in characteristics such as the ease of
consumption of items, the speciﬁc design of the feed, and its
role in people’s use of a site.
Second, we ﬁnd wide individual variation in susceptibility to
copy-inﬂuence. Such variation extends past work on identify-
ing differences in susceptibility [18, 43, 3], and points to the
potential of using individual-level susceptibility estimates for
modeling diffusion and making more informative, persuasive
recommendations using social information [43, 31].
Third, we ﬁnd that the extent of copy-inﬂuence is small.
Across all domains, less than 1% of people’s actions can be
attributed to copy-inﬂuence. Contrary to the popular narra-
tive on inﬂuence, our results join other work in questioning
the extent of inﬂuence or virality in these networks [27, 24],
at least as conveyed through copying others’ observed behav-
iors in activity feeds.
This paper also contributes a way to estimate copy-inﬂuence
in any network where network connections and timestamped
activity data are visible, as well as a large Last.fm dataset.
More generally, we see this work as demonstrating the need
for sharper deﬁnitions of inﬂuence that account for both per-
sonal preferences and speciﬁc mechanisms of inﬂuence.

RELATED WORK
Mimicry of others’ actions has been demonstrated in con-
trolled experiments. This can happen at a population level, as
with Sagalnik et al.’s demonstration that making popularity
visible causes different songs to become popular compared

1092

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

to the case when no such information is shown [40]. It may
be even stronger at the individual level; Sharma and Cosley
showed that trusted friends’ opinions have more inﬂuence on
people’s willingness to try unknown items than item popular-
ity [43]. Similar results have been shown in experiments on
online social networks: a user is more likely to share a link
on Facebook if it appears in her social feed [9] and to click
on an ad if it is endorsed by her friends [6].
Outside of controlled experiments around information con-
sumption in real social networks—which may be infeasible,
costly, or potentially unethical—identiﬁcation of inﬂuence is
not straightforward. Naive measures such as simply count-
ing the number of common actions between friends within a
given time period likely overestimate inﬂuence [7, 25, 48], as
any observed data is simultaneously affected by both inﬂu-
ence and homophily. In addition, people may be externally
exposed to the same item through forces outside of the social
network [19]. For example, two friends may like the same
item after watching an advertisement for it. Such external
exposure also creates confounds for estimating inﬂuence.
In line with Shalizi and Thomas’ argument for the need for
assumptions about mechanism [42], work on estimating in-
ﬂuence from observational data generally makes assumptions
about the nature of inﬂuence and/or homophily, then uses sta-
tistical or computational procedures on those data to simulate
contexts where those assumptions don’t hold.

Controlling for inﬂuence
The ﬁrst general strategy is to compare the observed data with
an alternative world with no inﬂuence and attribute the differ-
ences to inﬂuence. A core part of such an estimation proce-
dure is to obtain, or create, data and network structures for
the alternative world.
Christakis et al. presented an edge-reversal test, where if per-
son A has an edge to B but not vice-versa, then comparing B’s
inﬂuence on A with that of A on B would give us a measure of
inﬂuence due to the directed edge [15]. This is based on the
intuition that inﬂuence should ﬂow only one way on directed
edges; it also has the advantage of strongly addressing the
effect of homophily. This test was used to examine whether
becoming obese is contagious and found that inﬂuence is sig-
niﬁcantly higher in the direction of the directed edge than the
opposite direction. In online contexts like Twitter with asym-
metric information ﬂows, this could ﬁt well, but in networks
with undirected edges, it is not so useful.
Another approach by Anagnostopoulos et al. randomizes the
order of people’s actions to remove causal links due to tem-
porality between A’s and B’s actions [1]. In the absence of
inﬂuence, the expected probability of a user acting upon an
item given that some number of their friends have already
done so—called k-exposure [39, 19]—should be the same in
the observed data and the time-shufﬂed data. If it is statis-
tically different, inﬂuence is in play. The method was used
on a Flickr dataset and showed no signiﬁcant difference be-
tween the two worlds. Still, the authors do not rule out in-
ﬂuence, giving examples from their dataset that demonstrate

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

inﬂuence effects, and note that their method is unable to make
individual-level inﬂuence estimates.

Controlling for homophily
Instead of removing inﬂuence, the other main strategy is to
control for homophily. For instance, La Fond and Neville use
shufﬂing of social network edges to estimate inﬂuence given
snapshots of people’s network and activity data at two points
in time [32]. They ﬁrst calculate the average overlap in activ-
ity between friends. To control for homophily, they subtract
the overlap in friends’ activity after randomizing the edges
between people. To control for external exposure, they also
subtract out the overlap among friends when both edges and
actions are randomized. Any difference that one ﬁnds then,
must be due to inﬂuence. Using data on Facebook groups
joined by people at two timestamps a year apart, they found
that the relative effect of inﬂuence varies: some groups ex-
hibited a signiﬁcant inﬂuence effect, while others exhibited a
signiﬁcant homophily effect.
Another way to control for homophily is to directly account
for its indicators. If we are able to observe attributes such
as demographics or other characteristics that affect people’s
preferences, then we can identify inﬂuence by controlling for
these attributes. Based on this intuition, Aral et al. esti-
mated inﬂuence effects by comparing adoption rates for pairs
of similar users where only one of them had a friend who had
adopted the item [2]. Using data from Yahoo on adoption of a
web service and 46 attributes based on personal and network
characteristics, they found that most adoption was indepen-
dent of inﬂuence. A fundamental problem, however, is that
their method depends heavily on the careful choice and avail-
ability of attributes that predict similarity.

PRELIMINARIES: BASIS FOR INFLUENCE ESTIMATION
Combining ideas from the above two lines of work, we pro-
pose a broadly applicable statistical procedure for estimating
the extent of copy-inﬂuence in social networks. We control
for homophily using activity data while limiting the time du-
ration of exposure to friends’ actions to closely model the
mechanism of copy-inﬂuence through a feed interface.
In
this, we make the following key assumptions.

Preference as a proxy for homophily
To control for homophily, we borrow from the recommender
systems literature [46] and assume that similarity metrics
based on past activity are good indicators of underlying ho-
mophily. Past activity data implicitly captures factors such as
demographics, prior external and social inﬂuence, and other
hidden factors that determine people’s preferences on items
[30, 41]; it can also be a direct indicator of their current per-
sonal preference. In principle, any two people with identical
activity histories have the same probability of acting on an
item in the future, minus any social inﬂuence.
Using commonly available streams of activity data avoids
cost and methodological issues around using panel data col-
lected at ﬁxed intervals [34, 45, 32] and allows broader appli-
cation of the matching technique from Aral et al. [2], which
required additional person-level and network attributes.

Figure 1. A reverse chronological feed of songs loved by friends of a user
on Last.fm. For each love action, the name of the song, its artist, and the
friend who loved it are shown. This interface is shown as a widget on the
home page for each logged-in user, along with a similar widget for recent
songs listened to by friends.

Limited attention to a reverse chronological feed
To specify the inﬂuence mechanism, we focus on copy-
inﬂuence from feeds. Feeds are not the only interface ele-
ments that might convey social inﬂuence: proﬁle pages, col-
laborative ﬁltering or popularity-based lists of items, social
explanations of presented content, and out-of-system interac-
tion may all convey information and perhaps inﬂuence from
friends. However, feeds are ubiquitous and commonly stud-
ied as conveyors of inﬂuence [47, 33, 7]; we argue that they
are the dominant feature through which people see and learn
from their friends’ behavior in social networks [10, 12], and
thus a dominant feature through which inﬂuence from spe-
ciﬁc friends might ﬂow.
Further, we assume that the feeds show an unﬁltered, re-
verse chronological aggregation of friends’ activities. For
many networks such as Last.fm, Goodreads, and Flickr, this
closely resembles the feed seen by users. For example, Fig-
ure 1 shows a reverse chronological feed of songs loved by the
friends of a user on Last.fm. Still, this is an approximation:
feeds can contain advertisements or content from non-friends
(e.g., sometimes Facebook presents actions from friends of
friends), while algorithmic ﬁltering can hide or reorder items
shown in the feed. We discuss ways to deal with such ﬁltered
feeds later.

A simple model for users’ interaction with feeds
The above assumptions lead to a simple model for users’ in-
teraction with an activity feed. Let us start by formally deﬁn-
ing what we mean by a feed within a social network. The
term friend refers to anyone whose activities are shown to the
user; these are typically social connections of an individual,
such as Facebook friends or Twitter followees. We deﬁne the
feed to be the aggregated activity of all of a user u’s friends
presented in reverse chronological order.

1093

We assume that at the time a user performs an action, she has
seen some number M of the friends’ most recent actions in the
feed. In contrast to k-exposure models that implicitly assume
people attend to all of their friends’ actions [1, 5], the param-
eter M represents a user’s attention budget for friends’ actions
and we argue this more realistically models copy-inﬂuence.
Finally, we deﬁne copy-actions as actions by a user on itmes
that appear in the last M items in her feed (e.g., loving one
of the songs in Figure 1 if M >= 3). A baseline measure
of copy-inﬂuence would be the fraction of actions by a user
that are copy-actions, as reported in some studies [25, 48,
7]. However, as argued earlier, that is likely to overestimate
copy-inﬂuence because of underlying homophily and external
exposure.

ESTIMATING COPY-INFLUENCE FROM FEEDS
To address these possible confounds, let us now consider a
hypothetical feed constructed from users who are not friends
with the user. When a user’s actions are copies of a feed based
on non-friends, that is most likely due to following their own
preferences or common external exposure. Copy-inﬂuence is
ruled out because within our model, a user does not see the
non-friends’ actions in her feed1. This intuition drives our
procedure for estimating copy-inﬂuence: if we can ﬁnd non-
friends who are as similar to a user as that user’s friends, we
may use them to approximate the effects of homophily and
some kinds of external exposure. Thus, copy-inﬂuence can
be estimated as the number of copy-actions from the friends’
feed, over and above the observed overlap between a user’s
actions and the matched non-friends’ feed.
To compute similarity between users, we consider their past
actions on items as a representation of their preferences. This
allows us to use similarity metrics on past actions to ﬁnd non-
friends who are as similar in preferences to a user as her ac-
tual friends. Note that our selection of non-friends is similar
to La Fond and Neville [32], except that instead of choosing
non-friends randomly, we use preference similarity to better
control for homophily.
In addition to controlling for homophily, using matched non-
friends also controls for some kinds of external exposure.
These would include mass advertisements or widely popular
items where any two users with the same personal preference
would be expected to have an equal probability of acting on
the item, regardless of the distance between them in the net-
work2.

Preference-based Matched Estimation (PME) Procedure
The procedure proceeds in two phases: Matching and Esti-
mation. We divide the data into two parts at a ﬁxed time T,

1Although direct copy-inﬂuence is ruled out, there may still be in-
direct, algorithmically mediated inﬂuence, such as through recom-
mendations or targeted advertisements as described earlier. Such
inﬂuence may be important, but our focus here is on the extent of
copy-inﬂuence.
2Like other methods, using matched non-friends cannot control for
external exposure due to shared context (e.g., when two friends at-
tend the same music concert); such overlap is much harder to distin-
guish from activity data alone.

1094

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

performing the matching phase on data before T and the esti-
mation phase on data after T. In the matching phase, for each
user u we generate a set of non-friends (“similar strangers”)
who at time T are as close in preferences to the user as
her friends.
In the estimation phase, we compute Friends-
Overlap, the fraction of u’s actions that are copy-actions of a
feed based on friends (F), and Strangers-Overlap, the fraction
that are copy-actions of a feed based on the similar strangers
(S ). The extent by which Friends-Overlap is greater than
Strangers-Overlap gives us a measure of copy-inﬂuence.

Matching Phase
For each friend f of a user u, we ﬁnd a matching non-friend
s using activity data before time T, such that both of the fol-
lowing conditions are satisﬁed:
• The similarity between the non-friend s and u is approxi-
mately equal to the similarity between f and u. We com-
pute similarity between two users by using the Jaccard
measure between their activity sets up to time T 3. Let A(u)
0,T
denote the activity set of a user u consisting of all the items
she has acted on until time T. Then, we compute the simi-
larity between two users u and v as:

S im(u, v) = J(A(u)

0,T , A(v)

0,T ) =

|A(u)
|A(u)

0,T

0,T

(cid:84) A(v)
(cid:83) A(v)
0,T|
0,T|

• The number of actions by the non-friend |A(s)| is approxi-
mately equal to the number of actions by the friend |A( f )|,
up to time T. Assuming that the rate of activity stays the
same before and after T, this condition ensures the non-
friend and friend are expected to have an equal number of
actions that will appear in u’s feed after T.

To implement the matching phase, we sample a non-friend
randomly without replacement and check whether it matches
with an unmatched friend until there are no more unmatched
friends left or no more non-friends to choose. We allow
matches to be approximately equal: s is the allowed percent-
age difference in similarity and a is the allowed percentage
difference in the number of actions between non-friends and
friends.

Estimation Phase
For the data after time T, we compute the percentage of ac-
tions taken by u that copied recent actions by either the set of
friends (F) or similar strangers (S ) that we computed in the
matching phase. Because we assume that people have a ﬁnite
amount of attention for their feed, we only consider the M
most recent actions by the set before each action of u.
More formally, let A(u)
T,∞ denote u’s activity set after time T,
and Feed(u,W)
denote the most recent M actions taken by a
set of users W before u acts on a given item. We deﬁne the

M

3We also tried cosine similarity, which gave comparable results; in
principle, any reasonably efﬁcient and unbiased similarity metric
could be used.

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Feature
Users with ≥ 10 actions
Core users
Friends per user (mean; std. error; median)
Actions
Actions per user (mean; std. error; median)
Songs
Actions per song

Listen
312K
96K
(75; 0.7; 29)
656M
(2101; 5.5; 1192)
23M
(28; 0.1; 2)

Love
434K
140K
(70; 0.5; 25)
136M
(313; 1.4; 118)
13M
(10; 0.03; 1)

Table 1. Descriptive statistics for the Last.fm dataset. On average, each user listened to 2101 songs during the 3 month period and loved a total of 313
songs during his lifetime.

(cid:80)

T,∞ 1{a ∈ Feed(u,W)
M }

a∈A(u)

Overlap(u,W)

M

=

T,∞|
|A(u)

Overlap between u and the users in W as:

where 1{x} represents the indicator function which is 1 when-
ever x is true and 0 otherwise.
The difference in Overlap between a user and her friends
(Friends-Overlap) versus the similar strangers (Strangers-
Overlap) should give us an estimate of the copy-inﬂuence due
to the friends’ activity feed, over and above the homophily
effects captured by similarity in preferences with the non-
friends and any external inﬂuences that affect both friends
and non-friends.

CopyIn f luenceu = Overlap(u,F)

M − Overlap(u,S )

M

The mean of this per-user copy-inﬂuence estimate gives us an
estimate of the extent of copy-inﬂuence in a social network.

Interpretation
An estimate close to 1 implies that copy-inﬂuence is the dom-
inant force driving people’s actions, while an estimate close
to zero implies that most of Friends-Overlap can be explained
by underlying preference similarity. To measure uncertainty
in the mean estimate, we compute the standard error using the
bootstrap technique from resampling statistics [23].4
The same procedure also provides us per-user estimates for
susceptibility to copy-inﬂuence. The standard error for the
per-user estimate can be calculated by repeating the estima-
tion procedure with a new selection of non-friends each time.
Note that the copy-inﬂuence estimate can range between −1
and 1. When a user tends to adopt items that are popular
outside their ego-network and few items from within the net-
work, the estimate can be negative; we take this as an indi-
cator that copy-inﬂuence is not present and thus should be
considered as zero for that user.

VALIDATION ON SEMI-SYNTHETIC DATA
To check the efﬁcacy of the procedure in identifying copy-
inﬂuence, we ﬁrst run it on simulated worlds based on data
from Last.fm where we ﬁx the relative effects of copy-
inﬂuence, personal preference, and external exposure. We

4Per-user mean copy-inﬂuence estimates are not independent be-
cause of how we sample non-friends; thus it may not be appropriate
to use the formula for standard error.

1095

use actual data in the matching phase and activity data sim-
ulated by these processes in the estimation phase, similar to
the evaluation strategy used by La Fond and Neville [32].

Describing the Last.fm dataset
Last.fm is a music service that records the songs that its users
listen to on its website or supported desktop/mobile devices.
Users can listen to, love, or ban songs. It also allows users to
add other users as friends; both parties have to agree, so these
links are undirected. Each user sees the songs listened to and
explicitly loved by her friends on the Last.fm homepage, al-
lowing us to study the inﬂuence effects of both implicit and
explicit actions on items. These actions are aggregated and
presented in two reverse chronologically ordered widgets—
one for friends’ loves and one for listens—in the way our
model of copy-inﬂuence assumes (see Figure 1).
We used Last.fm’s API to collect listens, loves, and network
data for users. Because the API does not provide timestamps
for the creation of friendship links, we run the risk of incor-
rectly considering someone as a friend of a user before the
actual link was made. To reduce this problem, we randomly
selected 1000 user ids of people who joined before 2010, with
the thought that these older members of the system would
tend to have more stable friend networks.
Starting with this seed set, we followed a weighted breadth-
ﬁrst search to obtain other users, adding friends to the search
queue weighted by the number of already-found users they
were friends with. This weighting resulted in a reasonably
well-connected component of the Last.fm social graph. The
crawl was completed over the months of April-June 2014.5
In addition to the social network, we collected users’ time-
stamped actions on items through February 2014. For loves,
we collected the user’s entire history since they joined; for
listening, which is much more frequent, we collected songs
they had listened to starting in November 2013 to keep the
dataset size reasonable. The data crawl and subsequent anal-
ysis was judged by Cornell’s institutional review board (IRB)
as an exempt research protocol.
For both listens and loves, we ﬁltered out any users with less
than 10 actions. Table 1 shows some statistics for the data we
collected. Although listening is a more frequent activity, the
number of users with at least 10 listen actions is fewer than
the corresponding number for the love action (Table 1). This

5The full dataset can be accessed at http://www.amitsharma.
in/data/lastfm-social-activity.html.

is because we collected listening data for only 3 months, so
users who were inactive during the period will not appear in
the listening dataset.
Since we collected a sample of the network, some users are
missing friends in the dataset. We fetched the actual number
of friends for each user and labeled users that have at least
75%6 of their friends in the dataset as core users. We apply
the PME procedure to only such core users, for whom we
have a reasonable sample of their total friends.

Generating semi-synthetic data
The three processes are operationalized as follows:
• Copy-inﬂuence: Analogous to a reverse chronological
feed, a user selects an item at random from a set containing
the last M items acted upon by her friends.

• Personal preference: First, we select the k most similar
users to the current user by comparing the Jaccard simi-
larity of their current activity sets. A user then selects an
item at random from the last M items acted upon by these
k most similar users. We choose a low value of k = 10 to
ﬁnd a narrow neighborhood of high-similarity users.

• External exposure: We model such exposure by assuming
that a user randomly selects the next item to act upon from
the set of all items, weighted by their current popularity.

To generate synthetic data, we start from the state of the
Last.fm loves dataset at time T, after which we replace the
songs that users actually loved with songs generated by either
the copy-inﬂuence, personal preference, or external exposure
process, while maintaining the original social network and
timestamps of actions. We also consider cases with a mixture
of personal preference and copy-inﬂuence. For these cases,
we ﬁx the relative probability of selecting copy-inﬂuence over
personal preference and each user decides which process to
use for his next action based on this probability.
For our experiments, we set M = 10 and selected time T
at three equally-spaced timestamps: 2014/01/01, 2013/10/01
and 2013/07/01. We choose values closer to our crawl date
so the friend set that we use for estimation is close to the
actual friend set. Both s and a were set to 0.1, ensuring that
non-friends are within 10% of the corresponding similarity
and activity for friends of a user. To get reliable estimates for
similarity and copy-inﬂuence, we consider only those users
who have at least 5 actions both before and after T. Finally,
we generated data 100 times using each process and ran the
PME procedure for determining the extent of copy-inﬂuence
in each. Results shown are averaged across the 100 runs and
across all three timestamps.

PME procedure recovers simulated copy-inﬂuence
As Table 2 shows, our copy-inﬂuence estimate is able to cor-
rectly rule out most correlated actions in the external exposure
and personal preference processes, while it still shows a high
copy-inﬂuence estimate for the copy-inﬂuence process.
6We chose the threshold percentage 75% as a tradeoff between hav-
ing a representative sample of friends and being too restrictive for
ﬁltering. Results were similar at thresholds of 50, 90 and 100.

1096

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Std. Err.
8.1 ∗ 10−6
0.0001
0.0004
0.0001
0.0001
0.0002

FrOverlap Copy-Inf.
2.4 ∗ 10−5
0.0001
0.001
0.04
0.95
1.00
0.51
0.53
0.12
0.16
0.05
0.02

Process
Ext. Exposure (EE)
Personal Pref. (PP)
Copy-inﬂuence (CI)
CI-PP (50%-50%)
CI-PP (10%-90%)
CI-PP (1%-99%)
Table 2. Sanity check on the proposed PME procedure using loves on
songs, showing Friends-Overlap, the copy-inﬂuence estimate, and the
standard error of the estimate for each process. Each dataset simulates
either external exposure, personal preference, copy-inﬂuence, or a mix-
ture of personal preference and copy-inﬂuence. The PME procedure
correctly does not ascribe most of the copy-actions in the homophily
and external exposure processes to copy-inﬂuence. For mixtures involv-
ing copy-inﬂuence, the procedure retrieves the true probability of copy-
inﬂuence with a lower error than Friends-Overlap.

Likewise, when there is a mixture of personal preference
and copy-inﬂuence, copy-inﬂuence estimates using the PME
procedure are closer to actual copy-inﬂuence than Friends-
Overlap. It is still slightly higher than the true extent of copy-
inﬂuence that we ﬁxed for generating the data. The reason
is that our matching may be inexact: for the personal prefer-
ence process, a user should have the same overlap with the
matched non-friends’ feed as with the friends’ feed, but in
practice, our measure of preference similarity may not cap-
ture people’s preferences completely. These estimates are
also noisy, especially for users with relatively little data. Nev-
ertheless, the observed error is much lower than that obtained
with Friends-Overlap, showing that accounting for preference
similarity is helpful in estimating copy-inﬂuence.

EXTENT OF COPY-INFLUENCE ON LAST.FM
We now apply the PME procedure to the actual activity of
users on Last.fm for both love and listen actions. We use the
same parameters as we did before, setting M = 10 and s =
a = 0.1. Since we have listen data only for three months, we
set T differently for listen and love actions. For love actions,
we set T = 2013/07/01 as before, while for listen actions, we
set T = 2014/01/01.
A user may listen to the same song more than once, raising
the question of how to treat repeated activity. One option
would be to only look at the ﬁrst time a user heard a song,
on the assumption that copy-inﬂuence plays a minimal role
in re-experiencing the song versus a user’s own preferences
about the song after listening to it. On the other hand, a user
might be inﬂuenced to re-listen to a song they like by seeing
it in their feed; in this case, we would want to measure copy-
inﬂuence on all actions. For our copy-inﬂuence estimates, we
consider all actions taken by users, including re-listens.

Friends-Overlap overestimates copy-inﬂuence
Our ﬁrst major observation is that for both listens and
loves, Friends-Overlap overestimates copy-inﬂuence. Table 3
shows the mean effect of copy-inﬂuence, along with Friends-
Overlap, for listening to or loving songs. On average, only
0.3% of a user’s actions can be attributed to inﬂuence for
loves, and fewer still for listens—and in both cases, the copy-

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Action on song FrOverlap Copy-Inf. Std. Err.
2.5 ∗ 10−5
Listen-Listen
7.8 ∗ 10−5
Love-Love
4.9 ∗ 10−5
Love-Listen

0.001
0.003
0.0007

0.004
0.015
0.004

Table 3. A comparison of copy-actions from the friends’ feed (Friends-
Overlap) with the copy-inﬂuence estimate computed using the PME pro-
cedure on Last.fm. We look at the inﬂuence of friends’ listen actions on
a user’s listen actions, love actions on love, and friends’ love actions on
a user’s listen actions. For all three actions, Friends-Overlap overesti-
mates copy-inﬂuence.

inﬂuence estimate is less than one-fourth of the naive Friends-
Overlap.7
To test whether explicit endorsement of a song by friends in-
ﬂuences a user’s implicit listening activity, we next compute
copy-inﬂuence on listen actions of a user due to love actions
in her feed. As for the previous two scenarios, we ﬁnd that
Friends-Overlap for listens overestimates copy-inﬂuence and
the actual extent of that inﬂuence is below 0.1%.
Friends-Overlap and copy-inﬂuence for exposure to loves is
higher than those for listens, indicating ﬁrst, that a higher
fraction of love actions are common among friends than lis-
tens, and second, a higher fraction of love actions are also
copied from friends than listens. A possible reason could be
that loves by other users might be considered as stronger en-
dorsements than the implicit listens, and thus, have higher
copy-inﬂuence. Further, there might be less user choice in
which songs to listen to versus loves, for instance, when
a playlist or recommendation algorithm is choosing which
songs are played. We will come back to how intentionality,
along with algorithm and interface design, are important for
modeling inﬂuence in the discussion.

Most users show no inﬂuence effects
In addition to estimating network-level copy-inﬂuence,
it
could be useful to estimate copy-inﬂuence on individual
users. One way to interpret individual estimates is that we
are measuring the susceptibility to copy-inﬂuence for an indi-
vidual [3]. Such an estimate can be used in diffusion models
to set personalized transmission probabilities or thresholds.
Looking at per-user copy-inﬂuence for the love action on
songs shows a wide variation in the effect of copy-inﬂuence
among users, as shown in Figure 2. Note that strikingly,
Friends-Overlap is zero for a majority of users. The high
number of zeros makes visual inspection of the distribu-
tions difﬁcult, so Figure 2 includes only users with non-zero
Friends-Overlap.
Among users with non-zero Friends-Overlap, about a third
have their copy-inﬂuence estimate less than or equal to zero,
which indicates that all of their Friends-Overlap can be ex-
plained by preference similarity alone; overall, the copy-
inﬂuence estimate is zero or negative for more than 75% of
7In practice, to make the feed manageable, Last.fm’s listen feed de-
viates from our reverse chronological assumption and instead shows
one most recent song per friend. When we modify our feed model
to include only the most recently listened song by each friend in
the feed, we ﬁnd that the copy-inﬂuence increases (from 0.001 to
0.0018), but is still less than half of Friends-Overlap.

Figure 2. Per-user variation of Friends-Overlap (left panel) and copy-
inﬂuence (right panel) for loves on songs among users with non-zero
Friends-Overlap. Even among these users, copy-inﬂuence is zero or neg-
ative for a third of the users.

Figure 3. Variation of copy-inﬂuence with activity rates of Last.fm users
during the Estimation phase. We ﬁltered out bins with less than 5 users
towards the right end of the plot. The effect of copy-inﬂuence decreases
as the activity level of a user increases. Error bars convey standard error
of the mean estimates.

core users. This helps to explain the low overall effect we
see for copy-inﬂuence and provides additional empirical evi-
dence of a wide range of susceptibility among users [1, 3].

Less active users are more susceptible
We also wondered whether users’ activity levels affect how
susceptible they are to copy-inﬂuence. To do this, we com-
pare copy-inﬂuence estimates for users with different num-
bers of loves on Last.fm during the Estimation phase. Fig-
ure 3 shows the variation of copy-inﬂuence on songs with
activity (love) rate of users. The extent of copy-inﬂuence is
higher for users with fewer loves, who are also the majority
of users in the dataset; as the activity level increases, copy-
inﬂuence estimates decrease.

Robustness with change in parameters
The parameters we use in the inﬂuence test are T, M and the
two error thresholds, s and a. To check whether our results
are robust to changes in parameters, we tried a range of values
for each. While we do ﬁnd changes in the inﬂuence estimate
(increasing s and a, for example, decreases the extent to
which we can account for homophily), the high-level ﬁnding

1097

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Figure 4. Variation of copy-inﬂuence and Friends-Overlap estimates
with change in M. Both estimates increase; however, the ratio between
the two remains approximately equal.

that copy-inﬂuence could be ruled out for most copy-actions
stays consistent.
Figure 4 shows that both Friends-Overlap and estimated
copy-inﬂuence increase with M. The fact that both increase
is not surprising, since as M increases, each of a user’s ac-
tions might match with a larger pool of actions from either
the friends or non-friends feed. However, the ratio between
the two remains the same.

COPY-INFLUENCE ON OTHER SOCIAL NETWORKS
We have focused so far on Last.fm as a running example
for explaining and exploring the PME procedure. We now
apply it to compute copy-inﬂuence estimates on other so-
cial networks and see how our results generalize to different
item domains, feed interfaces, and system designs. Table 4
presents aggregate data for three existing datasets we use
from Goodreads [28], Flixster [29], and Flickr [14]. These
datasets cover a diverse set of item domains: Goodreads is a
social network for books, Flixster for movies, and Flickr for
photos. More details about each dataset can be found in the
papers that introduced them [28, 29, 14].

Describing the datasets
As on Last.fm, users on each of these websites can act
upon items and form undirected connections with other users.
Goodreads and Flixster allow users to rate books and movies
respectively. Flickr allows users to favorite photos that other
users post on the website. In addition, each social network has
a feed interface that shows friends’ rating or favoriting activi-
ties, aggregated and presented in a loosely reverse chronolog-
ically order in the way our model of copy-inﬂuence assumes8.
The number of items available to act on among the three
datasets varies widely. On average, an item is acted on 3 times
on Flickr, 21 times on Goodreads, and 163 times on Flixster.
8Flixster moved away from being a social network for movies after
2010, but the current dataset was collected before the change and
satisﬁes our assumptions.

1098

Figure 5. Friends-Overlap and copy-inﬂuence estimates on different so-
cial networks. While both Friends-Overlap and the ratio of Friends-
Overlap to copy-inﬂuence varies, the copy-inﬂuence estimate for all web-
sites is below 1% of users’ actions on items.

For comparison, the same average was 10 loves per song on
Last.fm (in this section, we report only loves on Last.fm be-
cause they are more similar to rating or favoriting actions in
these websites). In contrast to per-item activity, per-user ac-
tivity is similar across all three datasets, with users acting on
over 100 items on average.
Since on Goodreads and Flixster a friend’s rating is shown in
a user’s feed irrespective of whether it was high or low, we
consider all ratings by users for our analysis9. Since we do
not know the real number of friends for each user in these
datasets, we consider any user with non-zero friends as a core
user. All friend relations are still without timestamps, so we
assume a static social network and set T for each dataset so
that only 10% of the actions are after time T. For consistency,
we use the same values for all other parameters as for Last.fm.

Vast majority of actions are due to personal preference
Figure 5 shows the Friends-Overlap and copy-inﬂuence es-
timates for all four datasets, along with standard error. We
ﬁnd varying estimates for Friends-Overlap on these datasets,
from 0.019 on Flixster to 0.008 on Flickr. The amount
of Friends-Overlap explained by preference similarity also
varies widely; the copy-inﬂuence estimate is less than 15%
of Friends-Overlap for Flixster and over 85% of Friends-
Overlap for Flickr. Such differences are plausible, and in fact,
expected: except for the fact that they are all online social net-
works, these websites differ from each other in many charac-
teristics: their item domains, types of actions, popularity of
items, user interfaces, and use cases.
However, after controlling for preference similarity between
friends, we ﬁnd that the copy-inﬂuence estimates for all four
domains fall into a range from 0.002–0.007. Interpreting the
copy-inﬂuence estimate as the average fraction of user actions
due to copy-inﬂuence, these results imply that less than 1% of
the total user actions in these sites can be attributed to copy-
inﬂuence from the feed.

9To better account for preference similarity, we also tried a variation
where we ﬁltered out any rating below 3 or 4 on a scale of 0.5-5. The
pattern of results is the same.

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Feature
Users with ≥ 10 actions
Users with friendship data
Friends per user
Actions
Actions per user
Items
Actions per item

Goodreads

252K
252K

28M

1.3M

(29; 0.2; 14)

(13; 0.1; 5)

(74; 0.5;17)

(112; 0.35; 63) (158; 1.6; 44) (183; 1.5; 44)

(21; 0.4; 2)

(163; 4.0; 5)

(3; 0.003; 1)

Flixster
50.0K
48.8K

7.9M

48.4K

Flickr
183K
175K

33M

10.9M

Table 4. Descriptive statistics for datasets from Goodreads, Flixster, and Flickr. Flixster has the lowest number of items and consequently, more actions
per item (163) than Goodreads (21) and Flickr (3). The average number of actions per user is above 100 for all three datasets.

DISCUSSION
We present PME, a broadly applicable estimation procedure
for separating social inﬂuence from preference behavior in
online social networks. Unlike past work on identifying in-
ﬂuence [1, 2, 15], our procedure does not need any additional
person-level attributes, relies on data that is often publicly
available, does not depend on the directionality of edges, and
provides both overall and person-level estimates of not just
the presence but the amount of copy-inﬂuence. Applying this
procedure to data from a broad range of websites shows that
simple correlational estimates between friends greatly over-
estimate the extent of copy-inﬂuence and that accounting for
preference similarity can lead to more accurate estimates.
Our results add depth to studies that found that a majority
of actions common between friends can be attributed to ho-
mophily instead of inﬂuence [2, 34], both showing that it oc-
curs in a number of contexts and that the extent of overesti-
mation varies widely with both users and systems.
We begin by placing our results in context with scholarly
work on diffusion and inﬂuence in online social networks,
questioning whether the effects of copy-inﬂuence are over-
rated. We then discuss plausible reasons for differences in
the overestimation of actual copy-inﬂuence that we saw for
different social networks. Finally, we revisit assumptions of
the PME procedure that should be kept in mind before using
it in other settings.

Copy-inﬂuence is overrated (?)
Our results indicate a subdued picture of the role of copy-
inﬂuence in online sharing networks.
In all four datasets,
more than 99% of people’s actions on items can be explained
without copy-inﬂuence, and most users are not at all inﬂu-
enced by the activity feed. Even without controlling for
homophily, Friends-Overlap—an upper bound on the actual
copy-inﬂuence—is low:
less than 2% of users’ actions are
copy-actions (Figure 5).
These results are at odds with both popular perception and
much scholarly work on social inﬂuence. The idea of a par-
ticular item or opinion starting from a few sources and spread-
ing virally to a large component of a social network is riveting
and often highlighted in popular discourse. Further, social in-
ﬂuence on online networks has been shown to be present for
a number of activities, as we pointed out earlier. Thus, we are
not arguing that inﬂuence is not important.
However, we do think that in many contexts it is likely over-
stated. In particular, our results call attention to the tiny role

of copy-inﬂuence in affecting people’s routine activity around
items. Most discussion of inﬂuence focuses on the unusual:
events where people do adopt their friends’ behaviors and
items spread widely. However, the mundane reality is that
most people’s actions are driven by their own preferences.
Recent empirical work on the spread of items through social
media provide further support for this claim. Flaxman et al.
show that only about 2% of online news consumption is re-
ferred through social media [24]. This is essentially an upper
bound on the fraction of news articles read due to inﬂuence
from others in a social network. This study, like our work,
is able to put the effect of social media on news consump-
tion in perspective by comparing it against the total number
of news articles visited by users and not just focusing on the
ones shared within social networks. Likewise, the vast major-
ity of tweets never breach the sender’s ego network [27].
Still, a small effect today could turn into a big one tomorrow:
1% of all actions seems tiny, but 1 inﬂuenced action out of
100 may aggregate over time to be a signiﬁcant effect on peo-
ple’s decisions. This might be especially true if those inﬂu-
ences happen earlier in a user’s lifetime, which Figure 3 sug-
gests is true, since lower-activity users appear to have higher
copy-inﬂuence estimates. Studying the temporal variation in
copy-inﬂuence estimates and evolution of people’s personal
preferences over time will be interesting future work.

Factors that affect the extent of copy-inﬂuence
We also observe variations in the degree of over-estimation
for copy-inﬂuence between different actions (listen and love
on Last.fm) and between different websites, and it will be
useful to understand the reasons for these differences. We
see two factors as playing a prominent role in affecting the
potential inﬂuence of friends’ actions: characteristics of the
item space and the design of the feed. Our goal here is not to
present an exhaustive account of reasons why copy-inﬂuence
might differ between domains and individuals (in particular,
network factors such as tie strength and knowledge of friends
also affect people’s copying decisions [43, 4, 9, 11]), but in-
stead to call attention to the need for nuance in thinking about
the mechanisms by which inﬂuence ﬂows.

Characteristics of the item space
One set of factors that might affect the extent of copy-
inﬂuence has to do with properties of the items and domain.
• The distribution of attention to items likely matters. For
example, photos on Flickr, being user-generated items,
are numerous compared to relatively mass-consumed items

1099

Flickr Goodreads Last.fm Flixster

Item properties
No external existence Yes
Yes
Sparse actions/item
Quick consumption
Yes
Table 5. Item properties for the four datasets. Flickr, which has the
highest copy-inﬂuence estimate, has each of the properties that we ar-
gue promote copy-inﬂuence. Meanwhile, Flixster does not satisfy any
of these properties and has the lowest copy-inﬂuence estimate despite
having the highest Friends-Overlap among the four websites.

No
Yes
No

No
Yes
Yes

No
No
No

such as movies, music, and books. This leads to the low
mean popularity of 3 for a photo that we see in Table 4.
Consequently, the likelihood that people are exposed a par-
ticular photo through their friends rather than other mecha-
nisms is higher. There could be a similar effect for explicit
loves on Last.fm, which are rarer than listens and signal
stronger interest from others.

• Further, items like books, movies, and songs have a well-
deﬁned existence outside of the social networks we study
that might lead to more external exposure. Photos, on the
other hand, often exist only on Flickr and thus are hard to
discover from outside the system itself.

• Finally, photos, like songs, are quick consumption items
and thus are more amenable to mimicry on exposure from
friends’ feeds than a book or a movie. A user may favorite
a photo right after viewing it in her feed or love a song after
listening to it for a few minutes. For domains like books or
movies which take hours to consume, we would expect less
such spontaneous mimicry.

These characteristics of the item space can affect both the
amount of overlap in activity between friends and the ac-
tual copy-inﬂuence ﬂowing between them. Table 5 summa-
rizes these factors for the four websites we studied. The col-
umn for Flixster in the table suggests why movie ratings on
Flixster have low copy-inﬂuence: the dataset does not possess
any of the three factors that promote the likelihood of copy-
inﬂuence. On the other hand, Flickr, where preference simi-
larity could rule out only a small fraction of Friends-Overlap,
satisﬁes all these criteria. Last.fm and Goodreads lie the mid-
dle.

Properties of the feed
These websites also differ in how they show friends’ activities
to a user. Since users are typically exposed to their friends’
activity through the feed, both the design of the feed interface
and ranking algorithms that perturb the feed likely impact the
extent of copy-inﬂuence in a network.
Figure 1 shows the feed for love actions on Last.fm; in the
grand scheme of the interface, however, it is a small widget.
Moreover, the interface is often in the background while peo-
ple listen to music and attend to other tasks, likely reducing
the feed’s inﬂuence relative to other sites. The interface for
Flickr lies on the other side of the spectrum: most of the avail-
able space is devoted to a feed of others’ photos, so using the
interface is a focal activity that concentrates attention on the
photos shown in the feed.

1100

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Feeds might also make acting on an item possible without
having to consume it. For instance, a user might not read a
book or watch a movie right away, but if the interface lets her
put it in a queue, this might reasonably be considered copy-
inﬂuence on the queuing action. Note that in this case, the
design of the feed and the actions afforded to users compen-
sates for the item property of slow consumption.
This discussion underscores the importance of precise deﬁni-
tions and explicit mechanisms for interpreting the inﬂuence
estimates we obtain. System design and characteristics of the
item space both impact people’s exposure to and ability to act
on items from their friends, thus impacting what we measure
as copy-inﬂuence in these social networks. Even though the
PME procedure is broadly applicable to social networks—
requiring only social network edges and timestamped prefer-
ence data—it is important to interpret the resultant inﬂuence
estimates with respect to the design and context of the speciﬁc
network.

Assumptions and Generalizability
We now return to the assumptions behind the PME procedure
and discuss how it may be adapted to estimate copy-inﬂuence
from feeds in other social networks. In particular, we assume
limited attention to a reverse chronological feed, focus only
on inﬂuence conveyed by the feed, consider similarity in ac-
tions as a proxy for homophily, assume a static network, and
equally weight activites by all of a user’s friends.

Limited attention to a reverse chronological feed
Although the feed interfaces of the four websites differ some-
what, at heart they are based on a reverse chronological feed,
leading to our assumption of such a feed, cut off by a thresh-
old M number of actions that users attend to. When applying
the inﬂuence estimation procedure to a new website, it is im-
portant to think about whether the speciﬁc feed ranking and
interface of a website are amenable to such a formulation.
For example, the reverse chronological assumption is less ap-
propriate for networks with opaque feed ranking algorithms
such as Facebook.
In such cases it would be important to
capture data about which items are actually shown to a user
or use knowledge about the algorithm to approximate the real
feed from the timestamped activity data. In addition, future
work on estimating personalized values of M for each user
might lead to more ﬁne-grained estimates of susceptibility
and copy-inﬂuence.

Copy-inﬂuence, not all inﬂuence
Our deﬁnition of copy-inﬂuence means that we are only cap-
turing kinds of inﬂuence that directly lead to the consump-
tion of an item shortly after being exposed to it by a friend.
In the context of narratives around information diffusion and
virality, it is a reasonable choice: to propagate through the
network, users must continue to interact with it in ways their
friends will see (and copy). Further, we argue that this def-
inition, by providing a concrete mechanism and measure for
speciﬁc aspects of inﬂuence, is useful for carving the broad
notion of “inﬂuence” into pieces that support better modeling,
theorizing, and design.

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

But it does mean that we are not talking about all mechanisms
or methods of inﬂuence. Focusing on the feed means we are
not studying inﬂuence that ﬂows through other interface fea-
tures; focusing on copying of speciﬁc actions means that we
are not looking at indirect or cumulative notions of inﬂuence
(e.g., k-exposure models). Thus, it is important to remember
that although the PME procedure does its job in identifying
copy-inﬂuence and shows the importance of personal prefer-
ences, it does not capture all aspects of inﬂuence in a system.

Preference and matching as a proxy for homophily
We use preference similarity as a proxy for modeling under-
lying homophily between people. To do this, one needs to
have sufﬁcient data to make reasonable preference models;
this appears to be the case in many online social networks
in which users generate large volumes of activity. Since the
effectiveness of the PME procedure hinges on the ability to
match non-friends to friends, larger networks, higher activity
levels, and context-appropriate metrics of similarity are likely
to improve the reliability of copy-inﬂuence estimates.
We also chose to account for personal preference by matching
friends with non-friends. A natural alternative would be to
directly compute a user’s afﬁnity for an item (e.g., using a
recommendation algorithm [46]) and use that to control for
a user’s own preference. However, the drawback is that the
interpretation of inﬂuence estimates would depend strongly
on the quality of the recommender algorithm as a proxy for
personal preference, while such a recommender would not be
able to account for external inﬂuences that might be evident
in other users’ activities.

A reasonably static network
The datasets we studied didn’t have timestamps for tie for-
mation, so we assumed a static social network. When time-
stamps for edge formation are available, we can make a sim-
ple modiﬁcation in the procedure to consider only people who
became friends before time T when computing the set of sim-
ilar strangers, then considering the current friends of a user
when computing Friends-Overlap.
Another limitation of our estimation procedure is that by con-
sidering all actions in the Matching phase (before time T) as
proxy for personal preference, we miss out on the effects of
copy-inﬂuence in those actions. If copy-inﬂuence is higher
early on, we might underestimate it, as to the PME proce-
dure the effects of early copy-inﬂuence would look like per-
sonal preference at time T. Models that relax the time T as-
sumption and compute both preferences and friend sets across
the history of the dataset are computationally expensive, but
possible—and would be interesting for bringing simulation-
based results around contagion and network change [21, 22]
toward real datasets. Further, better understanding how users’
susceptibility changes as a function of their time in the sys-
tem and their networks is an interesting question in its own
right.

All friends being equal
Finally, by comparing all friends of a user in aggregate with
their matched non-friends, we do not consider possible differ-
ences in how much copy-inﬂuence a particualr friend might

1101

wield. Past studies show that people perceive actions by
different friends differently based on their relationship with
them [4, 18, 31, 43]. In our current datasets, we did not have
any principled ways to estimate tie strength. Future work
would include accounting for these tie-speciﬁc variations in
inﬂuence.

CONCLUSION
We presented a statistical procedure for separating copy-
inﬂuence from behavior rooted in personal preferences in ob-
servational data. The procedure requires only activity and
network data for users, thus making it well-suited for many
online social networks. At least for the websites we studied,
applying the inﬂuence-estimation procedure shows that the
vast majority of people’s actions on items in social networks
can be explained without invoking copy-inﬂuence.
More generally, our results suggest the importance of hav-
ing clear deﬁnitions of inﬂuence and well-deﬁned behavior
and process models. Rather than a grand unifying theory of
all inﬂuence, we believe that focusing on speciﬁc processes
are more likely to be useful in producing deeper understand-
ing and models of inﬂuence. Our results further suggest that
past user activity can be a valuable resource for these models,
requiring minimal additional data about users while giving
valuable information about their underlying preferences.
Accurate estimates of inﬂuence, in turn, promise to improve
both models of behavior and design for online social net-
works. Individual-level estimates can lead to better models
of susceptibility for diffusion models and better prediction of
next actions of users for personalization tasks. They would
also enable evaluation of changes to feeds and interfaces and
be practically useful for improving user experiences on online
social networks.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation
under grants IIS 0910664 and IIS 1422484, and by a grant
from Google for computational resources. We thank Chenhao
Tan for helpful feedback on an early draft of the paper.

REFERENCES
1. Aris Anagnostopoulos, Ravi Kumar, and Mohammad

Mahdian. 2008. Inﬂuence and Correlation in Social
Networks. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining (KDD ’08). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
7–15. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1401890.1401897

2. Sinan Aral, Lev Muchnik, and Arun Sundararajan. 2009.

Distinguishing inﬂuence-based contagion from
homophily-driven diffusion in dynamic networks.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106,
51 (2009), 21544–21549. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0908800106
3. Sinan Aral and Dylan Walker. 2012. Identifying

Inﬂuential and Susceptible Members of Social
Networks. Science 337, 6092 (2012), 337–341. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1215842

4. Sinan Aral and Dylan Walker. 2014. Tie Strength,

Embeddedness, and Social Inﬂuence: A Large-Scale
Networked Experiment. Management Science 60, 6
(2014), 1352–1370. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2014.1936

5. Lars Backstrom, Dan Huttenlocher, Jon Kleinberg, and
Xiangyang Lan. 2006. Group Formation in Large Social
Networks: Membership, Growth, and Evolution. In
Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
(KDD ’06). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 44–54. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1150402.1150412

6. Eytan Bakshy, Dean Eckles, Rong Yan, and Itamar

Rosenn. 2012. Social Inﬂuence in Social Advertising:
Evidence from Field Experiments. In Proceedings of the
13th ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce (EC
’12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 146–161. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2229012.2229027

7. Eytan Bakshy, Jake M. Hofman, Winter A. Mason, and

Duncan J. Watts. 2011. Everyone’s an Inﬂuencer:
Quantifying Inﬂuence on Twitter. In Proceedings of the
Fourth ACM International Conference on Web Search
and Data Mining (WSDM ’11). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 65–74. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1935826.1935845

8. Eytan Bakshy, Brian Karrer, and Lada A. Adamic. 2009.

Social Inﬂuence and the Diffusion of User-created
Content. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM Conference on
Electronic Commerce (EC ’09). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 325–334. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1566374.1566421

9. Eytan Bakshy, Itamar Rosenn, Cameron Marlow, and
Lada Adamic. 2012. The Role of Social Networks in
Information Diffusion. In Proceedings of the 21st
International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW
’12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 519–528. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2187836.2187907

10. Michael S. Bernstein, Eytan Bakshy, Moira Burke, and
Brian Karrer. 2013. Quantifying the Invisible Audience
in Social Networks. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’13). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 21–30. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2470658

11. Robert M Bond, Christopher J Fariss, Jason J Jones,
Adam DI Kramer, Cameron Marlow, Jaime E Settle,
and James H Fowler. 2012. A 61-million-person
experiment in social inﬂuence and political
mobilization. Nature 489, 7415 (2012), 295–298.

12. Moira Burke, Cameron Marlow, and Thomas Lento.

2009. Feed Me: Motivating Newcomer Contribution in
Social Network Sites. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’09). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 945–954. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1518701.1518847

13. Damon Centola. 2013. Social Media and the Science of

Health Behavior. Circulation 127, 21 (2013),

1102

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

2135–2144. DOI:http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.101816

14. Meeyoung Cha, Alan Mislove, and Krishna P.

Gummadi. 2009. A Measurement-driven Analysis of
Information Propagation in the Flickr Social Network.
In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on
World Wide Web (WWW ’09). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 721–730. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1526709.1526806

15. Nicholas A. Christakis and James H. Fowler. 2007. The

Spread of Obesity in a Large Social Network over 32
Years. New England Journal of Medicine 357, 4 (2007),
370–379. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsa066082 PMID:
17652652.

16. Nicholas A Christakis and James H Fowler. 2009.

Connected: The surprising power of our social networks
and how they shape our lives. Little, Brown.

17. Robert B Cialdini. 2001. Inﬂuence: Science and

practice. Boston: Allyn & Bacon (2001).

18. Dan Cosley, Shyong K. Lam, Istvan Albert, Joseph A.
Konstan, and John Riedl. 2003. Is Seeing Believing?:
How Recommender System Interfaces Affect Users’
Opinions. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’03). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 585–592. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/642611.642713

19. David Crandall, Dan Cosley, Daniel Huttenlocher, Jon
Kleinberg, and Siddharth Suri. 2008. Feedback Effects
Between Similarity and Social Inﬂuence in Online
Communities. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining (KDD ’08). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
160–168. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1401890.1401914

20. Laura Dabbish, Colleen Stuart, Jason Tsay, and Jim

Herbsleb. 2012. Social Coding in GitHub: Transparency
and Collaboration in an Open Software Repository. In
Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’12). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 1277–1286. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2145204.2145396

21. Peter Sheridan Dodds and Duncan J Watts. 2005. A

generalized model of social and biological contagion.
Journal of Theoretical Biology 232, 4 (2005), 587–604.
22. Patrick Doreian and Frans Stokman. 2013. Evolution of

social networks. Routledge.

23. Bradley Efron and Robert Tibshirani. 1986. Bootstrap
methods for standard errors, conﬁdence intervals, and
other measures of statistical accuracy. Statistical science
(1986), 54–75.

24. Seth Flaxman, Sharad Goel, and Justin M Rao. 2013.
Ideological segregation and the effects of social media
on news consumption. Available at SSRN 2363701.

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

25. Rumi Ghosh and Kristina Lerman. 2010. Predicting

inﬂuential users in online social networks. In
Proceedings of KDD workshop on social network
analysis (SNA-KDD).

26. Malcolm Gladwell. 2006. The tipping point: How little

things can make a big difference. Little, Brown.

27. Sharad Goel, Duncan J. Watts, and Daniel G. Goldstein.

2012. The Structure of Online Diffusion Networks. In
Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on Electronic
Commerce (EC ’12). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
623–638. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2229012.2229058

28. Junming Huang, Xue-Qi Cheng, Hua-Wei Shen, Tao

Zhou, and Xiaolong Jin. 2012. Exploring Social
Inﬂuence via Posterior Effect of Word-of-mouth
Recommendations. In Proceedings of the Fifth ACM
International Conference on Web Search and Data
Mining (WSDM ’12). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
573–582. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2124295.2124365
29. Mohsen Jamali and Martin Ester. 2010. A Matrix

Factorization Technique with Trust Propagation for
Recommendation in Social Networks. In Proceedings of
the Fourth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems
(RecSys ’10). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 135–142.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1864708.1864736
30. Bruce Krulwich. 1997. Lifestyle ﬁnder: Intelligent user

proﬁling using large-scale demographic data. AI
magazine 18, 2 (1997), 37.

31. Chinmay Kulkarni and Ed Chi. 2013. All the News

That’s Fit to Read: A Study of Social Annotations for
News Reading. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’13). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2407–2416.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2481334

32. Timothy La Fond and Jennifer Neville. 2010.

Randomization Tests for Distinguishing Social Inﬂuence
and Homophily Effects. In Proceedings of the 19th
International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW
’10). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 601–610. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1772690.1772752

33. Kristina Lerman and Rumi Ghosh. 2010. Information
Contagion: An Empirical Study of the Spread of News
on Digg and Twitter Social Networks. In Proceedings of
International AAAI Conference on Web and Social
Media. 90–97.

34. Kevin Lewis, Marco Gonzalez, and Jason Kaufman.
2012. Social selection and peer inﬂuence in an online
social network. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 109, 1 (2012), 68–72.

35. Miller McPherson, Lynn Smith-Lovin, and James M
Cook. 2001. Birds of a feather: Homophily in social
networks. Annual review of sociology (2001), 415–444.

36. Solomon Messing and Sean J Westwood. 2012.

Selective exposure in the age of social media:
Endorsements trump partisan source afﬁliation when
selecting news online. Communication Research (2012).

1103

37. Eli Pariser. 2011. The ﬁlter bubble: What the Internet is

hiding from you. Penguin UK.

38. Judea Pearl. 2009. Causality: models, reasoning and

inference. Cambridge university press.

39. Daniel M. Romero, Brendan Meeder, and Jon Kleinberg.

2011. Differences in the Mechanics of Information
Diffusion Across Topics: Idioms, Political Hashtags,
and Complex Contagion on Twitter. In Proceedings of
the 20th International Conference on World Wide Web
(WWW ’11). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 695–704.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1963405.1963503

40. Matthew J Salganik, Peter Sheridan Dodds, and

Duncan J Watts. 2006. Experimental study of inequality
and unpredictability in an artiﬁcial cultural market.
Science 311, 5762 (2006), 854–856.

41. Carson J Sandy, Samuel D Gosling, and John Durant.

2013. Predicting consumer behavior and media
preferences: The comparative validity of personality
traits and demographic variables. Psychology &
Marketing 30, 11 (2013), 937–949.

42. Cosma Rohilla Shalizi and Andrew C Thomas. 2011.

Homophily and contagion are generically confounded in
observational social network studies. Sociological
methods & research 40, 2 (2011), 211–239.

43. Amit Sharma and Dan Cosley. 2013. Do Social

Explanations Work?: Studying and Modeling the Effects
of Social Explanations in Recommender Systems. In
Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on
World Wide Web (WWW ’13). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 1133–1144. http:
//dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2488388.2488487

44. Amit Sharma, Mevlana Gemici, and Dan Cosley. 2013.
Friends, Strangers, and the Value of Ego Networks for
Recommendation.. In Proceedings of International
AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media. 721–724.

45. Christian Steglich, Tom AB Snijders, and Michael

Pearson. 2010. Dynamic networks and behavior:
Separating selection from inﬂuence. Sociological
methodology 40, 1 (2010), 329–393.

46. Xiaoyuan Su and Taghi M Khoshgoftaar. 2009. A

survey of collaborative ﬁltering techniques. Advances in
artiﬁcial intelligence (2009).

47. Eric Sun, Itamar Rosenn, Cameron Marlow, and
Thomas M Lento. 2009. Gesundheit! Modeling
Contagion through Facebook News Feed.. In
Proceedings of International AAAI Conference on Web
and Social Media.

48. Jie Tang, Sen Wu, and Jimeng Sun. 2013. Conﬂuence:

Conformity Inﬂuence in Large Social Networks. In
Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
(KDD ’13). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 347–355.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2487575.2487691

