CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Increasing Collocated People’s Awareness of the Mobile 

User’s Activities: a Field Trial of Social Displays 

Pradthana 

Aris Malapaschas 

Thomas Olsson 

Kaisa Väänänen 

Jarusriboonchai 

Tampere University of Technology 

Korkeakoulunkatu 1, P.O.Box 553, 33101 Tampere Finland 

{firstname.lastname}@tut.fi 

ABSTRACT 
Many activities that have traditionally been performed with 
different  dedicated  physical  artifacts  are  now  done  with 
personal  mobile  devices.  Consequently,  the  privacy  of 
mobile  interfaces  has  hampered  social  observability  and 
chances for serendipitous interactions. For example, reading 
an  electronic  newspaper  with  a  mobile  device  does  not 
allow  the  surrounding  people  to  be  similarly  aware  of  the 
reader’s  activity  as  traditional  newspapers.  Social  displays 
are  additional  displays  on  mobile  devices  providing  the 
surrounding  people  with  light-weight  cues  about  the 
activities  of  the  device  user.  We  implemented  a  prototype 
that  reveals  the  user’s  current  active  application  and 
presents  its  name  on  an  e-ink  display  on  the  backside  of  a 
mobile  device.  We  conducted  a  ten-day  field  trial  with  13 
participants  using  the  prototype.  The  results  show  that  the 
prototype  was  able  to  increase  awareness  of  users’  mobile 
activities  and  occasionally 
interactions  with 
others, without significantly violating the sense of privacy. 

triggered 

Author Keywords 
interaction; 
Collocated 
interaction;  face-to-face 
social display; personal interface; user trial; field study.  

social 
interaction;  backside  display; 

activity 

awareness; 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.3.  Information  interfaces  and  presentation  (e.g.,  HCI): 
Group and Organization Interfaces. 

INTRODUCTION 
The  designs  of  mobile  devices  have  mainly  focused  on 
personal  use  and,  consequently,  they  are  also  perceived  as 
personal  devices  [10].  This  is  evident  from,  for  example, 
the  small  displays, 
input,  and  vibration 
feedback  that  is  intended  as  personal.  In  addition  to  the 
private  interface,  current  mobile  devices  enable  a  broad 
range  of  activities  that  were  previously  carried  out  with 

touch-based 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be  honored. 
Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or  republish,  to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA  
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819990  

dedicated physical artifacts. Therefore, many activities that 
traditionally  allowed  social  elements  have  become  private. 
For example, reading a newspaper allows others to see what 
one  is  doing,  even  to  guess  which  section  one  is  reading, 
and,  especially  in  close  relationships,  to  inquire  about  the 
content.  Similarly,  browsing  photos  or  watching  videos  on 
mobile  devices  have  lost  many  of  the  social  elements  that 
physical photos and televisions used to involve (e.g. a joint 
focus  and  a  shared  interface).  In  other  words,  the  privacy 
and  personal  characteristics  of  mobile  device  interfaces 
have decreased the awareness that surrounding others have 
of the mobile user’s activity. As a result, it could be argued 
that  opportunities  for  shared  experiences  and  serendipitous 
interactions around the activity have diminished.  

Additionally,  while  mobile devices have enabled people to 
be  increasingly  connected  to  remote  others,  in  many 
situations, a person engaged with their activities on mobile 
devices  creates  a  private  “bubble”  or  “cocoon”  [32]  and 
becomes  absent-minded  in  the  surrounding  ongoing  social 
situation  [18].  As  Turkle  states,  “when  someone  holds  a 
phone,  it  can  be  hard  to  know  if  you  have  that  person’s 
attention.  A  parent,  partner,  or  child  glances  down  and  is 
lost to another place” [32 p.161]. Especially within families 
or  groups  of  friends,  this  can  hamper  the  sense  of 
community and create feelings of social isolation. To study 
this  phenomenon,  numerous  projects  and  discussions  have 
recently  emerged 
the  HCI  and  CSCW  research 
communities (e.g. [9,12]). Also public initiatives have been 
formed to solve this social issue, e.g. stop phubbing1.  

in 

Awareness of others has been defined as “understanding of 
the  activities  of  others,  which  provides  a  context  for  your 
own  activity”  [7].  Raento  and  Oulasvirta  define  social 
awareness applications as “the idea of a group sharing real-
time  context  information  via  a  personal  and  ubiquitous 
terminal”  [27].  While  the  previous  work  on  awareness 
systems  has  focused  on  remote  awareness,  our  focus  is  on 
increasing awareness of the surrounding people. Therefore, 
in this paper  we  use the term  “activity awareness” to refer 
to  the  awareness  that  collocated  people  have  of  the 
activities mobile users are doing with their devices. 

1 http://stopphubbing.com/ 

1691

Social  displays  are  envisioned  as  additional  displays  on 
mobile devices that provide cues to nearby people about the 
mobile  device  user’s  activities  in  the  digital  realm  (e.g. 
mobile  services,  applications,  or  content  being  used). 
Remote  social  awareness  systems  have  been  found  to 
enhance  communication  and  collaboration  (e.g.  [34]), 
encourage  serendipitous  interaction  (e.g.  [3]),  and  increase 
the  sense  of  community  (e.g.  [4]).  Considering  these,  this 
study  aims  to  (1)  explore  the  potential  of  social  display  in 
increasing  activity  awareness  of  others  in  the  physical 
proximity;  and  (2)  consequences  of  increased  awareness 
from  the  social  display  to  the  mobile  devices  users  and 
others in the surroundings.  

This  paper  builds  on  our  earlier  paper  [13]  where  the 
concept  of  social  displays  was  first  introduced,  and  focus 
groups were organized to evaluate a few early scenarios and 
to explore the design space with co-design activities. While 
that  paper  surfaced  interesting  and  important  user-centered 
aspects of how the concept could be utilized and what risks 
it involves, it was based on scenario work and focus groups. 
To  advance  the  research,  this  paper  presents  a  functional 
prototype  consisting  of  both  a  software  application  and  a 
simple  hardware  prototype. The hardware consists of an e-
ink  display  that  could  be  attached  to  the  user’s  mobile 
device  with  the  social  display  application  installed.  The 
application  runs  in  the  background  and  displays  the  icon 
and  name  of  the  currently  active  application  on  the  device 
(further details in the Methodology section). This prototype 
was  used  to  run  a  10-day  trial  study  with  13  participants, 
qualitatively  investigating  a  broad  variety  of  participants’ 
viewpoints.  With  this  empirical  “in-the-wild”  trial  study, 
we  could  gain  more  detailed  understanding  of  the  benefits 
and  risks  involved  in  social  displays,  as  well  as  their 
implications to the sense of privacy and social interactions.  

To  summarize,  the  contribution  of  this  paper  is  two-fold. 
First,  we  present  the  design  and  implementation  of  a 
prototype for social displays. Second, we report the findings 
of field trial of using social display in real life situations for 
10  days.  These  insights  can  be  used  to  design  appropriate 
applications for social displays as well as other technologies 
aiming  to  increase  activity  awareness  and  enhance  social 
interactions between collocated people.  

RELATED WORK  
In  remote  communication,  technology  provides  additional 
cues  to  mimic  missing  physical  cues.  For  example, 
ContactContexts  provides  callers  with  current  status  of  the 
person  they  wish  to  talk  to  in  order  to  help  them  decide 
whether  it  is  appropriate  for  them  to  make  a  call  [24].  In 
close 
awareness 
encourages  collective  interactions  and  increases  sense  of 
community.  The  Break-Time  Barometer,  for  example, 
provides information about other colleagues in a workplace. 
[15].  A  stationary  alarm-shaped  device  provides  social 
activity  information  occurring  at  different  locations.  The 
aim  was  to  encourage  people  to  convene  together  during 

technology 

proximity, 

increasing 

1692

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

their coffee breaks. Similarly, Walky applies microblogging 
to  a  mundane  walking  activity,  telling  other  seniors  in  a 
community when someone is going out for a walk [22]. The 
information  is  believed  to  encourage  further  interaction 
between  seniors  within  the  community.  Jabberwocky  is  a 
mobile  application  that  enhances  a  sense  of  community  by 
informing  who  in  their  surroundings  have  been  previously 
encountered 
[25].  This  awareness 
information is also a resource for developing further social 
interaction. StudioBRIDGE provides additional information 
related  to  other  people,  groups,  locations,  and  events  in  an 
open working space. It is found to help users to decide the 
appropriateness  of  initiating  an  online  or  face-to-face 
interaction with others [35].  

in  public  places 

the  activities 

In  collocated  situations,  people  are  aware  of  others’ 
physical  presence.  However 
that  are 
happening in the digital world (e.g. with a smartphone) can 
remain  unknown.  This  creates  a  design  space  for  the 
technology  itself  to  increase  activity  awareness  and  create 
shared  experiences  in  collocated  situations.  Some  earlier 
research  has  explored  this  design  space  through  different 
approaches.  Pac-Man  Must  Die  applies  this  limitation  of 
awareness  to  enhance  the  collocated  game  experience  by 
creating  a  shared  display  out  of  multiple  mobile  device 
displays and making it advantageous if the players perform 
shoulder  surfing  while  playing  [29].  O-SNAP  supports 
collocated  collaborative  search  on  mobile  devices  by 
providing  a  mode  that  contains  search-related  information 
that users can share and comment across devices during the 
search [31]. Reetz and Gutwin study the effect of different 
gestural  interaction  sizes  in  maintaining  awareness  among 
collocated people in a group. The results show that gesture 
sizes do not have a significant effect on their visibility and 
awareness  to  surrounding  others  [28].  However,  the  study 
was  limited  to  the  observability  and  visibility  of  the 
gestures and did not address about what the user is working 
on. 

the 

interaction 

Rendering 
through  an  attached  pico 
projector  is  another  approach  for  making  mobile  device 
interfaces  more  visible  and  sharable  to  collocated  people. 
Cowan  et  al.  suggested  several  use  cases  in  which 
projectors attached to mobile devices could support face-to-
face interaction, including  facilitating  spontaneous  sharing, 
conversation  triggers  and  playful  interaction,  collaborative 
coordination,  and  personal  expression  [6].  Tweeting  Halo 
allows users to express themselves using personal projector 
to  project  the  user’s  Twitter  message  on  the  ceiling  above 
his/her head [23]. However, using a projector to extend the 
display  to  the  environment  has  been  found  challenging  in 
overcrowded  shared  spaces  with  respect  to  privacy  [6,23]. 
The  privacy  issue  concerns  both  private  content  being 
shared  in  public  places  and  forcing  eavesdropping,  that  is, 
others seeing content by mistake.  

In  addition  to  the  pico  projector,  there  are  other  physical 
objects  studied  for  the  purpose  of  encouraging  interaction 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

found 

to  help  enhancing 

between people. BubbleBadge is a small public display in a 
broach-like  frame  providing  dynamic  information  [8]. 
BubbleBadge 
face-to-face 
interaction  in  a  non-intrusive  way  [8].  Urbanhermers  is  a 
small  display  aim  to  be  used  as  a  dynamic  fashion 
accessory  providing  its  users  a  channel  to  express  and 
communicate  something  about  themselves  to  others  within 
face-to-face  physical  environment  [20].  Mugshot  [14]  is  a 
coffee  mug  with  a  small  OLED  display  attached  to  it 
presenting  an  image  with  the  aims  to  encourage  and 
enhance  social  interaction  during  an  encounter  between 
strangers  and  acquaintances.  Instead  of  utilizing  another 
physical  object,  we  are  interesting  in  extending  items  that 
people  are  already  using  and  carrying  together  with  their 
mobile devices.  

Backside of mobile devices has been widely explored as an 
alternative  input  channel  for  touch  screen  gestures  (e.g. 
[6,21]).  In  this  research,  using  a  social  display  is  an 
alternative  approach  for  making  interaction  with  mobile 
devices  noticeable  to  others  in  one’s  surroundings.  The 
backside  displays  have  been  explored  in  face-to-face 
interaction  between  customer  and  the  service  provider  in  a 
service  encounter  with  stationary  technology  [11].  The 
authors  argue  that  having  a  double  display  at  a  service 
counter has the potential to enhance trust, effectiveness, and 
collaboration  in  the  service  encounter.  Similarly,  Colley  et 
al.  propose  using  two-sided  tablet  computer  to  support 
doctor–patient  interaction  aiming  to  reduce  barriers  and 
provide useful information  to the patients  [5]. Kleinman et 
al.  explore  two-screen  laptop,  Billboard,  [16].  Billboard  is 
designed  to  be  similar  to  social  networks  (i.e.  users  create 
own  text  on  the  outer  display,  allowing  digital  likes  and 
etc.)  and  aims  to  invite  and  support  social  interaction 
between  surrounding  people.  Zhu  and  Höök,  similar  to 
Tweeting Halo, share users’ tweets on Twitter to collocated 
people via the phone case [36]. Yotaphone [37] and Inkcase 
[38]  are  existing  commercial  products  that  offer  a  second 
screen  on  the  back  of  mobile  phones  as  a  supplementary 
information  channel  and  that  have  gained  great  interest 
from  people,  especially  the  InkCase2.  Although  they  are 
mainly  marketed  for  personal  use,  we  considered  the 
backside  display  a  promising  form  factor  for  increasing 
activity  awareness.  Such  a  display  is  less  intrusive  with 
respect to privacy than a pico projector, but may still allow 
for  subtle  presentation  of  one’s  current  activity  with  a 
mobile device to other people around them.  

In  summary,  this  study  extends  the  research  on  activity 
awareness with a purpose and approach that have not been 
well  studied  before.  In  particular,  we  explore  the  potential 
of  the  novel  concept  of  social  displays  for  increasing 
activity  awareness  in  collocated  situations,  based  on  the 

                                                           
2  https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/378232716/inkcase-
plus-e-ink-screen-for-android-phone/description 

visual cues people can see from the user’s activity with the 
mobile device. 

METHODOLOGY 
As mentioned, this research continues our earlier empirical 
user  research  about  the  concept  of  social  displays  [13]  . 
Compared to the previously conducted focus groups, with a 
functional  prototype  for  a  field  trial,  we  believed  to  gain 
more  profound  and  valid  insights  about  the  perceived 
benefits,  risks  and  opportunities  the  concept  has.  The  field 
trial  allowed  us  to  also  look  into  aspects  like  how  people 
utilize  the  social  display  in  their  everyday  life,  how  it 
affects the behaviors and interactions between the user and 
the  surrounding  people.  Furthermore,  we  wanted 
to 
understand  if  and  how  the  experience  evolves  over  the 
period  of  use,  particularly  considering  the  perceived 
benefits after the novelty factor has worn off.  

 

Figure 1. Illustration of the prototype. A hinge enables the 

user to hold the phone without covering the display with their 

fingers. 

Design of the Prototype 
The  prototype  consists  of  a  3.5-inch  display  from  InkCase 
[38] attached to the backside of an  Android smartphone. It 
is  a  grayscale,  electrophoretic  ink  (e-ink)  display  to  which 
images  can  be 
transmitted  from  a  smartphone  via 
Bluetooth.  With  our  application,  called  Social  Display 
application, the display shows the icon and the name of the 
application that is currently  active on the phone,  making  it 
possible for people around the user to see which application 
on the mobile device he is using at the moment (Figure 1). 

The  displays  were  attached  to  the  participants’  phones  in 
the first meetings in a manner that the display would disturb 
the use of the mobile as little as possible. There was a hinge 
between the backside of the  mobile device and the display 
to keep the user from covering the display with their hands 
and  to  allow  the  display  to  hang  perpendicularly,  thus 
maximizing its visibility to other people. In most cases, the 
display was attached slightly below the camera, as shown in 
Figure 1, so that it would increase only the thickness of the 
mobile  device  by  approximately.  5.2  mm.  The  added 
weight was approximately 50g as the display itself weights 
only  45g.  We  considered  this  as  a  decent  prototype  that 
would  not  encumber  the  user  excessively  but  still  produce 
realistic  user  experiences  in  the  everyday  life.  The  same 
feature  could  be  implemented  with  off-the-shelf  solutions 
like the YotaPhone [37]. 

1693

the  smartphone  and  uses 

The Social Display application creates a service running in 
the  background  of 
the 
getRunningTasks  function  of  the  ActivityManager  class  to 
identify the main running application. Every time the active 
app changes, the service creates an image file that contains 
the icon and the name of the app and sends it to the display 
on  the  backside,  with  a  refresh  rate  of  approximately  2 
seconds. A pre-defined image is shown  when the user is at 
the  home  screen  or  when  the  main  display  of  the  phone  is 
locked. The lock-screen picture can be changed by the user 
chosen from any image in the phone’s gallery.  

Methods and Procedure 
To address the research questions about user experience and 
social  influences  of  the  prototype,  a  field  trial  with  13 
participants in a qualitative approach was conducted.  

information  about 

the  participants  and 

Study Procedure and Data Gathering 
For  each  participant,  the  study  consisted  of  10-12  days  of 
using the prototype, with his or her own smartphone. In the 
beginning  of  the  study  a  one-to-one  introduction  and 
interviewing session was held with every participant, during 
which they  were asked to answer questions related to their 
general attitudes and behaviors about privacy and their use 
of mobile phone in everyday life. The aim was to not only 
gather 
their 
expectations,  but  to  stimulate  their  thinking  so  that  they 
could  comprehend  the  purpose  why  the  prototype  was 
developed.  After  the  interview,  the  participants  were 
introduced  to  the  concept  and  the  prototype,  and  the 
necessary applications and hardware were installed on their 
phones.  Next, 
initial 
questionnaire 
impressions  and 
expectations of the prototype, as well as their viewpoints on 
certain  privacy-related  issues  of  phone  usage.  Some  of  the 
most  significant  questions  and  the  accumulated  data  of  the 
initial  questionnaire  are  shown  in  Table  1.  In  all  the 
questionnaires of the study, a 7-point Likert scale (from  -3 
to  3)  was  used  to  measure  the  participants’  level  of 
agreement, -3 corresponding to “completely disagree” and 3 
to “completely agree”.  

the  participants  answered  an 

regarding 

their 

first 

In  the  evening  of  each  day  during  the  trial  period,  the 
participants  provided  answers  to  a  short  questionnaire 
regarding  their  experience  with  the  social  display  during 
that  day.  With  both  open-ended  questions  and  agreement 
statements,  they  were  asked  to  describe  their  behavior  and 
feelings while using their phone, as well as the behavior of 
people  around  them  in  relation  to  the  use  of  the  social 
display.  They  were  also  asked  to  report  the  conversations 
that  occurred  with  others  (if  any)  because  of  the  content 
shown on the display. 

A  second  interview  meeting  was  arranged  with  every 
participant  at  the  end  of  the  trial  period.  They  were  asked 
about  their  experience  and  interactions  during  the  whole 
study  from  various  viewpoints:  for  example,  the  benefits 
and drawbacks of the social display to both the user and the 
surrounding  people,  memorable  positive  and  negative 

1694

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

experiences,  if  and  how  it  had  increased  the  activity 
awareness  of  people  around  them  and  the  participants 
themselves,  and  how  the  display  could  be  utilized  in  other 
ways  or  for  other  purposes.  Again,  the  used  methods 
included both interviewing and a questionnaire. 

Finally,  we had a short questionnaire and interview  for the 
people  who the participants often  met during  the trial (e.g. 
spouses, roommates, friends) to survey their impressions of 
the  prototype  and  if  they  felt  to  be  more  aware  of  the 
participants’  activities  with  mobile  devices.  Unfortunately, 
only 8 people (3 partners of participants, 2 close friends, 1 
colleague, 1 classmate, and 1 roommate) responded. 

themes 

triangulation, 

a  bottom-up  data-driven 

Data Analysis 
The  analysis  of  qualitative  data  followed  a  procedure  that 
reminds  the  affinity  diagramming  process  [2]  but  with 
digital  tools.  First,  it  was  transcribed  (in  verbatim)  and 
digitized  into  excel  files.  Then  it  was  collaboratively 
analyzed  with 
approach, 
identifying  a  hierarchy  of 
the  data  and 
categorizing  all  the  answers  to  the  themes  and  subthemes. 
To  utilize  researcher 
three  researchers 
analyzed  the  data  independent  of  each  other.  The  gained 
insights  were 
form  a  common 
understanding  of  the  findings  as  well  as  commonly  agreed 
categories.  For  themes 
in  several 
participants’  data,  quantification  was  performed.  As  for 
numerical  data  from  the  questionnaires,  the  averages  were 
calculated  and  some  trend  charts  of  how  opinions  change 
day  after  day  were  drawn.  No  advanced  analysis  of  the 
statistical  significance  of  any  numerical  results  were 
calculated due to the limited N – however, that was neither 
the intention in this qualitatively driven study. 

that  were  present 

then  discussed 

in 

to 

Questions 

Mean 

SD 

Familiar people sometimes ask what I am 

1.31 

0.91 

currently doing with my phone 

I often bring up the content I browse as 

1.69 

0.61 

discussion topics 

My friends/family/colleagues sometimes 

0.92 

1.07 

peek at my phone 

I often peek at the displays of other 

0.15 

1.56 

familiar people 

Table 1. Selected statements from the initial questionnaire. 
The scale is from -3 (completely disagree) to +3 (completely 

agree). 

Participants and Recruiting 
The  participants  included  7  males  and  6  females  and 
represented 7 different nationalities (Finnish being the most 
common – 6/13), their ages ranging from 21 to 42 years old 
(average  26)  consisting  of  full  time  university  students 
(9/13),  part-time  workers  (2/13),  and  full-time  workers 
(2/13).  The  recruitment  of  the  participants  was  done  on  a 
voluntary  basis  via  email  lists  and  bulletin  boards  at  the 
local university. They were offered a gift worth 40EUR as a 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

compensation  for  their  efforts  in  the  trial  study.  The 
participants were selected based on a screening survey that 
inquired  how  active  mobile  users  they  are  and  how  much 
they are engaged in various social activities, thus indicating 
how  suitable  they  would  be  for  using  technology  for  such 
social  purposes.  The  minimum  requirements  were  that  the 
participants are savvy smartphone users and socially active 
in their everyday lives. The chosen participants of this study 
in  general  are  familiar  with  sharing  their  mobile  device 
activities  with  others  to  some  extent  and  also  involve 
mobile devices in their interactions with others (Table 1). 

viewers  did  not  say  a  word  but  merely  observed.  When 
concluding their impression of the concept, many described 
the  content  of  the  display  as  too  inadequate  to  trigger  any 
significant  interaction.  After  this  overview,  the  following 
sections provide a more in-depth report of the expectations 
and experiences of using the social display.   

RESULTS 
We  start  with  an  analysis  of  the  user  expectations  and 
experiences  from  the  social  display  prototype,  covering 
aspects  of  perceived  benefit,  privacy,  and  effects  on 
behavior. This is  followed by the participants’ impressions 
of  the  potential  of  the  social  display  for  increasing 
awareness  and  the  social  consequences  of  using  the 
prototype  with 
the 
participants  and  others  in  the  surroundings.  The  reported 
results include data  from both the interviews (initial, final) 
and  the  questionnaires  (initial,  daily,  final)  and  both  from 
the  answers  of  the  participants  and  of  their  often-met 
friends or partners, which we refer to as viewers.  

interactions  between 

respect 

to 

Expectations and User Experiences 
When  the  concept  of  the  social  display  was  introduced  to 
the participants in the first meeting, they found it interesting 
and  often  described  it  as  “unusual”  or  “different”.  They 
expressed  to  be  curious  about  the  effects  the  prototype 
might create and about what others might comment on their 
activities  with  mobile  devices:  “It  would  be  interesting  to 
see  what  kind  of  reactions  I  will  get.  It  sort  of  tells  how 
people  pay  attention  to  you  while  you  don’t  even  realize” 
(M, 34). Most participants (11/13) were rather unconcerned 
with  the  idea  of  having  the  prototype  for  10  days  and 
presenting  their  phone  activity  to  others  and  did  not  think 
that  it  would  affect  the  way  they  use  their  mobile  device. 
Only  two  participants  were  concerned  with  the  fact  that 
their  activity  will  be  exposed  and  cannot  lie  about  their 
activity when having the social display, “You cannot really 
lie with this thing. If someone asks what I am doing and he 
sees Facebook but I say something else, then…” (F, 24). 

Interestingly, after having used the social display for 10-12 
days,  the  participants’  opinions  about  the  social  display 
changed rather much (Figure 2). Participants tended to have 
more  positive  opinion  regarding  the  privacy  of  social 
display. Even though their activities with mobile devices in 
fact  became  less  private,  it  seems  that  the  expectations  of 
the  privacy  intrusiveness  were  more  negative  than  the 
actual  experiences.  Considering  the  benefits,  participants 
appeared  somewhat  disappointed  by  its  impacts  on  social 
interaction.  They  mostly  experienced  interactions  that  they 
considered as minor social interactions: others around them, 
or the viewers, merely asked what they were doing but the 
interaction hardly developed into a conversation. Often, the 

1695

 

Figure 2. Averages of the participants’ agreements with UX 
statement before and after the trial period. n =13; completely 

disagree = -3; completely agree = 3;  

Impacts on Mobile Usage Behavior and Sense of Privacy 
We  identified  two  main  factors  in  the  social  display  that 
affected the participants’ behavior while using their mobile 
devices:  the  looks  of  the  prototype  and  its  content.  The 
prototype’s  appearance  and  the  way  it  is  attached  were 
reported  to  draw  attention,  making  the  participants  feel 
somewhat  embarrassed  during  the  first  days,  especially 
when  in  unfamiliar  environments  surrounded  by  strangers. 
However, they reported that this feeling reduced after a few 
days  and  that,  over  time,  they  started  feeling  more 
comfortable with having the prototype.  

Interestingly, the social display showing only an icon of the 
currently  used  application  was  generally  not  considered  to 
be too privacy intrusive at any phase of the trial. Before the 
trial there were some who had slightly more concerns than 
others  regarding  privacy  but  the  prototype  was  acceptable 
even for them. Compared to what they expected before the 
trial,  after  the  trial  most  of  the  participants  (10/13) 
experienced  less  privacy  issues.  As  one  participant  stated, 
“it’s  not  privacy  intrusive  because  it  doesn’t  show  exactly 
what I am doing. If it showed for example all the messages I 
type, then it might be. I would be thinking what I’m writing 
all  the  time”  –  (M,  22).  Those  participants  whose  privacy 
concerns increased (3/10) during the trial reported that they 
had  come  across  situations  that  had  raised  their  awareness 
of  the  visibility  of  their  activity  on  mobile  devices. 
Nevertheless, also according to their assessments the sense 
of  privacy  remained  within  acceptable  limits:  “It  was  just 
interesting  to  realize  I  couldn't  hold  up  my  phone  on  my 
hands  on  lectures,  because  that  would  show  the  teacher 
what I was doing...” – (M, 25).  

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

-0.5

-1

-1.5

(1) Prototype violates privacy
(2) My mobile device activities are private
(3) Social display was beneficial for me
(4) Social diplay was beneficial to others around me

1.38

1.08

0.38

0.46

(1)

-0.38

(2)

-0.15

(3)

(4)

-0.77

-1.31

Before

After

Increased Self-Awareness of One’s Own Mobile Device Use 
Based  on  the  initial  questionnaire  and  interviews,  all 
participants thought that excessive use of mobile devices in 
social  gatherings  is  impolite.  They  admitted  to  often  be 
guilty  of  doing  the  same  when,  for  example,  hanging  out 
with  friends,  attending  a  lecture,  or  relaxing  at  home  with 
other  family  members.  The  final  questionnaire  indicated 
that the social display in general did not affect participants’ 
mobile device usage behavior (Figure 3: mobile usage when 
with  strangers  and  when  with  acquaintances).  Also  in  the 
interviews,  it  was  often  reported  that  the  participants’ 
behavior  remained  the  same,  however,  with  a  clarification 
that  they  were  more  cautious  with  their  activities  in  some 
situations.  Most  of  the  participants  (8/13)  noticed  to 
become  more  aware  and  careful  with  their  activities  with 
mobile devices. Five of them reported that, at times, having 
the social display suspended the use of the mobile device in 
social  situations  because  they  felt  that  the  use  was  not 
appropriate  in  the  situation.  The  situations  in  which  this 
happened  included  cases  where  they  were  expected  to  pay 
attention  to  ongoing  activities  in  front  of  someone  (e.g.  in 
classroom,  in  a  concert).  Using  a  mobile  device  in  such 
situations is already impolite, and having the social display 
seemed to add to the feeling of impoliteness.  

 

Figure 3. Effects of Social Display to device usage behavior 

and others around them 

The  feeling  of  impoliteness  was  observed  to  be  related  to 
the  application  one  is  using  as  well  as  to  the  situation. 
Participants reported to have felt less comfortable when the 
activities  on  mobile  devices  are  not  related  to  the  ongoing 
activity  in  the  social  setting.  “Once  we  went  to  [a 
performance]  and  we  were  sitting  quite  close  to  the  stage, 
at times I checked my phone. [At the spot,] the performers 
did notice what we were doing and they would think that we 
were  not  paying  attention  if  they  see  that  we  are  using 
Facebook,  so  I  was  trying  to  avoid  showing  that.  I  didn’t 
want to disturb  them” – (M,  34). On the other hand, if the 
activity  with 
to  ongoing 
activities, the social display could, in fact, turn the use of a 
mobile device more comfortable in the situation: “when you 
are  in  a  social  environment  where  it’s  impolite  to  use 
cellphones,  and  you  want  to read  your  e-mails  and  people 
are  wondering  ‘is  he  really  reading  his  emails  or  is  he 

the  mobile  clearly  related 

1696

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

playing candy crush or something’. In that situation it can 
be  reaffirming  for  the  person  that  they  can  see  that  he’s 
actually  using  Gmail.  It  can  give  more  confidence  to  you 
that  you’re  actually  doing  what  you’re  supposed  to  do”  – 
(M,  22).  Considering  the  formality  of  the  social  situation, 
self-awareness  and  being  conscious  of  one’s  own  mobile 
use  was  only  observed  in  more  formal  social  situations, 
such as a lecture or a performance. In casual situations (e.g. 
chatting or hanging out with friends), social display did not 
influence  the  participants  as  they  reported  using,  e.g., 
Facebook or WhatsApp normally in those situations.  

The Viewer Matters 
When not in any specific social situations, the relationships 
with  the  others  in  the  surroundings  were  reported  to  affect 
the  participants’  behavior  in  using  their  social  displays. 
Here, the opinions were split in two main viewpoints. Half 
of  the  participants  (6/13)  were  rather  cautious  with  their 
activity  and  applications 
they  are  using  when  with 
strangers:  “I  was  hiding  the  display  because  I  don’t  want 
other  people  to  see  what  I’m  doing.  Other  times,  I  didn’t 
even  use 
the  application  I  wanted  because  I  was 
surrounded  by  strangers  and  I  didn’t  want  them  to  know. 
The  worst  would  be  dating  applications.  Of  course,  I 
wouldn’t  mind  to  show  that  to  my  friends.  For  example 
when  I  was  eating  at  a  restaurant  I  didn’t  like  it  that 
everybody could peek and say ‘Hey, look at that guy trying 
to  get  a  date!’”  –  (M,  24).    Additionally,  participants 
reported to be cautious if the applications they are using are 
related  to  others,  i.e.  strangers:  “we  were  in  a  party,  and 
people  came  dressed  up  funny  and  weird,  and  also  some 
people  were  dancing  weird.  I  want  to  share  this  moment 
with my friends, taking a picture of a guy … when I take a 
picture of him I don’t want him to see. I was more cautious 
there” – (M, 34).  

The  other  half  of  the  participants  (7/13),  interestingly,  did 
not  notice  any  differences  in  their  behavior  with  mobile 
devices  while  being  with  friends  versus  with  strangers. 
They  considered  the  content  of  the  social  display  as  rather 
generic  and  safe  to  share  with  anyone.  Additionally,  they 
did  not  consider  the  applications  they  use  to  be  bizarre  or 
unusual,  and  thought  that  strangers  mostly  only  mind  their 
own  business  anyway:  “There  wasn’t  a difference  between 
when  with  friends  or  with  strangers.  It  was  surprising.  I 
thought  I  would  be  more  careful  among  strangers  but  no. 
For  example,  Instagram  and  Facebook  are  quite  okay.  I 
don’t  feel  ashamed  of  using  those  as  long  as  it  doesn’t  go 
into detail. If I were using some unusual applications, then 
maybe.” – (F, 25) 

Increasing  Viewers’  Awareness 
Interactions 

and  Triggering 

Visibility of the Social Display 
Placing  the  social  display  on  the  backside  of  a  mobile 
device  can  be  questioned  with  respect  to  its  visibility  to 
others.  As  we  required  the  participants  to  slightly  change 
the  way  they  usually  hold  the  device  (as  can  be  seen  in 

7

4

8

5

8

0

2

0

0

0

0

2

1

2

0

Acquaintance asked

about content of social

Mobile device usage
when with strangers

Mobile device usage

when with acquaintances

display

Much less

Slightly less

No change

Slightly more Much more

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Figure  1),  some  reported  that  when  in  a  hurry  they 
sometimes  covered  the  social  display.  Moreover,  this 
positioning makes the display visible to only those directly 
opposite  to  the  device  user.  Nevertheless,  the  responses 
from  the  viewers  indicated  that  all  of  them  noticed  the 
display  and  its  content  at  least  a  few  times  in  their 
encounters with the participants. Having said that, the social 
display  was  appreciated  for  allowing  its  content  to  be 
visible  in  the  physical  environment  –  allows  quick  glances 
without  having  to  turn  on  any  applications  to  get  a  cue  of 
what  the  user  is  doing,  “it  would  be  fine  to  have  just  an 
application  that  works  with  Bluetooth  and  shows  what 
nearby  people  are  doing,  but  you’d  have  to  turn  on  the 
application  every  time  you  want  to  see  what  others  are 
doing. It’s not like you can just look around” – (discussion 
between a participant M, 24 and his roommate). Moreover, 
the viewers reported that they did not feel uncomfortable or 
impolite looking at the participants’ social display and most 
of  them  (5/8)  found  themselves  peeking  at  the  display  at 
least a few times during their encounters. 

the  funny  display,  or  even  asking 

Triggering Interactions with Others in the Surroundings 
The  participants  reported  having  had  various  social 
interactions  with  their  friends  and  relatives  as  results  of 
having the social display. Most of them happened due to the 
novelty  effect  of  the  form  factor:  just  having  an  additional 
display  hanging  on  the  mobile  device  triggered  questions 
from  particularly  familiar  people  and  acquaintances. 
Examples  include  friendly  teasing  and  joking  around 
because  of 
the 
participants  to  use  the  mobile  device  to  see  it  again  in 
action: “I have a friend who had a funny reaction by saying 
‘Now  I  want  to  look  at  what  you  are  doing’”  –  (F,  24). 
Occasionally,  others  asked  the  participants  about  the 
content  presented  on  the  social  display,  including  short 
questions  like  “hey,  what  are  you  doing  on  Facebook”  or 
“how is your calendar?” Social display was then seen as a 
resource  for  a  few 
jokes  and  small  conversations, 
encouraging  an  open  and  fun  atmosphere  between  family 
members  or  friends.  Also,  when  the  social  display  hinted 
about  an  atypical  activity  or  application  people  got  easily 
interested: “when I was using something else, for example, I 
was  looking  for  score  results,  one  friend  asked  what  it  is 
about. I then explained that I was looking at sport results. It 
resulted  in  us  having  a  sport-related  conversation”  –  (M, 
22).   

Half  of  the  viewers  (4/8)  agreed  that  social  display 
increased  awareness  of  what  the  participants  were  doing 
with  their  mobile  devices.  This  awareness  sometimes 
increased the curiosity and resulted in a conversation: “I've 
noticed  she  was  using  different  Russian  apps  which  I  was 
not  familiar  with  and  I  asked  her  about  it.  Now  I 
understand  more  of  her  interests  and  what  she  likes”  – 
(close  friend  of  a  participant).  The  awareness  was  also 
found  to  help  indicating  interactivity  status  of  the  person: 
“it helps to see if [the user is] paying attention to me; if [he 
is] listening at all” – (close friend). This also allows others 

to interrupt and try to draw the  user’s attention back to the 
ongoing  interaction:  “My  girlfriend  and  I  were  having  a 
discussion  and  at  the  same  time  someone  messaged  me  on 
Facebook.  […] She  knew  that  I  was  doing  that  because  of 
the  [social  display].  She  didn’t  like  it  and  made  a  joke 
about it” – (M, 34). 

level  as  what  more 

Social Display versus Traditional Artifacts 
The  prototype  aimed  to  increase  activity  awareness  to  a 
similar 
traditional  artifacts  as 
newspapers, books, or televisions allow. While most of the 
viewers  (6/8)  expressed  positive  opinions  about  the  social 
display,  only  4/8  of  them  actually  reported  that  their 
awareness regarding the participants’ activities with mobile 
devices increased. This implies that the prototype is lacking 
some  aspects  that  traditional  artifacts  have.  Participants 
indicated  that  traditional  artifacts,  e.g.  a  newspaper  or 
magazine,  provide  much  more  information  about  what  the 
person  is  doing:  “[Social  display]  gives  clues  about  what 
you  are  doing;  in  that  sense  it  is  similar  to  [those 
traditional  artifacts].  But  when  you  are  watching  a  movie, 
TV or reading a newspaper, [those artifacts] give others a 
lot more information. For a newspaper, if you don’t see the 
article, you might still see which section or headlines [one 
is  reading].  This  brings  an  in-depth  conversation  topic. 
Social display doesn’t provide to the same extend because it 
just  shows  [the  name  of  the  application,  for  example] 
WhatsApp  or  Gmail.  They  might  think  that,  ‘OK,  he  is 
doing that’, but not anything else” – (M, 22). Moreover, the 
prototype  has  a  disadvantage  in  terms  of  size  and  the 
limited  viewing  angle,  making  it  is 
less  observable 
compared  to  a  book  or  a  newspaper:  “[social  display] 
almost  fulfill  its  purpose,  but  when  you  are  reading  a 
newspaper, almost everybody in the same area can see it” – 
(M, 24).  

More Detailed Content: More Interesting yet Intrusive 
The application for social displays showed simply the name 
and  icon  of  the  application  currently  in  use.  Most  of  the 
viewers  (6/8)  agreed  that  the  display  should  provide  more 
information than this to make it more useful for others and 
increase the likelihood of triggering social interactions. “As 
you can only see the application that is being used, it's hard 
to  comment  on  the  things  that  are  really  happening.  You 
don't  really  know  much  more  than  before,  only  you  get 
more  curious  of  what  is  happening.”  –  (close  friend).  In 
addition,  the  participants  reported  similar  comments  from 
their other friends and relatives: “Feedback that I got from 
other people by showing only the application I’m using was 
that it doesn’t give enough information to do anything with 
that”  –  (M,  27).  They  pointed  out  that  the  activity  on  a 
mobile  device  could  be  interesting,  but  displaying  the 
application  a  user  is  using  does  not  usually  tell  enough 
about – or even have a direct relation to  – what the user is 
doing.  It  was  agreed  that  for  specific  applications  like 
games,  the  name  and  the  icon  of  the  application  can  be 
enough.  For  internet  browsing  and  social  media  the 
application  name  is  inadequate:  “I  don’t  think  it  gave  out 

1697

enough information. The thing is that I usually check news 
and other  things  from  Facebook  or  Chrome. It  only  shows 
the  application,  not  the  news  title.  It  doesn’t  show  the 
actual stuff that I’m looking at. People are not going to say 
‘Hey, what’s on Chrome?’ For Facebook yes; maybe once 
or twice they asked me ‘what’s on Facebook?’” – (M, 25).  

The  viewers  agreed  and  some  of  the  participants  (7/13) 
explicitly stated that adding  more information  would  make 
the  content  on  the  social  display  more  interesting,  better 
increase  activity  awareness,  and  increase  the  possibility  of 
having  an  interaction  between  users  and  others  around 
them.  The  detailed  information  was  envisioned  to  be,  for 
example, news headlines or Twitter activities. 

While  the  participants  envisioned  interesting  uses  and 
contents  for  the  social  display,  some  speculated  that  it 
would  also  affect  their  behavior  more  if  it  showed  more 
than  currently:  “if  it  showed  more,  then  I  would  probably 
think  about  what  I  am  doing  a  lot  more.  I  wouldn’t  want 
everyone  to  see  on  which  webpage  I  am.  I  don’t  see  any 
point  in  that.  I  think  it  is  too  much”  –  (F,  24).  One 
participant  proposed  an  alternative  design  with  additional 
information  related  to  the  activity  already  hinted  by  the 
social display: “If I am using [social media], I could show 
also  the  activity  that  I  am  doing,  like  if  I’m  posting 
something,  chatting,  or  looking  at  a  profile.  […]  if  I  am 
using the email, it could say that I am reading or writing; a 
bit more information but not too private” – (F, 24). 

Instead  of  sharing  more  details  about 
the  current 
application,  allowing  device  users  to  customize  content  on 
the social display could make the content more interesting. 
Interestingly,  the  possibility  to  customize  the  content  the 
display showing when their mobile devices are locked or at 
the  home  screen  got  little  attention:  only  3/13  actively 
changed  the  pictures.  Others  seemed  to  associate  the 
customization  with  changing  the  background  picture  on 
their devices, which they not either were actively changing. 
“[Being  able  to  change  the  picture]  is  quite  nice.  It  is  the 
same as background picture of the phone. In the beginning 
I changed it a lot, but now it has been the same for maybe a 
year” – (M, 24). Also, none of the viewers mentioned about 
the participants’ custom pictures. Instead, some participants 
(5/13)  envisioned  an  option  of  replacing  the  application 
icons  with  user-selected  pictures,  writing  own  messages  to 
the display, expressing one’s  mood through the display, or 
manually selecting content to be shown. “It could be really 
good  if  there  were  features  that  allow  writing  something 
into the display, changing the setting, and also writing own 
message to others. It makes the display more personal. It’s 
more  ‘me’”  –  (M,  22).  A  possibility  to  choose  which 
content to be presented also satisfies participants’ concerns 
for privacy.  

The Displayed Information is Just “Good to Know” 
As  mentioned, 
reported  occasional 
interactions with others around them as a result of the social 
display  and  its  potential  in  increasing  activity  awareness. 

the  participants 

1698

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

if  more  detailed  or 

However, most of the time, social display provided merely 
good-to-know  information,  which  does  not  necessarily 
intend  to  encourage  interaction  regardless  the  detail  of  the 
content,  “One  doesn't  need  to  ask  what  does  s/he  doing  in 
the  phone,  just  look  at  the  screen  and  be  aware”  – 
(classmate).  Even 
interesting 
information was provided, it would not necessarily increase 
interaction  between  people,  as  one  participant  speculated: 
“Even  if  you  are  reading  a  newspaper,  nobody  actually 
comes to you and says something about it. I guess it has the 
same effect. People might know what you are doing but they 
don’t  say  you  anything”  –  (M,  34)  Nevertheless,  this 
awareness  can  stop  others  from  asking  or  interrupting  the 
user  as  they  already  know  what  he  is  doing:  “I  guess 
without  the  display,  it  would  be  easier  to  get  interrupted 
because you don’t know what the other person is doing” – 
(M,  27).  Although  the  majority  did  not  notice  any 
difference to  previous times,  a few participants agreed that 
there  are  slight  changes  in  others’  asking  and  interrupting 
also  observed  (Figure  3:  acquaintance  asked  about  content 
of social display).  

Some  of  the  viewers  interpreted  activities  on  the  users’ 
mobile  devices  as  private  actions  and  was  none  of  their 
business, thus, they did not pay much attention to the social 
display in general: “I think what people are doing with their 
own mobile is covered by privacy. I'm just curious in what 
they  are  doing  but  I  did  not  pay  much  attention  in  that 
screen  because  it  is  not  my  business”  –  (roommate). 
Participants  also  reported  similar  perceptions  with  others 
during the trial:  “everybody could see what I’m doing with 
my  phone,  but  nobody  cared”  –  (F,  25).  One  participant 
commented  that  others  did  not  care  because  there  is  no 
good reason for them to do so: “People do stuff and others 
don’t  care.  Why  should  they?”  –  (F,  24).  Another 
mentioned that regardless of the activity on  mobile device, 
he will wait until the user finishes using the device: “I don’t 
care  too  much  about  what  applications  other  people  are 
using…if  I  want  to  talk  to  somebody  I  will  probably  wait 
until they’re done using their phones. The fact that they just 
use their phone is the most important for me” – (M, 24).  

However, the situations vary depending on the situation and 
relationships  between  the  device  user  and  others  around. 
For example, as mentioned by two participants, their family 
members  were  quite  interested  in  the  content  on  the  social 
display  and  were  asking  about  it  all  the  time:  “My  family, 
they  were  interested  in  what  I’m  doing  with  my  phone. 
When  I  was  at  my  parents’  house,  my  mom  was  always 
asking, ‘what is that app’, ‘what is that for?’” – (F, 21). At 
the  same  time,  no  serendipitous  interactions  with  strangers 
were reported by any of the participants. 

DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This  study  explored  the  potential  of  social  display  in 
increasing  activity  awareness  with  a  trial  study  in  real-life 
contexts.  The  results  indicate  that  the  display  helped 
increasing  awareness  of  user’s  activities  on  mobile  device 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

to  others  in  the  surroundings,  up  to  a  certain  extent.  In 
general,  the  social  display  emphasizes  users’  mobile 
activities,  making  them  more  observable and  unambiguous 
to  people  around  them.  This  was  found  to  often  result  in 
making  the  use  of  the  mobile  device  more  acceptable  in 
certain  social  situations.  In  some  other  social  situations, 
however,  also  depending  on  the  applications  used,  it  can 
make the mobile device usage quite bothersome to both the 
user and others around them.  

Activity Awareness and Privacy of Social Display 
Mobile  devices  provide  their  users  with  freedom  of 
interaction,  communication,  and  activities  anywhere  and 
anytime regardless of the contexts.  Interestingly, the social 
display not only increased the awareness of the surrounding 
others  but  seemed  to  encourage  the  participants  (i.e.  the 
mobile  device  users  themselves)  to  pay  more  attention  to 
the  ongoing  social  situation  and  consider  when  the  use  of 
mobiles is appropriate. The results imply that there are three 
main factors that affected the participants' decision whether 
to  use  their  mobile  device  or  not  while  having  the  social 
display attached: (1) the application they were about to use, 
(2)  the  ongoing  social  situation,  and  (3)  their  level  of 
familiarity (relationship) with the viewers. All these factors, 
along  with  the  personal  privacy  tolerance,  which  varied 
from one participant to another, also affected the way users 
believed  to  be  perceived  by  others.  For  example,  some 
participants  did  not  prefer  the  use  of  dating  applications 
when  among  strangers  but  considered  it  fine  when  among 
friends.  As  a  result,  occasionally  hiding  the  display  or 
avoiding  use  of  mobile  devices  in  some  social  situations 
was reported.   

The current design of social display is in the borderline if it 
invades  the  privacy  of  the  mobile  device  users  or  not.  On 
one  hand,  it  does  not  provide  in-application  privacy 
configuration  and  sometimes  it  seemed  to  exceed  the 
desired  level  awareness  be  presented  to  others  around.  On 
the  other  hand,  when  we  consider  privacy  as  the  right  to 
select  what  information  is  known  to  what  people  [33], 
social  display  actually  allows  the  users  to  control  their 
privacy  relatively  much.  Activity  awareness  applications 
usually  provide 
the 
audience’s  own  devices  (e.g.  [24,35]).  The  information  is 
constantly  presented  and  viewers  can  access 
the 
information  anytime  and  anywhere  with  or  without  the 
information  owner  knowing.  This  is  not  the  case  with  the 
social display: the activity information can be seen only by 
the  people  in  the  physical  proximity  and  when  the  user  is 
using  the  mobile  device.  This  allows  users  to  evaluate  the 
ongoing  situation  and  timely  react  to  it  by,  for  example, 
hiding the social display or putting the device away.  

information  on 

the  awareness 

Social Display Bursting the Mobile Bubble 
Some  events  of  serendipitous  interactions  as  results  of  the 
social  display  were  reported.  Additionally,  the  social 
display  and  its  content  were  perceived  as  sources  of  jokes 
and  small  conversations,  leading  to  an  open  and  relaxing 

atmosphere  among  friends  and  family  members.  However, 
generally 
like 
engaging people in  social interaction  was  hampered by the 
lack of detail of the user’s activity on the social display. 

the  potential  for  social  consequences 

this 

thus,  reduce 

regard.  Often 

joint  activity,  and 

Ongoing  social 
interactions  create  social  norms;  for 
example, the expectations from others to pay attention to an 
ongoing 
the  social 
appropriateness of using mobile device in the situation. The 
social  display  seemed  to  make  people  more  self-aware  in 
this 
to  politeness  and 
consideration  of  others,  e.g.  not  disturbing  others  by  using 
personal  mobile  devices  while  being  involved  in  a  social 
situation that demands attention. In other words, the reasons 
behind  hiding  and  suspending  the  use  of  mobile  device 
were  not  only  about  the  users  not  wanting  others  to  know 
about  applications  they  are  using  (i.e.  privacy-related 
reasons), 
themselves 
appropriately in the current situation (cf. [27]).   

presenting 

related 

but 

also 

about 

Moreover,  the  aforementioned  factors,  application  and 
social  situation,  can  also  generate  understanding  and 
empathy  from  surrounding  others  towards  the  users.  For 
example,  when  the  use  of  a  mobile  device  is  generally 
considered improper but necessary due to for example work 
reasons,  the  social  display  increased  the  acceptability  of 
mobile  device  use.  Consequently, 
the  social  display 
provides activity awareness not only to others around them, 
but to the users themselves, increasing one’s self-awareness 
related to the appropriateness of using mobile devices. 

Encouraging  heads-up  interaction  and  bursting  the  mobile 
bubble  have  recently  been  hot  topics  in  HCI  research. 
Public  initiatives  have  raised  awareness  of  the  issue  and 
aimed  at  encouraging  people  putting  away  mobile  devices 
in  social  situations  (e.g.  projects  Look  Up3  or  stop 
phubbing).  However, 
such  general-level  normative 
regulations  do  not  take  into  consideration  different  uses  of 
mobile  devices  in  different  social  situations.  Many  of  the 
other research prototypes are designed for specific contexts 
and  activities.  For  example,  [30]  focuses  on  game  play 
between  children  and  [19]  focuses  on  learning.  Some  go 
further and propose applications that limit the use of mobile 
devices  with  in-app  social  support  and  competition  [17]. 
We  argue  that  social  display  is  a  simple  approach  that 
allows 
and 
meaningfully  utilizes  the  concepts  of  peer  pressure  and 
social  norms  to  burst  the  mobile  bubble.  Moreover,  the 
display  also  allows  a  device  user  to  appropriately  create  a 
socially acceptable bubble without too complicated method 
as in [18]. 

context-based 

flexibility 

social 

and 

Customizing Social Display 
With social display,  mobile device users  might not be able 
to  use  their  mobile  devices  normally  and  whenever  they 
want.  They  have  to  consider  their  privacy  and  self-

                                                           
3 http://bit.ly/1s2h19J  

1699

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

represented various cultures and probably have encountered 
many  people  from  various  other  cultures,  the  study  was 
conducted in the context of Finnish culture, which probably 
makes  an  overarching  effect.  Anyway,  with  such  a 
qualitative  study,  the  methods  and  the  participant  number 
do not allow making conclusions about the effect of culture, 
so  this  remains  as  an  aspect  to  be  considered  in  future 
studies.  

Opportunity: Social Display as a Semi-Public Display  
Mobile devices are considered to be private, especially the 
main display and the content on the device, even for family 
and friends  [10]. In our earlier study, as a display attached 
on  the  backside  of  a  mobile  device,  the  social  display  was 
questioned considering its visibility and appropriateness for 
others in the surroundings to look at [13]. The results of this 
study  indicate  that  the  social  display  is  not  as  private  and 
personal  as  previously  thought.  Rather,  it  is  a  semi-public 
display,  especially  when  the  user  is  among  family  and 
friends.  Similar  findings  are  reported  when  examining  the 
function of smartwatches as public displays [26].  

The main difference between the current social display and 
a  typical  public  display  is  that  the  former  has  a  dedicated 
owner,  i.e.  the  user  of  the  mobile  device.  The  owner  is  in 
charge  of  whom  the  display  is  visible  to,  and  his/her 
activities with the mobile devices directly affect the content 
of  the  display.  As  a  result,  any  interactions  caused  by  the 
display is controlled by its owner and revolves around him 
or her. However, the use of the social display is to provide 
information  to  others  in  the  surroundings,  but  not  to  the 
device  users  themselves.  It  will  be  interesting  to  further 
explore  how  others  in  the  surrounding  could  gain  more 
benefits by being aware of the user’s activity (e.g. utilizing 
social  display  in  collocated  mobile  collaboration  with 
multiple mobile devices, similarly as in [19]).   

CONCLUSIONS 
Mobile  devices  can  serve  for  a  broad  range  of  activities. 
While  this  has  benefited  people  in  many  ways,  it  comes 
with  a  social  cost.  Many  activities  that  were  more  easily 
observed  and  allowed  shared  experiences  have  become 
private  when  moving  to  mobile  devices.  We  implemented 
the social display prototype aiming to increase surrounding 
people’s awareness of user’s activity  with a mobile device. 
A 10-day field study with the prototype was conducted with 
13 participants. The results imply that the social display has 
the potential to increase activity awareness and occasionally 
encourage  serendipitous interaction between  mobile device 
users  and  their  collocated  family  members  and  friends. 
Additionally,  the  social  display  underlines  the  user’s 
activities  with  their  mobile  devices,  thus  raising  self-
awareness  regarding  the  appropriateness  of  using  mobile 
devices in different social contexts. The social display  was 
found  to  encourage  its  users  to  be  more  careful  with  the 
usage  of  their  mobile  devices,  and,  before  using  them, 
consider ongoing activities around them more carefully.  

presentation according to the ongoing situation. As a result, 
participants,  at  times,  wanted  to  replace  the  activity  cues 
with  something  else,  allowing  them  to  be  able  to  use  their 
mobile  devices  normally.  Currently,  the  social  display  is 
designed  as  a  fully  automatic  display  showing  cues  of  any 
applications currently active on the mobile device. Instead, 
social  display  could  provide  less  information  about  the 
users’  activities  by  replacing  the  visual  cues  of  some 
applications  –  especially  application  that  users  are  not 
comfortable  revealing,  such  as  dating  applications  –  with 
user-created-contents.  This  approach  could  provide  the 
feeling of control over privacy and self-presentation and at 
the  same  time  persist  the  characteristic  of  automatic 
disclosure  of  an  activity  awareness  application.  However, 
allowing  users  to  customize  the  social  display  behavior 
could  affect  both  user’s  and  viewer’s  awareness.  Viewers 
could  be  less  aware  of  the  user’s  actual  current  activity, 
thus,  user  themselves  could  be  less  worried  about  their 
mobile device usage in respect to ongoing social situation. 

Methodological Reflection and Limitations 
is  a  close-proximity  social  awareness 
Social  display 
application.  In  most  of 
the  awareness  applications, 
reciprocal  behavior  is  expected:  a  user  has  the  role  of  an 
information  provider  as  well  as  a  viewer  [1].  One  of  the 
differences  between  social  display  and  other  social 
awareness applications is that the user has only one role: an 
information  provider,  and  viewers  are  others  who  the  user 
encounters  face-to-face.  In  this  regard,  the  results  of  the 
study could have been more complete if we had had a better 
access  to  the  viewers  who  our  participants  came  across. 
However,  due  to  recruitment  challenges,  it  was  not  always 
possible  to  recruit  participants  together  with  the  viewers 
(e.g.  those  who  spend  a  lot  of  time  with  the  participants). 
Furthermore,  due  to  the  length  of  the  trial  period,  constant 
observation of the participants was not feasible. Our results 
are  primarily  based  on  participants’  report  of 
their 
experiences  and  discussion  with  some  of  the  viewers  they 
have encountered. The questionnaire sent to the participants 
on daily basis was helpful in collecting experiences that the 
participants might have otherwise forgotten to report at the 
end of the study. It also allowed us to access the results and 
bring  up  some  clarifying  questions  in  the  final  interview. 
However,  in  a  future  study  with  a  shorter  trial  period,  we 
would consider also a direct observation and shadowing as 
methods for more inclusive qualitative data gathering from 
different perspectives. 

Finally, we had participants from 7 different nationalities to 
provide  a  rich  set  of  data  with  as  little  cultural  bias  as 
possible.  Although 
the  sense  of  privacy  and  social 
interactions  are  also  defined  by  the  culture,  we  did  not 
observe  strong  differences  between  participants’  feedback 
that  could  be  explained  by  their  cultures.  The  differences 
were  mostly  based  on  their  personalities,  preferences, 
background  knowledge  of  technology,  and  social  situation 
and  their  relationship  with  people  they  interacted  with 
during  the  trial  period.  Even  though  the  participants 

1700

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank all the participants of the study for their insightful 
comments.  A  special  thanks  to  Putt  Sakdhnagool  for 
helping  with  the  references.  The  research  was  funded  by 
Academy of Finland (grant 264422). 

REFERENCES 
1.  Victoria Bellotti and Abigail Sellen. 1993. Design for 

privacy in ubiquitous computing environments. 77–92. 
Retrieved from 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1241934.1241940 
2.  Hugh Beyer and Karen Holtzblatt. 1998. Contextual 

design: defining customer-centered systems. Retrieved 
from http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=286067 

3.  Asaf Burak and Taly Sharon. 2004. Usage patterns of 

FriendZone - Mobile Location-Based Community 
Services. Proceedings of the 3rd international 
conference on Mobile and ubiquitous multimedia - 
MUM ’04, ACM Press, 93–100. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1052380.1052394 

4.  Karen Church, Eve Hoggan, and Nuria Oliver. 2010. A 

study of mobile mood awareness and communication 
through MobiMood. Proceedings of the 6th Nordic 
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction 
Extending Boundaries - NordiCHI ’10, ACM Press, 
128–137. http://doi.org/10.1145/1868914.1868933 
5.  Ashley Colley, Juho Rantakari, and Jonna Häkkilä. 
2015. Dual Sided Tablet Supporting Doctor-Patient 
Interaction. Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference 
Companion on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
& Social Computing - CSCW’15 Companion, ACM 
Press, 13–16. http://doi.org/10.1145/2685553.2702672 

6.  Lisa Cowan, William G Griswold, and James D 

Hollan. 2010. Applications of projector phones for 
social computing.  

7.  Paul Dourish and Victoria Bellotti. 1992. Awareness 

8. 

9. 

and coordination in shared workspaces. Proceedings of 
the 1992 ACM conference on Computer-supported 
cooperative work - CSCW ’92, ACM Press, 107–114. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/143457.143468 
Jennica Falk and Staffan Björk. 1999. The 
BubbleBadge: a wearable public display. CHI ’99 
extended abstracts on Human factors in computing 
systems - CHI  '99, ACM Press, 318. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/632716.632909 
Joel Fischer, Stuart Reeves, Steve Benford, and Chris 
Greenhalgh. 2013. First International Workshop on 
Designing Mobile Face-to-Face Group Interactions. 
European Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work (ECSCW ’13). 

10.  Jonna Häkkilä and Craig Chatfield. 2005. “It”s like if 

you opened someone else’s letter': user perceived 
privacy and social practices with SMS communication. 
Proceedings of the 7th international conference on 
Human computer interaction with mobile devices & 
services - MobileHCI ’05, ACM Press, 219–222. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1085777.1085814 

11.  Ohad Inbar and Noam Tractinsky. 2010. Interface-to-
face - Sharing Information with Customers in Service 
Encounters. Proceedings of the 28th of the 
international conference extended abstracts on Human 
factors in computing systems - CHI EA ’10, ACM 
Press, 3415–3420. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1753846.1753994 

12.  Pradthana Jarusriboonchai, Sus Lundgren, Thomas 
Olsson, et al. 2014. Personal or social?: Designing 
Mobile Interactions for Co-located Interaction. 
Proceedings of the 8th Nordic Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction Fun, Fast, Foundational - 
NordiCHI ’14, ACM Press, 829–832. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2639189.2654840 

13.  Pradthana Jarusriboonchai, Thomas Olsson, and Kaisa 

Väänänen-Vainio-Mattila. 2015. Social Displays on 
Mobile Devices: Increasing Collocated People’s 
Awareness of the User's Activities. Proceedings of the 
17th International Conference on Human-Computer 
Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services - 
MobileHCI ’15, ACM Press, 254–263. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2785830.2785863 

14.  Hsin-Liu (Cindy) Kao and Chris Schmandt. 2015. 

MugShots: A Mug Display for Front and Back Stage 
Social Interaction in the Workplace. Proceedings of the 
Ninth International Conference on Tangible, 
Embedded, and Embodied Interaction - TEI ’14, ACM 
Press, 57–60. http://doi.org/10.1145/2677199.2680557 
15.  Reuben Kirkham, Thomas Ploetz, Sebastian Mellor, et 
al. 2013. The Break-Time Barometer – An Exploratory 
System for Workplace Break-time Social Awareness. 
Proceedings of the 2013 ACM international joint 
conference on Pervasive and ubiquitous computing - 
UbiComp ’13, ACM Press, 73–82. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2493432.2493468 

16.  Lisa Kleinman, Tad Hirsch, and Matt Yurdana. 2015. 

Exploring Mobile Devices as Personal Public Displays. 
Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on 
Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and 
Services - MobileHCI ’15, ACM Press, 233–243. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2785830.2785833 

17.  Minsam Ko, Kyong-Mee Chung, Subin Yang, et al. 
2015. NUGU: A Group-based Intervention App for 
Improving Self-Regulation of Limiting Smartphone 
Use. Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social 
Computing - CSCW ’15, ACM Press, 1235–1245. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675244 

18.  Minsam Ko, Chayanin Wong, Sunmin Son, et al. 2015. 

Lock n’ LoL: Mitigating Smartphone Disturbance in 
Co-located Social Interactions. Proceedings of the 33rd 
Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI EA ’15, 
ACM Press, 1561–1566. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2702613.2732819 

19.  Stefan Kreitmayer, Yvonne Rogers, Robin Laney, and 

Stephen Peake. 2013. UniPad: orchestrating 

1701

collaborative activities through shared tablets and an 
integrated wall display. Proceedings of the 2013 ACM 
international joint conference on Pervasive and 
ubiquitous computing - UbiComp ’13, ACM Press, 
801–810. http://doi.org/10.1145/2493432.2493506 

20. Christine M. Liu and Judith S. Donath. 2006.

urbanhermes: Social Signaling with Electronic
Fashion. Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on
Human Factors in computing systems - CHI ’06, ACM
Press, 885–888.
http://doi.org/10.1145/1124772.1124902

21. Alexander De Luca, Marian Harbach, Emanuel von
Zezschwitz, et al. 2014. Now you see me, now you
don’t. Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM
conference on Human factors in computing systems -
CHI ’14, ACM Press, 2937–2946.
http://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557097

22. Elena Nazzi and Tomas Sokoler. 2011. Walky for

embodied microblogging: sharing mundane activities
through augmented everyday objects. Proceedings of
the 13th International Conference on Human
Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and
Services, 563–568.
http://doi.org/10.1145/2037373.2037461

23. Wai Shan (Florence) Ng and Ehud Sharlin. 2010.

Tweeting Halo: Clothing that Tweets. Adjunct
proceedings of the 23nd annual ACM symposium on
User interface software and technology - UIST ’10,
ACM Press, 447–448.
http://doi.org/10.1145/1866218.1866264

24. Antti Oulasvirta, Mika Raento, and Sauli Tiitta. 2005.
ContextContacts: re-designing SmartPhone’s contact
book to support mobile awareness and collaboration.
Proceedings of the 7th international conference on
Human computer interaction with mobile devices &
services - MobileHCI ’05, ACM Press, 167–174.
http://doi.org/10.1145/1085777.1085805

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

28. Adrian Reetz and Carl Gutwin. 2014. Making big

gestures: effects of gesture size on observability and
identification for co-located group awareness.
Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on
Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’14, ACM
Press, 4087–4096.
http://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557219

29. Johan Sanneblad and Lars Erik Holmquist. 2004. “Why

Is Everyone Inside Me?!” Using Shared Displays in
Mobile Computer Games. Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
Berlin, Heidelberg. http://doi.org/10.1007/b99837

30. Iris Soute, Panos Markopoulos, and Remco Magielse.

2009. Head Up Games: combining the best of both
worlds by merging traditional and digital play.
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 14, 5, 435–444.
http://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-009-0265-0

31. Jaime Teevan, Meredith Morris, and Shiri Azenkot.

2014. Using physical signaling to support collaborative
mobile search. Proceedings of the companion
publication of the 17th ACM conference on Computer
supported cooperative work & social computing -
CSCW Companion ’14, ACM Press, 245–248.
http://doi.org/10.1145/2556420.2556493

32. Sherry Turkle. 2011. Alone Together: Why We Expect

More from Technology and Less from Each Other.
Retrieved from
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1972496

33. Alan F. Westin. 1970. Privacy and Freedom. Bodley

Head.

34. Jason Wiese, Jacob T. Biehl, Thea Turner, William van

Melle, and Andreas Girgensohn. 2011. Beyond
“yesterday”s tomorrow’s : Towards the design of
awareness technologies for the contemporary worker.
Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on
Human Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and
Services - MobileHCI ’11, ACM Press, 455–464.
http://doi.org/10.1145/2037373.2037441

25. Eric Paulos and Elizabeth Goodman. 2004. The

35. Susan Yee and Kat S. Park. 2005. StudioBRIDGE:

Familiar Stranger : Anxiety , Comfort , and Play in
Public Places. 6, 1, 223–230.

26. Jennifer Pearson, Simon Robinson, and Matt Jones.

2015. It’s About Time: Smartwatches as Public
Displays. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems -
CHI ’15, ACM Press, 1257–1266.
http://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702247

Using Group, Location, and Event Information to
Bridge Online and Offline Encounters for Co-Located
Learning Groups. Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human factors in computing systems -
CHI ’05, ACM Press, 551–560.
http://doi.org/10.1145/1054972.1055048

36. Bin Zhu. Using Mobile Phone Cover to Extend Twitter

with Gesture-Based Emotional Expressions.

27. Mika Raento and Antti Oulasvirta. 2008. Designing for

37. YotaPhone. Retrieved July 19, 2015 from

privacy and self-presentation in social awareness.
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 12, 7, 527–542.
http://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-008-0200-9

https://yotaphone.com/fi-en/product/yotaphone/

38. InkCase - The Second Screen for Your Phone.

Retrieved July 19, 2015 from
http://www.inkcase.com/en.php

1702

