CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Supporting Group Coherence in a Museum Visit 

Lesley Fosh, Steve Benford, Boriana Koleva 

University of Nottingham 

Nottingham, UK 

[firstname.lastname]@nottingham.ac.uk  

 

ABSTRACT 
Visiting museums as part of a group poses the challenge of 
managing engagement with exhibits while preserving group 
cohesion.  We  respond  to  this  by  reconfiguring  the  social 
dynamic  of  visiting  with  an  experience  designed 
specifically  for  groups,  that  invites  the  group  members 
themselves  to  design  and  „gift‟  interpretations  to  one 
another. We present a trial of this experience with groups of 
family  and  friends  at  a  museum.  We  show  how  groups 
managed  and  configured  themselves  during  the  visit, 
revealing  the  strategies  involved  in  maintaining  different 
group 
design 
accommodated  different  visiting  styles  by  making  objects 
social  and  scaffolding  rather  than  directing  the  group 
experience.  We  interpret  our  findings  to  frame  group 
coherence  as  a  flexible  and  configurable  phenomenon 
within CSCW. 

behaviors.  We 

discuss 

how 

our 

Author Keywords 
Museums;  collaboration;  visiting;  mobile  guides;  gifting; 
groups; coherence.  

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous.  

INTRODUCTION 
It  is  well  documented  that  when  most  people  visit 
museums, they do so as part of a group of friends, family or 
loved  ones,  and  the  social  experience  can  be  a  key 
motivation  for  visiting  in  the  first  place  [8].  In  response, 
there  has  been  a  shift  from  technology  for  personal  use, 
such  as  traditional  audio  guides,  to  those  that  support 
collaborative  interaction  between  visitors,  enhancing  the 
visit  by  supporting  the  collaborative  making  of  meaning 
[12],  connecting  visitors  with  each  other  over  content  [5], 
or promoting collaboration with tabletop exhibits [11].  

 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  the  author(s)  must  be 
honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or 
republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific  permission 
from 
Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW  '16,  February  27-March  02,  2016,  San  Francisco,  CA,  USA 
Copyright  is  held  by  the  owner/author(s).  Publication  rights  licensed  to 
ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819970 

fee.  Request  permissions 

and/or 

a 

 
 

1

Other  research  has  considered  how  groups  of  visitors 
behave. Studies have uncovered the many different types of 
groups that visit museums [16] and the types of interactions 
that  occur,  for  example  the  roles  parents  take  on  when 
visiting with their children [15, 19], and how goals such as 
learning and coordination of the visit might be supported by 
collaborative systems. 

In  spite  of  this  growing  body  of  work,  there  is  recent 
evidence that supporting group visiting remains challenging 
for CSCW.  Tolmie et al.‟s ethnographic  study of two very 
different  museums uncovered a  phenomenon that appeared 
to  span  across  many  types  of  small  groups  [28].  Tolmie 
repeatedly observed visitors‟ engagement with exhibits and 
information  being  prematurely  interrupted  because  of  a 
need  to  maintain  a  physical  coherence  within  the  group. 
Tolmie  et  al.‟s  work  suggests  that  groups  of  visitors 
struggle  to  simultaneously  manage  engaging  with  museum 
content on the one hand, while „sticking with‟ or otherwise 
tending to the needs of fellow group members on the other, 
often  being  „dragged  away‟  from  exhibits  and  information 
because  of  a  desire  to  catch  up  with  group  members  who 
are moving on at a faster pace.  

A proposed solution was to reconfigure the social dynamic 
of  visiting,  perhaps  by  designing  for  more  collaborative 
experiences  or  increasing  visitors‟  awareness  of  each 
others‟  activities.  Tolmie  suggests  that  one  way  of  making 
visiting  more  collaborative  might  be  through  „gifting‟ 
experiences of objects, such as by sharing recommendations 
or interpretations. This approach was explored in a study by 
Fosh  et  al.  of  pairs  of  adults  visiting  a  contemporary  arts 
museum,  where  one  member  of  each  pair  was  invited  to 
design  a  personal  tour  for  their  partner  [10].  Fosh  et  al. 
found  the  approach  to  be  promising  in  giving  visitors 
intensely personal yet shared experiences around objects. It 
was  reported,  however,  that  visitors  often  felt  a  degree  of 
social  discomfort,  perhaps  due  in  part  to  the  unmet 
„obligation  to  reciprocate‟  inherent  to  gift  giving  rituals, 
since the approach offered no opportunity for gift recipients 
to  reciprocate  with  a  gift  of  their  own,  hence  the  gifting 
relationship  between  giver  and  recipient  was  imbalanced. 
They  also  reported  on  the  intensity  of  the  one-to-one 
pairwise  interaction  between  participants  and  the  visible 
presence of the designer, who was often anxious about how 
their design would be received.  

In  this  paper,  we  extend  Fosh  et  al.‟s  approach  to 
accommodate more diverse and mainstream visiting groups, 
i.e.  moving  from  pairs  to  small  groups,  and  to  directly 

address  the  challenges  of  group  visiting  identified  by 
Tolmie et al. in the design of a group visit. Our aim was to 
enable  small  groups,  typical  of  those  that  visit  many 
museums,  to  be  able  to  share  an  experience  in  which  they 
can  enjoy 
focused  engagement  with  artifacts  and 
interpretation while also paying attention to and meeting the 
needs of different group members.  

We  firstly  describe  how  we  extended  the  approach  and 
worked  with  groups  of  visitors  to  realize  it  in  a  formative 
user  study.  Our  study  explores  how  visitors  flexibly 
coordinate  their  visit  amongst  themselves  to  accommodate 
different  individual  and  group  visiting  styles.  We  then 
discuss  the  design  features  that  support  these  different 
styles and what it means for group coherence. 

APPROACH 
We  now  describe  the  design  of  our  group  visiting 
experience  and  its  deployment  in  a  formative  study. 
Following  an  „in  the  wild‟  strategy  [6],  we  worked  with  a 
particular museum exhibition to design an extended visiting 
experience  and  then  deploy  it  with  groups  of  visitors.  We 
conducted  a  naturalistic  study  through  observations  and 
interviews to build up a rich case study. 

Setting 
The  setting  for  the  experience  was  [anonymized],  a 
traditional  art  and  local  history  museum  set  on  the  site  of 
[anonymized]‟s  Medieval  castle.  Among 
the  various 
exhibitions in the  museum  – fine and decorative arts, local 
history,  archaeology  and 
temporary  contemporary  art 
exhibitions  –  we  chose  to  focus  on  the  exhibition  named 
„Every  Object  Tells  a  Story‟,  a  collection  of  decorative, 
historical  and 
through  our 
conversations  with the museum‟s curators, we learnt  was a 
collection  that  groups  of  visitors  often  struggled  to  engage 
deeply  with,  perhaps  due  to  the  large  number  of  exhibits 
presented in glass cabinets and the largely functional nature 
of  the  objects.  We  felt  this  provided  a  challenging  setting 
for  testing  the  approach.  The  exhibition  covers  two  mid-
sized rooms adjacent to each other. 

functional  objects 

that, 

Content and experience design 
The experience spanned two distinct stages of participation. 
First,  visitors  attended  a  design  workshop  where  they  put 
together the content for their group‟s experience. Next, they 
were invited back to the museum on a separate occasion to 
use the experience on a group visit. Our overall experience 
was  based  on  Fosh  et  al.‟s  gifting  approach  that  saw  one 
member  of  each  pair  of  participants  design  a  personalized 
experience for the other. Our first challenge was to scale the 
approach  up  to  cater  to  groups  larger  than  two.  This 
involved  working  out  who  would  design  and  gift  content, 
who would receive content and how it would be presented: 

Gifting configuration. Fosh et al. found that designing and 
gifting  an  experience  was  often  more  beneficial  than 
receiving  one,  giving  the  designer  the  chance  to  develop 
and  revisit  an  interpretation  through  experiencing  it  with 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

their  partner.  We  therefore  felt  that  each  group  member 
should  get  a  chance  to  design  interpretations  as  well  as 
experience  them.  Gifting  is  highly  ritualized  and  the 
literature  tells  us  that  when  multiple  people  are  involved, 
gift-givers are concerned about mutuality and equipollence, 
the absence of which can cause anxiety [31]. Our extended 
gifting  model  thus  allowed  each  member  of  the  group  to 
design an interpretation for each other member, as shown in 
Fig. 1. For example, in a group of four friends, each person 
would  pick  out  three  objects  –  one  for  each  of  the  other 
member of the group. The tour would then consist of twelve 
objects. 

 

Figure 1: Model of gifting in a group of four. Red arrows 
denote an interpretation is designed and gifted from one 

person to another. Right side of figure represents one 

interpretation.  

Content.  The  participants  were  able 
the 
interpretation resources that would be delivered through the 
mobile  guide  to  accompany  the  objects  in  the  tour.  They 
were  able  to  choose  three  pieces  of  content  to  fit  our 
experience template [9]: 

to  design 

  a piece of music (to suggest a theme, mood or tone); 
  a  vocally  recorded  instruction  for  how  to  interact  with 
the object (performing a physical action or looking in a 
particular way); and  

  a  portion  of  text  to  be  presented  as  they  walked  away 

(information or a personal message).  

resources 

In  replication  of  Fosh  et  al.‟s  study  of  this  approach 
between pairs, we encouraged participants to use the choice 
of  object  and 
to  design  a  personalized 
interpretation  for  one  another,  perhaps  communicating  a 
particular message or viewpoint alongside or in place of the 
more  traditional  museum  interpretation.  We  placed  no 
restrictions  on  the  objects  they  could  choose,  nor  the 
content  they  chose  to  accompany  them.  There  were  no 
constraints  on  overlap  of  choices  or  otherwise.  The 
instructions were recorded by a voiceover artist and played 
alongside  the  audio  track  while  the  text  was  presented  on 
the screen once the audio had finished. 

Presentation.  The  gifting  literature  tells  us  that  gifts  are 
experienced  as  a  social  occasion,  and  are  often  exchanged 
in  the  presence  of  others.  Onlookers  –  those  present  who 

2

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

aren‟t  giving  or  receiving  –  play  a  key  role  in  gifting 
occasions. When gifts are received, they are often presented 
to  onlookers  for  assessment,  and  onlookers  respond  with 
positive  evaluations  of  the  gift  and  sometimes  questions 
[21].  It  was  therefore  decided  that  each  member  would  be 
able  to  engage  with  the  entire  set  of  content,  not  just  the 
parts that had been designed for them, to allow participants 
to take on the role of onlookers, as they would in traditional 
gifting  occasions.  This  also  ensured  there  would  be  more 
content  for  everyone  to  try  and  potentially  less  confusion 
around who is doing what. The objects were presented in a 
list  based  on  where  they  would  be  found  in  the  museum 
space, suggesting an order in which to visit the objects but 
not  enforcing  it;  it  was  possible  to  deviate  by  selecting 
objects out of order. 

A  further  design  feature  intended  to  support  group  visiting 
was to conceal the identity of those who an experience was 
designed  by  and  for  until  after  the  content  had  been 
delivered.  We  anticipated  that  by  only  revealing  the 
identities  of  the  designer  and  recipient  towards  the  end  of 
the  experience,  an  element  of  fun  and  expectation  was 
introduced  as  participants  undergo  a  process  of  „working 
out‟  who the object  was for and from,  while keeping them 
engaged to find out whether or not it was designed for them 
–  providing  an  incentive  to  see  the  experience  through  to 
the  end.  Our  rationale  was  also  that  instead  of  each  group 
member  seeking  out  their  own  content,  they  could  all 
engage with the same full set of content. 

Participants 
We  recruited  a  total  of  41  participants  through  our 
University‟s  network  and  the  museum‟s  mailing  lists.  We 
recruited a total of twelve self-organized groups: six groups 
of  adult  friends  and  six  families  consisting  of  one  or  two 
parents  and  one  or  two  children.  Each  group  had  three  or 
four  members  who  had  formed  a  group  prior  to  attending 
the  study.  Our  decision  to  work  with  these  small  groups 
was  based  on  the  types  of  group  that  commonly  visit 
museums [8, 19], and to ensure the design and visit process 
was manageable. All participants were interested in visiting 
museums  either  as  a  leisure  activity,  out  of  academic 
interest, or both. 

Workshops 
Each group was invited to the museum to attend a two-hour 
long  workshop  where  they  were  able  to  self-design  a 
custom  mobile  tour  of  the  museum‟s  objects.  The  group 
members  were  given  a  set  of  worksheets  that  guided  them 
through the process of choosing objects, music, instructions 
and text. They were given access to the Internet to look up 
information and listen to music options. 

Visits 
The  participants  were  invited  back  to  the  museum  in  their 
groups to use their tours, which had been implemented onto 
Android  smartphones  using  the  AppFurnace  tool  [2].  The 

interface  presented  them  with  a  complete  list  of  all  the 
objects chosen by the group in the design session (Fig. 2a). 
Once  selected,  the  participant  is  instructed  to  locate  the 
object  and  prepare  to  start  the  experience  (Fig.  2b).  The 
music and vocally recorded instruction are played through a 
set  of  headphones,  before  the  music  fades  out  after  1-2 
minutes.  The  portion  of  information  is  then  presented  as 
text  on  the  screen  along  with  a  „label‟  showing  who  the 
object was chosen for and who it was designed by (Fig. 2c).  

 

 

 

Figure 2: Screen shots – a) list of objects, b) set up and c) text. 

Data collection and analysis 
We  initially  captured  participant‟s  written  designs  and 
justifications  from 
the  worksheets  as  well  as  audio 
recordings  of  the  workshops  in  order  to  understand  how 
they  went  about  the  design  task.  We  video  recorded  the 
groups  of  participants  using  the  experience  in  the  museum 
to  capture  an  overview  of  their  interactions,  and  used 
wireless  microphones  to  capture  their  conversations.  Once 
they had finished using the experience, we conducted semi-
structured interviews with the groups, asking them to reflect 
on each of the designs and the experience as a whole.  

Our  approach  to  analyzing  the  video  data  was  to  adopt  an 
ethnographic  style  across  a  number  of  data  sessions, 
reviewing  each  group‟s  interaction  with  the  museum 
content,  the  mobile  technology,  and  each  other.  We 
summarized  an  overview  of  what  happened  in  each 
interactional 
sequence,  based  on  our  analysis  of 
participants‟ gaze, gestures, utterances and interactions with 
relation  to  the  designed  content.  While  no  two  sequences 
were  the  same  due  to  the  different  objects  visited  and  the 
bespoke  content  delivered,  we  were  able  to  draw  out 
behaviors  that  were  broadly  characteristic  of  how  different 
groups  approached  their  visits.  These  sequences  were 
further  analyzed  and  transcribed  in  detail  to  draw  out  how 
the  sequential  order  of  their  activities  related  to  the  gifted 
content they were engaging with, including how the gifting 
relationship for each portion  of the experience affected the 
participants‟  behavior.  Our  interview  data  was  used  in 
conjunction  to  explain  what  we  saw,  with  participants 
elaborating  on  what  they  thought  and  did  at  each  stage  of 
the  visit.  In  taking  this  approach,  we  were  able  to  build  a 
rich  case  study  of  each  groups‟  engagement  with  our 
experience from start to finish. 

 

3

FINDINGS 
We  present  our  findings  with  a  primary  focus  on  how  the 
visitors  organized  their  group  experiences  of  using  the 
mobile guide. We firstly provide a general overview of the 
groups‟  makeups  and  how  they  approached  the  design  of 
their experiences. We then present a representation of how 
the group visits were organized, before looking in detail at a 
set of examples where the key themes that typify the social 
organization of the visit are made manifest. 

Group 

Adults 

Children  Relationship 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

1M, 2F (24-28) 

3M (27-28) 

1M, 3F (65-70) 

3F (20-24) 

3F (25) 

1M, 3F (28-29) 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

1M, 1F (35, 37) 

2M (7, 10) 

1M, 1F (36, 37) 

2M (3, 6) 

1M, 1F (35, 36) 

2M (7, 8) 

1F (34) 

2F (4, 6) 

1M, 1F (37, 38) 

1M (6) 

1M, 1F (39, 40) 

2M (7, 8) 

Friends 

Friends 

Friends 

Friends 

Friends 

Friends 

Family 

Family 

Family 

Family 

Family 

Family 

Table 1: Groups and their members (M = male; F = female). 

What they designed  
The  design  process  first  involved  browsing  the  exhibition, 
looking  at  objects  to  draw  inspiration,  until  the  participant 
found  a  suitable  match  between  their  knowledge  of  the 
person  they  were  choosing  for,  their  own  ideas  for  a 
particular theme, the properties of the object itself and how 
they interpreted the object. Music was often used to reflect 
themes brought up by the object or to set a particular mood 
or  emotional  tone.  The  music  choice  tended  to  be  a  piece 
that  was  known  and  liked  by  both  the  designer  and 
recipient,  and  matched  the  interpretation  the  designer 
wanted  to  get  across.  Some  participants  drew  inspiration 
directly  from 
the  object,  choosing,  for  example,  a 
traditional piece of music from the era or culture the object 
belonged  to,  which  was  the  case  for  a  visitor  in  Group  1 
who  chose  to  set  a  Japanese  arrow  quiver  to  a  piece  of 
traditional Japanese music. 

the 

intended 

The choice of instruction was also used to set an emotional 
tone  for  how  the  object  would  be  experienced.  Again,  the 
inspiration  for  the  specific  instruction  came  from  the 
object‟s  properties, 
type  of 
experience and the participant‟s interpretation of the object. 
Instructions included to “Strike a pose, like one of the chess 
pieces” (for a chess set chosen by the mother in Group 9 for 
her son), and to  “Pretend  you are at a  grand tea party, and 
think about all the rich and pretentious people you‟d  meet” 
(for a tea caddy chosen by a member of Group 4). 

theme  or 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Finally,  the  text,  to  be  displayed  after  the  music  and 
instruction,  was  used  by  participants  to  wrap  up  the 
experience,  delivering  factual  information  they  had  found 
about the object or explaining their interpretation or reason 
for  choosing  it.  It  tended  to  follow  on  from  the  other 
resource  choices  –  for  example,  a  child  in  Group  7,  after 
instructing his father to think about what an object was used 
for,  chose  to  explain  “This  curved  spike  was  twisted  into 
the  elephant‟s  hide  to  make  it  behave  in  a  certain  way.  I 
thought that  you  would put a piece of  fruit on the  spike to 
tempt  the  elephant  to  go  in  different  directions,  as  the 
elephant  would  respect  you  more.”  Text  was  also  used  to 
deliver personal messages, for example, “I feel this sums up 
a  part  of  your  character  and  is  a  nice  object  to  link  our 
friendship.” 

Adapting the gifting model for families 
Three  of  our  six  family  groups  (7,  8  and  12)  chose  to 
reconfigure  themselves  into  subgroups  to  complete  the 
design  task,  for  example  splitting  into  two  parent-child 
teams.  The  members  of  the  subgroups  were  then  able  to 
help  each  other  with  their  designs,  with  the  parents 
generally  overseeing  the  process  and  the  children  given 
control  over  the  specific  content.  This  approach  proved 
successful  in  keeping  the  children  on  task  and  generating 
ideas,  although  it  should  be  noted  that  the  groups  who  did 
not team up were also successful in completing the design. 
One  observation  we  did  have  was  that,  at  times,  one 
partner‟s  ideas  would  dominate  the  design  –  e.g.  in  Group 
8, the mother and son working on a design for the other son 
chose  a  Gujarati  child‟s  jacket  and  instructed  to  „Imagine 
wearing  something  that  makes  you  feel  warm,  loved  and 
comforted‟,  which  the  mother  reported  reflected  her 
memories of looking after her son when he wore very small 
clothes.  In  this  instance,  the  design  was  framed  as  being 
from  the  mother  and  son,  i.e.  they  produced  one  design 
between  them  for  the  recipient.  In  other  cases  of  two 
participants  teaming  up,  they  produced  a  design  each  but 
helped with each other‟s designs. 

The  child  in  Group  7,  who  worked  on  his  own,  used  the 
design  to  relate  a  decorative  knife  blade  to  his  father‟s 
background  in  the  military,  something  that  the  father  was 
surprised  by  and  described  as  “really  touching”  once  he 
came to try out the experience. Of course, the ages of some 
of  our  younger  participants  put  a  limit  on  how  much  they 
could design independently.  

Returning to use the experience 
Our  approach  required  groups  to  return  to  the  museum 
when  their  designs  had  been  implemented  (by  us)  into  a 
mobile  guide.  Groups  took  between  two  days  and  two 
weeks  to  return  for  their  second  visit.  One  of  our  family 
groups, Group 12, was unable to return within the timescale 
of our study so did not get  to try out their experience. One 
member  of  Group  5  was  also  unable  to  return  to  use  her 
experience,  but  the  remaining  two  friends  completed  the 
full experience nonetheless. 

4

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Organizing the group visit 
All  group  members  received  the  same  set  of  objects 
regardless of who designed for whom – they were then free 
to  choose  whether  to  experience  them  all  together  or  not. 
The interface to the guide suggested an order by presenting 
the  set  of  objects  in  a  list  based  on  where  they  would 
encounter  them  in  the  museum.  However,  this  order  was 
not  enforced,  so  groups  could  choose  to  visit  objects  in  a 
different  order,  and  decide  whether  to  follow  the  order 
together or choose a separate order individually. 

From  analyzing  our  video  recordings  we  were  able  to 
determine  which  objects  group  members  visited  across  the 
duration  of  their  visit.  Figure  3  provides  a  summary 
timeline  documenting  the  time  visitors  spent  visiting  the 
objects  in  their  experiences  and  the  extent  to  which  it  was 
coordinated among members. We were able to judge when 
participants  were  visiting  an  object  from  our  video 
recordings,  specifically  participants‟  orientation,  gaze, 
wearing of headphones and interaction with the device. 

For  each  group‟s  timeline,  a  single  row  represents  an 
individual  group  member,  while  the  time  in  minutes  (from 
the  beginning  of  our  video  recordings)  is  noted  along  the 
horizontal  axis.  The 
is 

time  spent  visiting  objects 

represented  by  the  horizontal  lines  and  numbers;  the 
numbers  denote  the  object‟s  suggested  order  in  the 
experience. The dashed horizontal lines show times when it 
was not possible to capture the visitor‟s exact movements – 
often due to the limitations of using only one video recorder 
to record multiple participants.  

Our  timelines  show  an  overview  of  how  the  different 
groups organized their visits – which visitors were grouped 
together  at  different  points  of  the  visits.  One  approach,  as 
displayed  by  groups  1,  5,  7,  9,  10  and  11  was  to  stay 
together  for  the  entire  visit,  visiting  the  same  object  at  the 
same time, and following the order suggested by the guide. 
At  the  other  extreme,  members  of  groups  2,  4,  6  and  8 
visited  objects  separately  or  in  subgroups,  deviating  from 
the suggested order and only crossing paths coincidentally. 
Group  3  showed  a  range  of  behaviors,  often  staying 
together but sometimes separating before coming together. 

The timelines also show that it wasn‟t always the case that 
experiences  were  encountered  with  both  the  designer  and 
recipient present at the same time. While those  who stayed 
together  were  able  to  discuss,  comment  on  and  assess  the 
objects as experienced, those who visited objects separately 
were not able to exchange such immediate feedback.  

Figure 3: Timelines showing group members' engagement with objects over time. 

5

Our  video  observations  and  subsequent  interviews  tell  us 
that  all  but  two  visitors  fully  completed  the  experience  – 
visiting all of the objects including those they had designed, 
those  designed  for  them  and  those  designed  by  others  for 
others. One visitor chose not to visit the objects that she had 
chosen,  stating  afterwards  that  she  was  “embarrassed”  that 
her  text  explanations  were  more  detailed  than  others‟, 
reflecting the large amount of thought that she put into her 
designs and her anxiety at how they would be received. Our 
youngest  participant,  aged  three,  did  not  engage  with  the 
experience himself but was shown parts of it by his  father. 
All  visitors  who  did  engage  with  the  experience  listened 
through  to  the  end  of  the  audio  (music  and  instruction) 
before  disengaging,  and  most  visitors  appeared  to  follow 
the  instructions  that  had  been  designed.  There  was  often 
evidence  of  visitors  working  out  who  the  object  had  been 
chosen  for  part  way  through  the  experience  –  one 
commented  sarcastically,  “Oh  I  wonder  who  this  is  for”  – 
and  sharing  reactions  to  finding  out  the  relationship  at  the 
end – for example, “That  was for me”, offering thanks and 
praising the designs.  

to  visit  objects 

individually.  Sometimes 

Unsurprisingly,  the  highest  levels  of  social  contact  were 
between those visitors who stayed together during the visit. 
These visitors engaged with each other to navigate between 
objects, coordinate starting each experience, share reactions 
and  reflect  on  the  interpretation.  However,  we  were  also 
able  to  observe  social  contact  between  those  visitors  who 
chose 
this 
happened  in  the  form  of  chance  encounters,  such  as  when 
two  or  more  visitors  find  themselves  at  the  same  object 
without  having  consciously  coordinated  it,  but  there  were 
also  occasions  where  visitors  deliberately  initiated  contact 
by greeting one another, asking questions, sharing reactions 
and asking questions. Some of the groups that split up spent 
significant portions of their visits in different rooms of the 
exhibition  and  out  of  line  of  sight,  but  they  would  often 
come back into each others‟ visual fields at some point, and 
often coordinated coming together at the end of the visit. 

Our  overall  impression  from  the  video  observations  is  that 
visitors  were  able  to  organize  a  structure  for  their  group 
visit,  and  were  generally  able  to  maintain  a  level  of 
sociality  in  any  case.  Nearly  all  participants  did  all  of  the 
content, and when they did, they listened through to the end 
of the audio and followed instructions. We observed  much 
acknowledgement,  appreciation  and  comment,  sometimes 
at exhibits and sometimes on encounters between. 

A CLOSER LOOK 
We  now  consider  more  closely  the  work  involved  in 
organizing  a  group  visit  with  our  experience.  For  those 
groups  that  stayed  together,  how  did  they  manage  their 
continued  shared  engagement?  For  groups  that  separated, 
how  did  they  manage  disengaging  and  coming  back 
together? We focus on a series of vignettes to illustrate how 
these  various  issues  played  out  during  the  visit.  Three  key 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

group  behaviors  are  identified:  sticking  together,  splitting 
up and drifting apart. 

Sticking together 
We  now  look  at  what  was  involved  for  those  groups  that 
chose to stay together for the visit.  

Example  1:  Group  5.  This  group  of  three  female  friends 
designed  a  tour  of  six  objects  of  historical  and  cultural 
interest. Their approach to organizing their visit was to visit 
each  object  together  in  the  order  suggested  by  the  guide. 
They begin the experience by entering the gallery at a slow 
pace,  looking  around  as  they  prepare  to  engage  with  the 
experience.  

A:  Er,  which  one  do  you,  er?  ((Holds  device  in 
front of her, Fig. 4a)) 
(3.0) 
B:  We  could  do  it  in  the  ((gestures  to  device, 
Fig. 4b)) 
C: ((looks at A and B, nodding)) 
(...) 
A: In the order  
B: Yeah 
A:  Oh.  Natural  Selection  ((looks  towards  the 
display case „Natural Selection‟)) 
A: ((stands to left of object)) 
B: ((stands to right of A)) 
C: ((stands to right of B)) 
((A,  B  and  C  listen  to  the  audio  and  look  at  the 
object, Fig. 4c)) 
(2.07)  
B: ((looks at A, Fig. 4d)) It‟s Egyptian? 

This  fragment  sees  A  and  B  jointly  deciding  to  visit  the 
objects  in  the  order  suggested  by  the  guide.  They  choose 
and  arrive  at  the  first  object  of  their  experience,  a  set  of 
earthenware  tiles  chosen  by  A  for  C.  They  arrange 
themselves  in  a  semi-circle  around  the  object  where  they 
stay  while  they  listen  to  the  audio  designed  by  A.  B,  the 
intended  recipient  of  this  design,  then  queries  A  on  the 
interpretation  she  designed  for  B.  The  fragment  continues 
with B asking, “can we play it again?” and going on to 
redo  this  experience,  while  A  and  C  wait  for  her  to  finish 
before moving on. 

 

 

 

 

Figure 4: Group 5 a) and b) (top) navigating towards the first 

object; c) and d) (bottom) at the object. 

Example  2:  Group  7.  While  it  was  most  common  for 
families  to  stay  together  during  the  visit,  there  was 
significant  work  involved  in  managing  the  children‟s  visit. 
It was common for one of the parents to take a commanding 

6

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

role to ensure all members of the family stayed together and 
did not move on prematurely.  

Group 7 is a family of four with a mother, D, father, E, and 
two sons (F, aged ten and G, aged seven). In this example, 
they  are  visiting  their  second  object,  a  Japanese  sword 
displayed in a glass cabinet.  

D:  ((Reading  from  device))  Which  was  polished  to 
look very impressive.  
D:  So  all  that  [G],  see  all  the  bobbly  bits 
((pointing  to  the  object,  Fig.  5a))  (...)  that‟s 
actually fish skin, ray- ray skin, that‟s amazing 
isn‟t  it?  (...)  So  it‟s  actually  fish  skin  in 
there that‟s covering the sword hilt. Can you see? 
F: Who did the Chinese roof tile? (...) And where 
is it? 
E: Don‟t know. 
D: It‟s got to be here again, hasn‟t it? 
G: Oh (.) I I I know, I know where that is ((looks 
towards the next object))  
F:  ((Walks  towards  the  object  and  points  at  it, 
Fig. 5b)) 
G: It‟s there ((points to the object, Fig. 5c)) 
E: Object Stories ten, oh yeah (...) Oh right. 
 

 

 

 

 

Figure 5: Group 7 (a) D pointing out fish skin; (b) F finding 

the next object; (c) G pointing out the object 

The  above  fragment  shows  the  mother‟s  efforts  to  ensure 
both  children  engage  with  the  experience:  reading  the  text 
for  them,  checking  they  have  read  and  understood  the 
content, and even rephrasing the information. Meanwhile, F 
He  waits  until  his  mother  reaches  the  end  before  signaling 
he  is  ready  to  move  on:  “Who  did  the  Chinese  roof 
tile?  (...)  And  where  is  it?”  He  begins  looking  and 
finds it on his own, but G, who chose the object, also moves 
to point it out, and they all move on to look at the tile. 

Splitting up 
Other groups were less concerned with staying together for 
the  visit,  with  some  group  members  actively  seeking  out 
their own paths through the museum, as shown in our next 
examples. 

Example 3: Group 6. In this example we see four friends, 
who have all known each other for around eight years. They 
chose  a  range  of  objects  and  their  designs  were  often 
playful,  fun  and  with  personal  meaning.  In  this  fragment, 
each  of  the  four  visitors  is  at  a  different  stage  of  the  visit, 
having  chosen  to  visit  objects  separately  and  in  different 
orders. J and K arrive separately at the same object, a set of 
duck-shaped weights chosen for J by H. The instruction for 
this object is to follow a stranger around the gallery. As we 
join  them,  J  and  K  are  both  coming  to  the  end  of  the 
experience, having listened to most of the audio. 

7

J: ((Looks around at K, Fig. 6a)) Ha ha ha. (...) 
I didn‟t do it, did you do it? 
K:  No  I  couldn‟t  find  anyone  to  chase  but  it  did 
make me laugh. 
J: Yeah. 
K:  It  would‟ve  been  perfect  „cause  like,  I‟m 
finding  that  (...)  it‟s  better  to  have  something 
to do while the music‟s playing. 
J: Yeah it would be good I think if you could read 
as the music‟s playing. 
K: Yeah. 
J: I know what you mean, yeah. 
K: ((reads device, Fig. 6b)) (h)That‟s s(h)o good. 
Th(h)at‟s really good though, I love it. The whole 
thing‟s  great.  Yours  are  really  good,  mine,  I 
don‟t  think  mine  are  like  (...)  um  (.)  I  can‟t 
think  of  the  word  for  it,  I‟ll  have  to  think  of 
the word for it. 
H: ((Approaches J and K from behind, Fig. 6c)) 
K: Mine aren‟t um= 
H:  [Did you like it? 
K: =[Connecting  
J: It was great, yeah, it was so good. 
K: It was really good.  
H: Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. 
K: Love it ((turns to face H, Fig. 6d)) 
J: Heh heh heh. That‟s amazing. 
H: Did you follow someone around? 
J: No. 
H: WHAT?  
J:  I  looked  around  but  then  I  was  really 
embarrassed. 
H: I did it. 
K: No one was walking though I just walked instead 
by myself. 
H: I walked (h)behind (h)a str(h)anger. Ha ha ha. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 6: a) K and J (l-r); b) K and J (l-r); c) H, K and J (l-r); 

d) H, K and J (l-r). 

Despite visiting separately, the visitors in this example were 
able  to  share  experiences  of  objects,  either  when  finding 
themselves  at  the  same  object  without  having  expressly 
coordinated  it  (J  and  K)  or by  noticing  when  someone  has 
visited  a  particular  object  and  approaching  them  for 
feedback, as H did here with the object she designed for J. 
K, neither the gifter or recipient of this experience, joins in 
with assessing the experience while distinguishing between 
others‟ gifts and her own: “yours are really good”. 

Example  4:  Group  8.  The  one  family  group  that  did  split 
for  the  experience  was  Group  8.  They  start  the  experience 
with the father of the family, M, carrying the three year old, 
O, to the first object on the list. The mother, L, leads the six 
year old, N, separately to visit another object.  

L and N are at object three, where L is reading out the text 
content  to  the  son.  M,  carrying  O,  approaches  the  cabinet 
where object two is located (Fig. 7a).  

L: Oh look, it says for [N], from [O] (.) Shall we 
press the next one? 
M: ((Puts O down, Fig. 7b)) 
L:  Great.  So  we  did  that  one  (...)  ((Turns  to  M, 
Fig. 7c)) I liked the music. 
N: Where‟s the chess set? 
L: Well, oh that‟s there so shall we go and do the 
other one and come back and do this one? Let‟s go 
and do the child‟s jacket. ((Guides N away to the 
adjacent room, Fig. 7d)) 

 

 

 

 

Figure 7: Two subgroups visiting different objects. 

In  this  example,  we  again  see  interaction  between  those 
who  are  visiting  objects  in  different  orders  (L  saying  “I 
liked  the  music”  to  M).  We  then  see  L  deciding  to 
deviate  from  the  order  N  is  expecting  (“Where‟s  the 
chess set?”), explaining that they will come back to visit 
that object. In our interview with this family it emerged that 
the  two  parents  chose  to  separate  into  subgroups  so  they 
could take responsibility for a child each. 

Drifting apart 
There  were  some  groups  that  didn‟t  seem  to  explicitly 
decide whether to stay together or split up, but that  moved 
between states of being in and out of sync.  

Example  5:  Group  3.  Our  final  example  looks  at  a  group 
of  four  friends  from  an  art  appreciation  group.  They  start 
the  experience  together  and  visit  the  first  object,  a  wax 
sealing fob. They arrange themselves in two pairs (see Fig. 
8a) and, after listening to the audio, one pair confers while 
the  other  pair  moves  on  to  the  next  object  in  the  display 
case behind. By the time the second pair reaches the second 
object, a decorative drinking glass, the first pair has started 
the experience. The first pair separate to make room for the 
second  pair  to  access  the  object  (Fig.  8b),  reforming  the 
group  of  four.  Another  conversation  breaks  out  between  a 
new pairing, and the other two move on to the third object, 
in  the  same  cabinet.  After  visiting  the  third  object,  one  of 
the women scrolls through the list of objects on her device 
and  chooses  a  later  one,  then  walks  towards  the  cabinet  in 
which  it  is  found.  As  the  group  is  still  within  close 
proximity to each other (within line of sight) they continue 
to converse despite not visiting the same objects.   

8

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

  

 

Figure 8: a) Group arranged in two pairs, and b) reuniting. 

DISCUSSION 
Our findings paint a picture of a shared visiting experience 
in  which  small  groups  of  family  and  friends,  including 
those  with  young  children,  systematically  engaged  with 
museum  content.  By  and  large,  our  groups  invested 
significant  effort  in  designing  experiences  for  one  another 
and  „saw  these  through‟  on  returning  to  the  museum, 
attempting and completing the vast  majority of the content 
they  had created. They created  personalized interpretations 
which were frequently discussed and commented on during 
their visits. Moreover, the almost palpable sense of tension 
and  embarrassment  reported  in  Fosh‟s  study  of 
the 
asymmetric  gifting  of  experiences  among  adults  was 
notable  by  its  absence  here,  with  fewer  intensely  personal 
or  provocative  interpretations  gifted  between  the  friends 
and  family  who  took  part  in  our  study,  which  seemed 
appropriate  for  an  experience  that  is  shared  between  small 
groups  rather  than  couples.  Visitors  reported  enjoying  the 
experience  and  playfully  engaging  with  and  appreciating 
others‟ designs. Our findings also reveal an experience that 
accommodated  diverse  group  behaviours  from  sticking 
together  throughout  to  splitting  up  and  rejoining  and  from 
pre-formulated  strategies  to  ad-hoc  coordination.  These 
observations stand in marked contrast to  Tolmie‟s study of 
group museum visiting that highlighted the ongoing tension 
of balancing engagement with content with paying attention 
to  fellow  group  members.  We  now  relate  our  observations 
to  three  broader  themes  in  an  attempt  to  both  explain  and 
generalize them.  

From museum artifacts to social objects 
In  discussing  participatory  museum  visiting,  Nina  Simon 
defines  social  objects  as  those  that  are  “transactional, 
facilitating  exchanges  among  those  who  encounter  them” 
[25].  Such  exchanges  include  discussions  of  an  event  or 
story  the  object  brought  to  mind  or  cooperation  around  an 
object  that  invites  play  or  touch.  Our  approach  directly 
embeds  social  transactions  into  the  mobile  technology  by 
having  visitors  design  structured  experiences  around 
individual 
and 
information.  This  enables  visitors  to  directly  embed  such 
transactions  into  the  visit  through  the  content  they  design 
for others – using music that represents a theme or memory, 
drawing  attention  to  particular  aspects  of  an  artifact  or 
taking it as inspiration for telling a story. At the very least, 
it allows visitors to draw their group members‟ attention to 
an object. We saw how visitors drew on their knowledge of 
each  other  and  their  inter-personal  relationships  to  create 
social objects. When visitors experienced artifacts together, 

instructions,  music 

artifacts 

from 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

they  often  built  upon  the  experience  by  responding  or 
exchanging  remarks,  as  in  examples  1  and  2.  Even  those 
visitors  who  split  up  to  visit  individually  were  able  to 
discuss  the  experiences  when  they  crossed  paths  or  sought 
each other out (Example 3).  

Moreover,  our  approach  draws  on  an  especially  powerful 
form  of  social  transaction  –  the  gift.  As  Fosh  et  al.  have 
previously  argued,  framing  the  design  of  experiences  as 
gift-giving  creates  a  strong  social  obligation  for  the 
recipient of the gift to complete the experience [18] and to 
respond  appropriately  [24].  In  our  study,  we  saw  the 
hallmarks of gift-giving play out amongst the visitors,  who 
recognized  and  appreciated  when  a  gift  had  been  tailored 
towards  them,  and  who  often  commented  on  who  the  gift 
had been intended for, offering thanks and assessments.  

Fosh  et  al.  also  noted  potential  anxiety  and  even 
embarrassment  that  arose  when  such  gifts  were  given 
asymmetrically  between  pairs  of  visitors.  This  led  us  to 
extend the approach in three ways, each of which appear to 
have  alleviated  such  tensions.  The  first  has  been  to  make 
them reciprocal. The approach reported here involves each 
member of a group designing for each other member. Each 
gives and receives, sharing the inherent risk of giving while 
also  providing  all  concerned  with  opportunities  for 
acknowledging  and  appreciating.  The  second  has  been  to 
scale  up  beyond  pairs.  Mauss  describes  how  gift-giving  is 
socially  occasioned  and  how  gifts  are  „opened‟  and 
appreciated  in  front  of  others  who  in  turn  play  a  role  in 
appreciating  them,  an  idea  that  is  directly  reflected  in  our 
approach.  The 
them  mutually 
pseudonymous, 
is  not  directly  associated  with 
identified gift givers or giftees. By only revealing who each 
interpretation  had  been  designed  for  and  by  at  the  end  of 
each  experience  at  an  artifact,  visitors  may  have  been 
committed to see through the experience to find out if it had 
been intended for them. We also saw participants trying all 
the  designs,  rather  than  just  those  made  for  themselves  or 
by  specific  people,  perhaps  motivated  to  find  out  if  it  had 
been intended for them. This meant all visitors in the group 
engaged  with  the  same  content.  In  addition,  visitors  who 
weren‟t  sticking  together  were  therefore  aware  of  what 
everyone  else  was  experiencing,  allowing  for  discussion 
when they did come into contact. 

to  make 

third 

that 

is 

In  light  of  this  discussion,  we  recommend  the  general 
approach  of  „socializing‟  museum  artifacts  by  getting 
visitors to craft and gift interpretations for one another. Our 
experience  here  suggests 
that  such  gifts  should  be 
reciprocal,  exchanged  incognito  and  exchanged  among 
small  groups.  We  also  note  that  this  approach  is  directly 
and  easily  implementable  in  software,  with  the  gift-giving 
transactions being realized in simple templates. 

From directed to scaffolded experiences 
Previous  studies  of  museum  visitors  have  uncovered  a 
range  of  different  visiting  styles  and  have  attempted  to 
categorize  visitors  into  different  types  that  may  change 

9

throughout the visit [26, 29]. Early categorizations focused 
on  individual  visitors,  but  the  idea  of  classification  has 
since  been  extended  to  pairs  of  visitors  based  on  their 
engagement and orientation towards each other and exhibits 
[16]. The dynamics of visiting as a family group have also 
been  well  documented,  with  studies  revealing  the  extreme 
prevalence  of  playful  behavior  with  interactives  and  long 
conversations  among  the  group  [19],  and  the  impact  of 
parents‟  shaping  and  supporting  of  children‟s  interactions 
on  learning  [7].  Previous  responses  to  such  observations 
have  aimed  to  augment  social  interaction  in  museum 
visiting  by  promoting  connection  with  others  [5]  and 
engaging  group  members  in  a  coordinated  narrative  to 
induce  group  conversation  [4],  the  latter  being  unusual  in 
narrative-driven  directed  experiences  in  that  it  required 
collaboration for the story to unfold. 

Our  study  suggests  that  an  open  and  flexible  structure  can 
accommodate  a  range  of  different  visiting  styles.  While 
each  bite-sized  experience  of  an  individual  artifact  was 
highly directed through instructions, music and information, 
there  was  no  overarching  narrative  that  needed  to  be 
followed  to  connect  them  altogether.  While  visitors  chose 
experiences from an ordered list, the order was not enforced 
or strongly narrativised. Nor were there any requirements to 
collaborate in order to progress. Visitors were therefore free 
to manage the overall global trajectory of their visit as they 
saw  fit,  splitting  and  joining  according  to  local  needs  and 
circumstances.  Thus,  around  half  of  the  groups  (1,  5,  7,  9, 
10  and  11)  stuck  together  during  their  visits,  while  the 
others  split  up  to  some  degree.  We  found  that  sticking 
together  generally  involved  joint  decision  making,  waiting 
for  one  another,  and  discussing  interpretations  in  the 
moment:  what  might  be  thought  of  as  an  ideal  social  visit. 
However,  we  were  also  able  to  observe  behaviors  in  those 
who  split  up  that  suggested  a  level  of  social  engagement 
despite  group  members  not  visiting  objects  synchronously. 
This took the form of visitors finding themselves coinciding 
at  the  same  object  and  sharing  a  more  spontaneous 
engagement,  seeking  one  another  out  to  give  feedback  or 
seek assessment, or monitoring one another from afar.  

Another  notable  feature  of  our  approach  is  its  technical 
simplicity. There are no location-based technologies at play 
here, no recommender systems or triggering of content and 
no  attempt  to  technically  synchronize  content  between 
people.  Rather,  visitors  must  author  and  then  select 
experiences for themselves, find the artifacts involved using 
conventional means and then manually trigger the „content‟ 
(manually  synchronized  if  they  so  wish).  The  approach 
balances orchestration of the experience with visitors‟ own 
agency; by  scaffolding rather than directing,  we encourage 
visitors 
the 
experience,  rather  than  designing  for  a  canonical  way  of 
visiting  [3].  This  is  a  common  approach  in  visiting 
experiences  with  mediascapes  [14]  and  participatory 
performance  [27].  This  manual  approach  to  scaffolding 
rather than directing experiences even extends to the use of 

trajectories 

their  own 

to  carve 

through 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

headphones  (traditionally  a  thorny  issue  in  mobile  CSCW 
systems [1, 17]) with visitors manually putting them on and 
taking them off as required. While clearly demanding more 
work  of  visitors,  this  largely  manual  approach  does  not 
appear  to  have  caused  difficulties  or  frustration  and  does 
appear  to  have  afforded  great  flexibility  for  adapting  to 
different visiting styles.  

coherence.  It  seems,  then,  that  these  visitors  were  unfazed 
by  the  potential  incoherence  of  their  group  visit  in  a  way 
that  the  groups  in  Tolmie  et  al.‟s  study  went  to  some 
lengths  to  avoid.  When  they  did  engage  with  one  another, 
sporadically,  inadvertently  or  intentionally,  they  were  able 
to  discuss  the  experience  and  engage  with  each  other, 
before possibly splitting up again.  

This  scaffolding  approach  was  perhaps  most  evident  in 
enabling  adults  to  support  children  when  managing  the 
family  experience.  Children  were  able  to  engage  in  the 
making  and  doing  of  experiences  with  support  from  their 
parents,  listening  to  the  music,  dancing  around  and 
repeating  experiences  they  had  enjoyed.  They  sometimes 
surprised  parents  with  thoughtful  designs  and  questions. 
And  yet,  it  was  also  possible  to  mix  in  moments  of 
experience for adults in the party too. 

In  light  of  these  observations,  we  recommend  experience 
designers  to  recognize  that  sometimes  „less  is  more‟  and 
that  approaches  that  scaffold  interactions  without  heavily 
directing them (e.g., through strong narratives, collaborative 
mechanics,  location-based  wayfinding  and  triggers  and  so 
forth) have a valuable role to play in visiting experiences.  

From cohesive groups to coherent experiences 
Considering  the  nature  of  groups  is  both  fundamental  and 
challenging  for  CSCW.  One  common  approach  is  to 
consider  physical  collocation,  drawing  on  notions  of 
proxemics from anthropology [13] and employing location-
based  technologies  to  detect  collocated  formations  [23], 
sometimes  in  combination  with  the  strength  of  social-
network  connections  [20].  Another  key  idea  is  that  of  the 
cohesiveness  of  groups  working  together  on  tasks,  that  is, 
on  the  strength  of  social  relationships  between  those 
working  together  and  the  effects  of  this  on  the  quality  of 
their work [22].  

Groups  in  leisure  activities,  such  as  museum  visiting,  are 
likely  to  already  enjoy  strong  social  relationships  and 
therefore  to  exhibit  tight  cohesiveness  as  a  group.  Indeed, 
this  very  cohesiveness  may  be  a  major  challenge  for 
museum  experience  designers  as  they  seek  to  engage 
tightly-knit  groups  with their  content rather than  with each 
other.  This  tension  between  group  cohesion  and  external 
content  lies  at  the  heart  of  Tolmie‟s  previous  observations 
of  museum  studies,  leading  him  to  discuss  the  notion  of 
group  coherence  that  involves  maintaining  a  level  of 
togetherness through staying within line of sight [28]. This, 
and other forms of awareness of group members‟ activities, 
has been shown to be important in collocated collaboration 
[32]. 

Our study revealed how some visitors intentionally avoided 
being  in  physical  proximity  to  each  other,  using  their 
awareness  of  others‟  location  to  avoid  going  in  the  same 
direction.  Others  appear  to  drift  in  and  out  of  awareness 
without 
premature 
disengagement with exhibits in order to maintain an overall 

noticeable 

any 

detriment 

or 

Our  findings  suggest  that  perhaps  group  cohesion  and 
coherence in museum visiting are not as straightforward as 
previously  thought.  Groups  were  able  to  engage  fully  with 
our  experience  despite  not  always  being  physically 
proximate  or  within  line  of  sight.  Having  a  shared  set  of 
content,  that  was  generated  through  reflecting  on  the 
group‟s  social  relationships,  and  knowing  the  experience 
was limited to the list of objects they all shared, appeared to 
break down the need to be constantly aware of each other‟s 
whereabouts. Coherence might then be better thought of as 
a  more  esoteric  property  that  comes  about  as  a  result  of 
tight  social  cohesiveness  (the  groups  were  existing  friends 
or  family),  being  focused  on  the  same  task  (all  group 
members  were  engaging  with,  and  invested  in,  the  visiting 
experience),  and  some  kind  of  spoken  or  unspoken 
agreement  about  how  closely  they  would  stay  together 
during the visit (some visitors announced their plans to visit 
separately while others did not). Furthermore, the notion of 
coherence  might  be  extended  to  encompass  the  entire 
experience  rather  than  the  state  of  the  participants  at  any 
one  moment. It  may  not  matter if  visitors temporarily  split 
up  if  the  wider  nature  of  their  experience  is  sufficiently 
coherent  that  they  are  comfortable  that  they  will  soon  be 
able to rejoin. 

CONCLUSIONS, LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Tolmie‟s  previous  ethnographic  study  of 
two  major 
museums  revealed  the  significant  problems  facing  both 
visitors  and  curators  as  groups  of  visitors  struggled  to 
balance  their  engagement  with  exhibits  with  the  need  to 
attend to one another – often to the detriment of the former. 
In  response,  we  have  demonstrated  how  the  previously 
proposed approach of gifting experiences can be extended – 
through  reciprocity  and  concealed  identity  –  to  potentially 
mitigate  these  problems  and  deliver  a  group  visiting 
experience 
that  engages  groups  with  content  while 
remaining flexible to how they organize themselves locally. 
However,  it  is  important  to  note  several  limitations  of  our 
study  that  need  to  be  considered  and  addressed  in  future 
work before we can fully understand whether this approach 
can be successful and also how it might best be applied. 

to  success  compared 

First, we have not undertaken a controlled study to compare 
our approach with others and so need to be careful with any 
claims 
the  current  visiting 
experience  or  other  approaches.  Having  said  this,  the 
curators  we  engaged  with  at  our  museum  setting  reported 
that  the  rooms  in  which  we  worked  were  notable  as  being 
their  most  problematic  in  terms  of  engagement  with 
exhibits  for  groups.  Tolmie‟s  study  revealed  the  common 

to 

10

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

challenges  of  group  visiting  over  many  groups  in  two 
different museums, albeit ones that were larger in scale and 
complexity  and  also  more  crowded.  Moreover,  our 
participants were clearly taking part in a research study and 
so may well have behaved more coherently as a result. It is 
important to deploy our approach naturally „in the wild‟ in 
future  work,  and  to  allow  for  different  types  of  group 
beyond  families  and  close  friends,  who  may  well  behave 
differently.  

Our  approach  requires  participants  to  engage  significant 
effort  at  the  design  stage,  raising  questions  as  to  whether 
they  will be  willing to do this and also how  would it scale 
to  large  numbers  of  exhibits  and/or  visitors.  Future  work 
needs  to  explore  how  visitors  can  be  supported  in  readily 
creating  experiences  from  templates,  for  example  through 
an  online  service.  How  can  the  design  stage  as  well  as  the 
visit stage be scaffolded? Will it be acceptable or useful to 
share designs more publicly as inspiration to others?  

Given  these  caveats,  we  do  not  claim  our  approach  as  a 
panacea  for  designing  group  visits  to  museums.  Indeed, 
although we positioned it as something of an alternative to 
more  directed  approaches  earlier  on,  we  foresee  that  it 
might  ultimately  be  combined  with  these  as  part  of  the 
curator‟s  armory  of  techniques  and  technologies.  Perhaps 
gifted experiences will form only a part of an  overall visit, 
applying to a few selected artifacts, or perhaps they will be 
for special  visitors or occasions (a birthday treat?). Gifting 
may  fit  repeat  visits,  with  those  who  have  experienced  the 
museum  being  able  to  design  experiences  for  family  or 
friends? And perhaps gifting templates need to be combined 
with  other  technologies  such  as  recommender  systems  to 
help  people  design  their  gifts?  To  conclude,  then,  we 
suggest  that  our  study  confirms  the  initial  promise  of  the 
gifting approach, at least to support small-group  visits, but 
that many questions remain open for further exploration. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Lesley  Fosh  is  supported  by  the  Horizon  Centre  for 
Doctoral Training at the University of Nottingham (RCUK 
Grant  No.  EP/G037574/1).  This  work  was  also  supported 
by the Platform Grant award EP/FO3038X/1. 

REFERENCES 
1.  Paul M. Aoki, Rebecca E. Grinter, Amy Hurst, Margaret 
H.  Szymanski,  James  D.  Thornton,  Allison  Woodruff. 
2002.  Sotto  voce:  exploring 
interplay  of 
conversation  and  mobile  audio  spaces.  In  Proceedings 
of  the  SIGCHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in 
Computing Systems (CHI ‟02), 431-438.  
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/503376.503454 

the 

2.  Appfurnace Website. 2015. http://appfurnace.com. 
3.  Steve Benford, Gabriella Giannachi, Boriana Koleva, 
Tom Rodden . 2009. From Interaction to Trajectories: 
designing coherent journeys through user experiences. 
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ‟09),  709-718.  

http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1518701.1518812 

4.  Charles  Callaway,  Oliviero  Stock,  Elyon  Dekoven, 
Kinneret  Noy,  Yael  Citron,  Yael  Dobrin.  2011.  Mobile 
Drama  in  an  Instrumented  Museum:  Inducing  Group 
Conversation 
In 
Proceedings  of  the  16th  International  Conference  on 
Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI ‟11), 73-82. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1943403.1943416 

via  Coordinated  Narratives. 

5.  Dan  Cosley,  Joel  Lewenstein,  Andrew  Herman,  Jenna 
Holloway,  Jonathan  Baxter,  Saeko  Nomura,  Kirsten 
Boehner,  Geri  Gay.  2008.  ArtLinks:  fostering  social 
awareness and reflection in museums. In Proceedings of 
the  SIGCHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors 
in 
Computing Systems (CHI ‟08), 403-412. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1357054.1357121 

6.  Andy Crabtree,  Alan  Chamberlain,  Rebecca E. Grinter, 
Matt  Jones,  Tom  Rodden,  Yvonne  Rogers.  2013. 
Introduction  to  the  Special  Issue  of  “The  Turn  to  The 
Wild”.  Transactions  on  Computer-Human  Interaction. 
20, 3, 4 pages. 
http://doi.acm.org/ 10.1145/2491500.2491501 

7.  Kevin  Crowley,  Maureen  A.  Callanan,  Jennifer  L. 
Jipson,  Jodi  Galco,  Karen  Topping  and  Jeff  Shrager. 
2001.  Shared 
everyday 
parent‐child  activity. Science  Education.   85,  6,  712-
732. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/sce.1035 

scientific 

thinking 

in 

8.  John  H  Falk  and  Lynn  D  Dierking.  1992.  The  Museum 

Experience, Whalesback Books, Washington. 

9.  Lesley  Fosh,  Steve  Benford,  Stuart  Reeves,  Boriana 
Koleva,  and  Patrick  Brundell.  2013.  See  Me,  Feel  Me, 
Touch Me, Hear Me: Trajectories And Interpretation In 
A  Sculpture  Garden.  In  Proceedings  of  the  SIGCHI 
Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems 
(CHI ‟13), 149-158. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2470654.2470675 

10. Lesley Fosh, Steve Benford, Stuart Reeves, and Boriana 

Koleva. 2014. Gifting Personal Interpretations in 
Galleries. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ‟14), 625-
634. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2556288.2557259 

11. Geller, T. (2006). Interactive tabletop exhibits in 
museums and galleries. Computer Graphics and 
Applications. 26, 5, 6–11. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCG.2006.111 

12. Rebecca  E.  Grinter,  Paul  M.  Aoki,  Margaret  H. 
Szymanski, James D. Thornton, Allison Woodruff, Amy 
Hurst.  2002.  Revisiting  the  visit:  understanding  how 
technology can shape the museum visit. In Proceedings 
of 
the  ACM  conference  on  Computer  Supported 
Cooperative Work (CSCW ‟02), 146-155. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/587078.587100 

13. Edward  T.  Hall.  1966.  The  Hidden  Dimension.  Anchor 

Books. 

14. Adrian  Hazzard,  Steve  Benford,  Gary  Burnett.  2015. 
Sculpting a Mobile Musical Soundtrack. In Proceedings 
of  the  SIGCHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in 
Computing Systems (CHI ‟15), 387-396. 

11

http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2702123.2702236 

15. Tom  Hope,  Yoshiyuki  Nakamura,  Toru  Takahashi, 
Atsushi  Nobayashi,  Shota  Fukuoka,  Masahiro 
Hamasaki,  Takuichi  Nishimura.  2009.  Familial 
collaborations  in  a  museum.  In  Proceedings  of  the 
SIGCHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing 
Systems (CHI ‟09),  1963-1972. 
 http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1518701.1519000 

16. Tsvi  Kuflik  and  Eyal  Dim.  2013.  Early  Detection  of 
Pairs  of  Visitors  by  Using  a  Museum  Triage. 
In Museums and the Web 2013, N. Proctor & R. Cherry 
(eds). Silver Spring, MD.  

17. David  Martin.  2002.  Audio  Guides.  Museum  Practice. 

5, 1, 71-81. 

18. Marcel  Mauss. 1990. The gift: the form and reason for 

exchange in archaic societies. London: Routledge 
Classics.  

19. Paulette  M.  McManus.  1987.  It's  the  company  you 
keep…:  The  social  determination  of  learning‐related 
behaviour  in  a  science  museum. Museum  Management 
and Curatorship. 6, 3, 263-270. 
20. Sanjay  Purushotham,  C.-C. 

Junaith 
Shahabdeen,  Lama  Nachman.  2014.  Collaborative 
Group-Activity  Recommendation  in  Location-Based 
Social  Networks.  In  Proceedings  of  the  SIGSPATIAL 
and 
International  Workshop  on  Crowdsourced 
Volunteered 
Information, 
8-15. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2676440.2676442 

Geographic 

Jay  Kuo, 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Conference  on  Embedded  Network  Sensor  Systems 
(SenSys ‟14), 46-60. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2668332.2668340 

24. John F. Sherry Jr. 1983. Gift giving in anthropological 
perspective. Journal of Consumer Research 10(2). 157-
168.  

25. Nina  Simon.  2010.  The  Participatory  Museum. 

Museums 2.0. 

26. Flavia Sparacino. 2002. The Museum Wearable: Real-

Time Sensor-Driven Understanding of Visitors Interests 
for Personalized Visually-Augmented Museum 
Experiences. In Museums and the Web 2002, N. Proctor 
& R. Cherry (eds). Silver Spring, MD.  

27. Robyn  Taylor,  Guy  Schofield,  John  Shearer,  Peter 
Wright,  Pierre  Boulanger,  and  Patrick  Olivier.   2014. 
Nightingallery: Theatrical Framing and Orchestration in 
Performance.  Personal  Ubiquitous 
Participatory 
Computing. 18, 7, 1583–1600.  

28.  Peter  Tolmie,  Steve  Benford,  Chris  Greenhalgh,  Tom 
Rodden,  Stuart  Reeves.  2014.  Supporting  Group 
Interactions  in  Museum  Visiting,  In  Proceedings  of  the 
ACM  Conference  on  Computer  Supported  Cooperative 
Work (CSCW ‟14), 1049-1059.  
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2531602.2531619 

29. Eliseo  Véron 

and  Martine  Levasseur. 

1989. 
Ethnographie  de  l’exposition:  l'espace,  le  corps  et  le 
sens, Centre Georges Pompidou, Bibliothèque publique 
d'information. 

21. Jessica S. Robles. 2012. Troubles with assessments in 
gifting occasions, Discourse Studies. 14, 6, 753-777.  

22. Victoria  L.  Schwanda,  Kyle  Barron,  Jennifer  Lien, 
Gretchen  Schroeder,  Ashley  Vernon,  Jeffrey  T. 
Hancock.  2011.  Temporal  Patterns  of  Cohesiveness  in 
Virtual Groups. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference 
on  Computer  Supported  Cooperative  Work  (CSCW 
‟11),709-712. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1958824.1958951 

23. Rijurekha  Sen,  Youngki  Lee,  Kasthuri  Jayarajah, 
Archan  Misra,  Rajesh  Krishna  Balan  2014.  GruMon: 
Fast and Accurate Group Monitoring for Heterogeneous 
Urban  Spaces.  In  Proceedings  of  the  12th  ACM 

30. Dirk  vom  Lehn,  Christian  Heath  and  Jon  Hindmarsh. 
2001. Exhibiting interaction: Conduct and collaboration 
in  museums  and  galleries. Symbolic  Interaction.  24,  2, 
189-216. 

31. David  B.  Wooten.  2000.  Qualitative  Steps  toward  an 
Expanded  Model  of  Anxiety  in  Gift‐Giving. Journal  of 
Consumer Research. 27, 1, 84-95. 

32. Nicola Yuill and Yvonne Rogers. 2012. Mechanisms for 
Collaboration: A Design and Evaluation Framework for 
Multi-User  Interfaces.  Transactions  on  Computer-
Human Interaction. 19, 1, 25 pages.  
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2147783.2147784

 

12

