CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

“Helping Others Makes Me Happy”: Social Interaction and 

Integration of People with Disabilities 

Xianghua Ding 

Ning Gu 

Shanghai Key Laboratory of 
Data Science Fudan University 

Shanghai Key Laboratory of 
Data Science Fudan University 

Shanghai 201203, China 

dingx@fudan.edu.cn 

 

Shanghai 201203, China 

dingx@fudan.edu.cn 

Peng Liu 

School of Computer Science 

Fudan University 

Shanghai 201203, China 

liudongping0202@163.com 

ABSTRACT 
This  paper  presents  a  qualitative  study  of  people  with 
disabilities,  focusing  on  issues  of  their  social  interaction 
and  integration.  Through  interviews  and  participatory 
observations with a group of people with motor disabilities 
in China, we found that their perceived limited capabilities 
to reciprocate, or feelings of indebtedness, were among the 
main  reasons  that  kept  them  from  interacting  with  others. 
The study shows that ICT and communities of people with 
disabilities  are  valuable  in  relieving  these  issues,  in  that 
they provide means and opportunities for them to give help 
and  in  turn  develop  self-esteem,  crucial  for  their  social 
interaction  and  integration.  Our  study  suggests  providing 
ways  for  them  to  give  and  not  simply  receive  help  as  an 
important  means  to  support  their  social  interaction  and 
integration—in particular, by focusing on their abilities and 
communities, instead of disabilities and independence.  
Author Keywords 
Disability; social interaction; social integration; reciprocity; 
ICT; community.  
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous. 
INTRODUCTION 
Information  and  Communication  Technology  (ICT)  is 
expected to provide important opportunities for people with 
disabilities,  probably  more  so  for  people  with  greater 
disabilities than those with fewer or no disabilities [13]. As 
such,  on  one  hand,  effort  is  made  to  ensure  their  equal 
access to ICT so that they will not be further disadvantaged 
with  the  increasing  expansion  of  ICT  [35].  On  the  other 
hand, it is hoped that ICT will provide unique opportunities 
for them to work through ICT and potentially to hold high-
end jobs [21], so that they can be more fully integrated into 
Permission to  make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be  honored. 
Abstracting with  credit  is  permitted. To copy  otherwise, or  republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819998 

society.  
In CSCW and related fields, however, work for disabilities 
has  mainly  focused  on  accessibility,  primarily  in  terms  of 
individuals  (e.g.,  [1]),  and  investigation  of  their  social 
interaction  and  integration  has  been  limited.  When  social 
aspects  are  concerned,  these  are  either  explored  as  new 
ways  to  address  accessibility  (e.g.,  crowdsourcing-based 
approaches [2, 7, 24]) or as a new perspective to understand 
disabilities [34] and the use of assistive technologies [41]. 
The other side of the story—how ICT works for those with 
disabilities to interact with others and more fully participate 
in society—is still underexplored.  
In this paper, we focus on social interaction and integration 
of  people  with  disabilities.  In  China,  although  effort  has 
been  made  to  improve  public  space  accessibility  and 
encourage them to go out, people with disabilities are still 
largely  isolated  and  it  is  still  uncommon  to  see  them  in 
public  spaces.  A  survey  conducted  in  China  showed  that 
more than 71 percent of people with disabilities had never 
been to the library or other public cultural facilities, about 
68  percent  had  never  appeared  in  any  of  the  public  sport 
stadiums,  and  44  percent  had  never  been  to  parks  [51]. 
Starting  with  a  group  of  people  with  motor  disabilities  in 
China,  we  studied  what  kept  them  home,  whom  they 
interacted  with  and  how,  and  in  what  aspects  ICT  might 
help.  Unlike  other  kinds  of  disabilities  such  as  visual 
impairments, people with motor—especially lower limbs—
disabilities  did  not  have  more  troubles  using  ICT  than 
people  without  disabilities.  Actually,  we  found 
their 
adoption  of  ICT  was  impacted  more  by  their  ages  and 
financial conditions than by disabilities. This finding helps 
us 
issues  of  ICT  accessibility  and 
investigate social interaction and integration of people with 
disabilities, with or without ICT. 
The  study  started  with  a  collaborative  project  with 
Shanghai’s  Disabled  Person’s  Federation.  Through  this 
project,  we  gained  access  to  a  group  of  individuals  who 
were classified as seriously disabled—most of them cannot 
move,  either  due  to  muscle  atrophy,  deformation  of 
articulations, spinal cord injury, or other conditions. When 
working with them over the project, we were struck by how 
isolated  these  participants  were,  and  decided  to  conduct  a 
qualitative study to better understand issues and practices of 
their  social  interaction  and  integration,  by  recruiting  more 

look  beyond 

to 

1596

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

includes  using 

participants  for  interviews,  and  conducting  participatory 
observations online and offline.  
Through  interviews  and  participatory  observations,  we 
found  that  besides  issues  of  accessibility,  their  perceived 
limited  capability  to  reciprocate others’  favors  was  one  of 
the  main  barriers  for  them  to  interact  and  socialize  with 
non-disabled  others.  At  the  same  time,  the  study  also 
reveals  how  ICT  and  communities  of  people  with 
disabilities  are  of  special  value  here,  in  that  they  provide 
means and opportunities for people with disabilities to give 
help and contribute, which is crucial for them to build self-
respect,  enjoy  social  interaction,  survive  and  even  thrive. 
With the study, we suggest a design for disability that goes 
beyond  accessibility,  focusing  on  abilities,  not  disabilities, 
and on communities, not individuals.  
RELATED WORK AND THEORIES 
Accessibility for Disability 
In CSCW and related fields, there has been extensive work 
on  disability,  largely  under  the  theme  of  “accessibility.”  
Most of such work proceeds from an individual perspective, 
where “independence” is emphasized—the primary goal is 
to  provide  accessible  or  assistive  technologies  for  people 
with  disabilities  to  live  independently  in  their  home  and 
other  environments.  The  work 
tactile 
feedback  [30,  37,  18,  50]  for  visually  impaired  people  to 
use  computers  or  navigate  through  indoor  or  open  spaces, 
and  providing  services  for  people  with  dementia  to  stay 
independently at home [42, 46]. An exception is work for 
autism,  where  approaches  to  practicing  their  social  skills 
are explored [16, 27].  
Recently,  social  aspects  of  disability  have  received  more 
attention. For example, a review of literature from disability 
studies  by  Mankoff  et  al.  [34]  suggests  that,  beyond  the 
traditional medical model of disability focusing on physical 
and  functional  limitations  as  well  as  approaches  to  fix  it, 
there are also social and cultural models. Social models of 
disability  focus  on  issues  of  access,  activism,  and  societal 
changes  to  address  it;  cultural  models,  on  the  other  hand, 
privilege  unique  individual  experiences  to  avoid  assuming 
that  “normalcy”  is  the  ultimate  goal.  Shinohara  and 
Wobbrock  reveal  that  social  context  may  have  negative 
impact  on  the  use  of  assistive  technologies,  despite 
technological  and  functional  soundness  of  these  assistive 
technologies, and highlight the importance of understanding 
social  situatedness  [41].  Branham  and  Kane  explicitly 
examine how people with visual impairment live with their 
partners and collaboratively construct an accessible shared 
living space; they propose collaborative accessibility and a 
focus  on 
to  go  beyond 
accessibility and independence [10]. 
Social and collaborative approaches to addressing disability 
have  been  more  actively  explored  in  the  form  of  crowd-
sourcing,  where  online  crowdsourcing  platforms  are 
leveraged to provide assistance for people with disabilities, 

interdependency  as  a  way 

1597

the 

level 

interface 

such as providing real-time answers to visual questions for 
blind people [7], or enhancing independence and safety for 
blind  and  deaf-blind  public  transit  riders  [2].  At  the  same 
time,  crowd-sourcing  platforms  also  provide  ways  for 
people with disabilities to do micro-work through them. In 
particular,  Zyskowski  et  al.  studied  experiences  of  people 
with  disabilities 
to  do  micro-work  using  Amazon 
Mechanical Turk and suggest that the notion of accessibility 
should  be  broadened  beyond 
to 
incorporate  the  whole  online  experience,  including  doing 
online paid work [52].  
In this paper, we are similarly concerned with social aspects 
of disability. However, rather than focusing on social ways 
of  addressing  accessibility  [2]  or  their  use  of  technologies 
[41],  we  will  directly  focus  on  social  interaction  and 
integration of disabled people as our ultimate end.  
Social Interaction: Reciprocity, Indebtedness, and Help 
As we will shall show later in the paper, we find that social 
interaction  and 
integration  problems  of  people  with 
disabilities  are  highly  related  to  issues  of  reciprocity, 
indebtedness  and  help,  and  also  embedded  with  issues  of 
social  relationships,  social  status,  happiness,  self-value, 
self-esteem and others. In this section, we will revisit these 
notions and theories that are relevant to the analysis of our 
data. 
Theories  from  economy  are  based  on  the  assumption  that 
we are rational and self-interested human beings, trying to 
get the most out of the least [3, 40]. Yet, social and cultural 
studies have long shown that our interactions are often not 
based on self-interests but rather based on a sense of justice 
or reciprocity [26, 32, 39], or “the sense of equity, balance, 
fairness,  and  symmetry”  [22].  It  is  also  argued  that 
reciprocity  is  the  norm  of  social  interactions,  and  is 
pervasive  in  human  culture  and  permeates  all  exchanges 
(e.g.  [12,  26,  32]).  For  example,  Claude  Levi-Strauss’s 
structuralism  suggests  that  all  the  three  spheres  of  human 
life—exchange of words in language, exchange of women 
in  kinship,  and  exchange  of  things  in  economics—are 
governed  by  the  fundamental  law  of  reciprocity  [32]. 
George Homan’s social exchange theory and its variations 
were also based on the norms of reciprocity [26].   
The  principle  of  reciprocity  has  also  been  illustrated  in  a 
number of psychology experiments [9, 12, 38]. For instance, 
Regan’s well-known experiment demonstrated that one felt 
obligated to return a favor even when one did not like the 
favor  giver  [38],  and  it  has  been  pointed  out  that  we  will 
feel real strain if there is limited means to return favors [9]. 
Robert  Cialdini  draws  on  Regan’s  experimental  work  as 
well as other extensive examples to show how powerful the 
rule  of  reciprocity  is  in  regulating  and  influencing  human 
behavior to comply with certain requests [12].  
Recent work on understanding participation in the peer-to-
peer  service  systems  also  shows  effects  of  reciprocity  and 
feelings of indebtedness [4, 15, 31].  For example, Bellotti 

et al. used theories of exchange and reciprocity to analyze 
motivations  for  participants  in  these  social  exchange 
services [4]. The study of Kassi carried out by Lampinen et 
al.  shows  that  people  consider  always  receiving  favor  as 
unpleasant  and  worrisome  and  would  try  to  avoid  it  and 
offset  it  [31].  Dillahunt  and  Malone,  in  their  study  of  the 
sharing economy among unemployed people, note that they 
are willing to lend but are unwilling to borrow [15].  
Not simply feeling unpleasant for always receiving favors, 
people  also  engage  in  altruistic  behavior,  performing 
actions  for  others’  benefit  at  one’s  own  cost  [45]  (e.g., 
saving  someone  from  drowning).  Many  theories  exist  to 
explain altruism. Some explain it in terms of the balance of 
costs  and  benefits  involved  in  the  actions—people  are 
willing  to  perform  an  altruistic  act  when  the  cost  is  very 
minimal, such as sharing a piece of information, holding the 
elevator, and so on, or when the benefit or need is extreme 
(such  as  drowning)  [22].  Others  turn  to  natural  selection 
theories and use the term “reciprocal altruism” [45]: when 
one gives help now, it will be likely to get repaid when one 
has the need in future, will increase the chances of survival, 
and  is  favored  by  natural  selection,  so  humans  are  hard-
wired  for  altruism  through  evolution  over  time.  Finally, 
there  is  also  evidence  showing  that  helping  others,  while 
coming with cost in economic terms, will be rewarded with 
psychological  and  physical  benefits,  in  terms  of  increased 
life-satisfaction, subjective wellbeing, and happiness [5, 6, 
14], and reduced mortality in older adults [11]. Diener and 
Biswas-Diener’s  insight  is  that  happiness  comes  with  a 
“balanced portfolio” of personal assets [14].  
However, there are notable exceptions to the pervasive rule 
of reciprocity. For example, Graeber notes that exchange or 
reciprocity  is  based  on  the  condition  that  the  involved 
parties  are  of  equivalent  status,  or  on  “more  a  constant 
process  of  interaction  tending  toward  equivalence”  [22]. 
When  the  involved  parties  are  not  in  equivalent  status,  or 
when  they  are  in  hierarchy,  then  it  operates  not  based  on 
reciprocity  anymore,  but  more  by  the  logic  of  precedent, 
habit or custom. For example, how much harvest is paid to 
the  king  is  not  based  on  the  calculation  of  how  much 
protection can be provided by the king, but based on how 
much harvest was paid last year, or how much our ancestors 
had to pay. So once we consider others as different, either 
above or below us, the ordinary rules of reciprocity will not 
apply. Even in peer–based relationships, there are situations 
in  which  the  principle  of  reciprocity  will  not  apply.  For 
example, in extreme situations when hierarchies or markets 
are  not  affordable,  such  as  in  the  immediate  wake  of 
disasters,  people  tend  to  revert  to  the  principle  of  “from 
each according to their abilities, to each according to their 
needs”  (“communism,”1 as  Graeber  calls  it  [22]),  rather 
                                                 
1 Please  note  that  the  term  communism  is  used  here  to 
characterize a kind of interaction that is based on a principle 
distinct  from  reciprocity.  To  avoid  confusing  it  with 

1598

SESSION: ACCESSIBILITY AND UNIVERSAL DESIGN

for 

the 

construction  of 

than  operating  by  reciprocity.  In  a  communistic  relation, 
sharing  a  basic  necessity  such  as  food  is  an  obligation  as 
well as a pleasure [22]. Finally, reciprocity does not apply 
either  in  relations  of  social  solidarity,  such  as  parents  and 
children, wives and husbands, or close friends, with whom 
people more readily share everything [22]. 
Social  interaction  and  exchange,  and  giving  and  receiving 
favors,  in  particular,  then,  are  entangled  with  notions  of 
perceived  self-worth,  happiness,  social  status,  and  social 
relationships, as well as local conditions (e.g., in the worst 
or best times). As a matter of fact, social interaction, social 
status, and social relationship are mutually constructed with 
each  other.  For  instance,  exchange  between  equals  can 
create relation through “an endless circle of gifts to which 
no one ever handed over the precise value of the object last 
received” [22]. To bring back an exact equivalent would be 
to  suggest  an  end  of  relationships,  such  as  in  the  case  of 
commercial exchange. Moreover, equal exchange relations 
or  communistic  relations  can  slip 
into  relations  of 
“hierarchical”  inequality  if  care  is  not  taken  to  guard 
against it [22].  
THE STUDY 
The  study  was  based  in  Shanghai,  China,  starting  with  a 
collaborative  project  with  Shanghai  Disabled  Person’s 
Federation  in  August  2014.  In  this  project,  our  team  was 
responsible 
smart  home 
environments  for  people  with  disabilities.  To  start  with, 
Shanghai  Disabled  Person's  Federation  introduced  to  us 
three participants, officially classified as severely disabled, 
caused  by  Amyotrophic  Lateral  Sclerosis 
(ALS), 
Rheumatoid Arthritis, and spine injury respectively. We got 
in touch with them and went to their homes to find out what 
their daily lives looked like, and to decide what assistance 
we  should  build.  We  observed  that  all  of  them  had  very 
limited  capability  to  move  around,  and  for  the  ones 
suffering  from  ALS  or  Rheumatoid  Arthritis,  they  even 
could  not  freely  move 
limbs.  Through 
interacting with them, their caregivers, as well as Shanghai 
Disabled Person’s Federation, we decided, as the first step, 
to  design  a  system  for  them  to  use  cell  phones  and  voice 
commands 
their  home  facilities 
(including windows, curtains, TV sets, and lights); the three 
homes worked as our test beds.  
Over  the  process  of  working  for  these  three  families,  we 
were  struck  by  how  isolated  these  participants  with 
disabilities had been. They all reported that they had stayed 
home for over ten years, and rarely went out and interacted 
with others. Although the one with spine injury had started 
to go out to meet and travel together with other friends with 
                                                                                 
Communism  as  a  political 
ideology,  we  will  use 
communistic interaction or communistic relationship in the 
rest of the paper. 
 

to  remotely  control 

their  upper 

 

 

 
f
o

 
s
r
a
e
Y

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
s
i
D

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

one 

organized 

disabilities,  with  the  help  of  some  programs  and  other 
pioneers  with  disabilities  (these  will  be  elaborated  later  in 
the  paper),  it  did  not  happen  until  recently.  We  were 
intrigued  to  explore  further  what  happened,  with  whom 
they interacted on a daily basis and how, and what role ICT 
might play.  
To  understand  their  social  interaction  and  integration,  we 
started to recruit more participants for interviews and also 
conducted more participant observations. Besides observing 
and  interviewing  the  original  three  participants,  the  first 
author also contacted the local disability service institutions 
and worked as a volunteer for their activities and gatherings, 
including 
by  Shanghai  Sunshine 
Rehabilitation  Center  (we  knew  them  through  Shanghai 
Disabled  Person's  Federation),  the  largest  and  the  most 
professional rehabilitation institution in Eastern China, and 
one organized by the Halfway House, an institution to help 
people  with  disabilities  to  rehabilitate  and  to  adapt  and 
integrate  with  the  society  by  organizing  various  trainings 
and activities.  
In addition, through interviews and participant observations, 
we also learned of some online forums and QQ groups for 
people with disabilities. The first author got invited to join 
some of their QQ groups, and started to observe activities 
on  these  QQ  groups  and  forums.  We  also  contacted  the 
founder  of  the  largest  online  forum  for  people  with 
disabilities 
in  China,  ZiQiang  Net  ( 自 强 网 self-
improvement  network)  for  interviews.  In  the  end,  we 
recruited and conducted semi-structured interviews with 11 
informants 
total:  four  recommended  by  Shanghai 
Disabled Person’s Federation (they introduced one more for 
interviews  besides  the  original  three  participants),  four 
recruited  from  voluntary  activities,  one  introduced  by  one 
of the informants, one from our own social network, and the 
founder of ZiQiang Net.  
Table 1 lists all the informants for our study. P1 and P2 and 
P3  were  the  three  participants  originally  introduced  by 
Shanghai Disabled Person's Federation. As we can see from 
the table, all of them had motor disabilities from different 
causes. P11 was the founder of ZiQiang Net, and had been 
suffering  from  Ankylosing  Spondylitis  (AS)  for  over  20 
years.  Except  for  P1,  P2  and  P11,  the  rest  suffered  from 
injuries, primarily spine injuries. Most of them were injured 
from  work,  and  could  be  compensated  by  governments  or 
enterprises.  Before  becoming  disabled,  they  were  working 
at various positions, covering a broad range of occupations: 
factory  workers,  policemen,  drivers,  miners,  accountants, 
etc. Most of them were taken care of by spouses, parents, 
children  or  paid  caregivers,  and  most  of  them  were  from 
Shanghai, with a few from other parts of the country. 
We  conducted  interviews  with  them  face  to  face,  by 
telephone, or by online chat, with time ranging from one to 
three  hours.  We  asked  about  their  daily  lives,  social 
relations,  social  interactions,  assistive  technologies  used, 
whether and how they used ICT, and so on. When some  

in 

1599

 
s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

P1 

P2 

 

x
e
S

 
e
g
A

F 

F 

56 

64 

P3  M  66 

P4  M  57 

P5  M  70 

P6  M  36 

P7  M  63 

P8  M  61 

P9  M  27 

 

T
C
I
 
f
o

 
s
r
a
e
Y

 
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
E

0 

9 

2 

9 

0 

5 

4 

2 

2 

P10 

F 

32 

10 

 
f
o

 
e
p
y
T

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
s
i
D

ALS 

RA 

spine 
injury 

spine 
injury 

thoracic 
injury 

spine 
injury 

spine 
injury 

spine 
injury 

spine 
injury 

spine 
injury 

 
s
u
o
i
v
e
r
P

 

b
o
J

 

d
e
t
a
l
e
r
-
k
r
o
W

 

y
r
u
j
n
i

 

n
o
i
t
a
c
o
L

30 

30 

36 

worker 

accountant 

worker 

34 

policeman 

7 

worker 

13 

policeman 

38 

29 

6 

17 

23 

driver 

 worker 

miner 

none 

worker 

N 

N 

Y 

Y 

N 

Y 

Y 

Y 

Y 

N 

N 

Shanghai 

Shanghai 

Shanghai 

Shanghai 

Shanghai 

Shanghai 

Shanghai 

Shanghai 

Shandong 

Anhui 

Shanghai 

P11  M  43 

13 

AS 

Table 1. Study participants’ information 

the 

*ALS, Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis 
*RA, Rheumatoid Arthritis     *AS, Ankylosing Spondylitis 
interesting information came up, we followed up for more 
details  and  specific  examples.  Except  for 
three 
interviews  conducted  over  volunteering  activities  where 
only notes were taken, and one through online chat (coming 
with  chatting  scripts),  all  the  interviews  were  audio 
recorded  and 
transcribed.  Interviews  were  conducted 
mostly in Mandarin, occasionally with some dialects (e.g., 
Shanghainese)  which  were  then  translated  into  Mandarin. 
Besides  participant  observations  and  interviews,  we  also 
collected data from related online forums, websites and QQ 
groups. 
Throughout  our  research,  we  used  a  grounded  theory 
approach [43] to conduct analysis as we collected the data. 
As  themes  began  to  emerge,  we  iteratively  posed  more 
questions  around  these  themes  in  subsequent  interviews. 
Representative  quotes  were  translated  into  English  and 
illustration  purposes 
applied  for 
this  paper.  All 
informants’ names are anonymized. 
FINDINGS 
From  the  study,  we  learned  that  all  informants,  except  P1 
and  P5,  had  adopted  and  used  ICT;  all  informants,  except 
for  P1  and  P2,  had  engaged  in  interactions  with  other 
people with disabilities regularly, through offline or online 
means.  They  used  ICT  for  information  searching,  news 

in 

reading,  video  watching,  book  reading,  gaming,  online 
shopping, and sharing and communicating with friends. For 
communications, QQ on PC and WeChat on mobile phones 
were  the  most  widely  used.  Besides  staying  in  touch  with 
old  friends  and  relatives,  their  main  contacts  were  people 
with  disabilities  like  them,  or  disability  friends  ( 伤 友 
Shangyou),  as  they  are  called.  Although  P2  used  ICT,  it 
was mainly to read news and watch and listen to Buddhist 
Chant videos. P1 did not use ICT, although she watched TV 
every day. 
In  this  section,  we  will  present  findings  of  how  they  felt 
uncomfortable with always receiving help and at the same 
time would actively reach out to provide help by using ICT 
and  other  means.  We  will  then  illustrate  how  they  often 
turned to other people with disabilities to provide help and 
how  online  and  offline  communities  were  formed  among 
them  as  a  consequence.  We  will  also  highlight  that  the 
nature and value of a community of people with disabilities 
are of a special kind. 
Not Willing to Receive but Willing to Give Help  
Perceived Incapability to Reciprocate as a Main Barrier  
As  quite  some  empirical  studies  have  illustrated,  people 
dislike  feeling  indebted  [31],  and  inability  to  return  and 
give back will pose strain on them [23], especially among 
those  who  perceive  themselves  as  equivalent  [22].  In  our 
study, we also found that for our disabled informants, their 
unwillingness to interact with others had much to do with 
their  perceived  limited  capability  to  reciprocate.  This  was 
most  evident  in  the  cases  of  P1  and  P2,  the  relatively 
isolated participants. P2 said explicitly: “Actually, with my 
personality,  I  will  not  refuse  interacting  with  others,  but  I 
don’t want to bother others and bothering others hurts my 
self-esteem.”  Similarly,  when  we  asked  P1,  who  stayed 
home by herself most of her day, whether she had friends 
coming  over  to  visit  her,  she  answered  that  although  she 
had  many  friends  who  would  like  to  come,  she  tended  to 
decline their visits as she did not know how to return their 
favors. She shared with us cases when she declined others’ 
visit though in need: 

Sometimes, I got high fever up to 39 degrees (Celsius), 
at  home.  I  couldn’t  even  swallow  water.  I  got  their 
phone calls: “How are you doing? Are you fine?” “I am 
good.” I forced myself to say, “I am good,” “very good.” 
Actually  he  said  it  seemed  you  gasped.  “No,  no,  I  just 
choked from drinking water.” I would not tell others. If I 
told  them,  they  would  come  over  and  that  would  add 
extra burden on them. I told them, I had no way to pay 
you back, and if I was capable [of paying them back], I 
would like you to come every day, not to mention several 
times  a  year.  It  is  really  a  shame  when  you  can’t  pay 
people back. 

Contrary  to  what  was  assumed  for  those  with  disability—
that “helping” them was the starting point—receiving “help” 
or  favor  actually  imposes  burdens  and  in  the  end  keeps 

1600

SESSION: ACCESSIBILITY AND UNIVERSAL DESIGN

them  away  from  others.  We  found  that  these  two  isolated 
informants  shared  some  common  conditions.  Both  were 
widowed,  meaning  that  they  did  not  have  spouses,  whose 
help they would not have felt guilty for receiving [22]; and 
although  both  of  them  lived  with  their  sons,  they  were 
unwilling to add extra burden on them. Therefore, without 
solidary relations (e.g., spouses or parents) to turn to when 
in need, their feelings of indebtedness were much stronger 
than in other informants, leading to their ultimate isolation. 
To  make  things  worse,  their  living  environments  suffered 
from serious accessibility issues. Both of them lived on the 
upper  floors  in  old  public  residence  buildings,  where  no 
elevator  was  provided.  Therefore  it  took  more  effort  for 
them  to  physically  go  out;  more  effort  meant  that  more 
trouble would incur and more stress would be put on them. 
So  both  of  them  tried  their  best  to  avoid  going  out  and 
chose  to  stay  home  most  of  the  time.  P1’s  case  was  even 
worse: a bit overweight, it took three to four male adults to 
carry  her  down.  For  that  reason,  although  P1  had  a  very 
strong desire to go out (actually her dream was to go to the 
supermarket  someday),  she  rejected  opportunities  offered 
by some volunteers to take her out. For P2, the continuing 
worsening of her health conditions and the lessening ability 
for her to do things made her increasingly depressed.  
For  other  informants,  we  found  they  were  generally 
sensitive  when 
interacting  with  non-disabled  others, 
especially  their  former  equivalent  relations  (e.g.,  former 
colleagues, friends and relatives, and so on). P4, who used 
to be a policeman and was injured in a motor accident, was 
such a case. He said he did not talk to others for seven or 
eight years after the drastic change in his life: 

At  that  time,  I  was  among  the  best.  My  family 
backgrounds  and  conditions  all  belonged  to  the  upper 
class,  more  or  less.  Things  dropped  all  of  sudden  [he 
appears sad]. After [becoming] paralyzed, I had to rely 
on  others  for  everything.  I  did  not  talk  to  others  for 
seven, eight years and almost contacted no one.  

P9,  a  coal  mine  worker,  was  disabled  six  years  ago,  and 
expressed 
interacting  and 
socializing with his old friends:  

similar  discomfort  when 

I am not used to that for now, and hope it will become 
better.  Because  I  had  been  all  good  before.  But  now,  I 
am not feeling well, and others will not feel well either 
when they see me. 

Reflecting  on  Diener  and  Biswas-Diener’s  statement  that 
happiness  comes  from  a  “balanced  portfolio”  of  personal 
assets [14], we believe it was the participants’ overreliance 
on others for daily activities, and not finding ways to return 
favors,  that  resulted  in  their  imbalanced  portfolio  of 
personal  assets  and  their  increasing  depression,  which  in 
turn  led  some  to  withdraw  from  social  interactions.  In  a 
sense, 
interactions 
altogether becomes a way for them to stay balanced and to 
protect  their  self-esteem;  since  reciprocity  is  based  on 

refusing  others’  help  and  social 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

lead 

to 

to  reciprocate  may 

equivalence,  and  failing 
undesirable inequality [22].  
Interestingly,  things  were  quite  different  when  the  favor 
came  from  government  institutions.  P2  said  while  she  did 
not even want her relatives to know that she was in need of 
help, she would feel more comfortable receiving help from 
organizations  or  institutions:  “I  feel  more  relieved  [when 
the favor was from them—the government], because that is 
their  job.”  Although  relations  with  these  institutions  or 
organizations  were  not  necessarily  hierarchical,  no 
equivalent  status  was  expected  in  these  situations.  In 
addition,  these  institutions  and  organizations  were  defined 
by their responsibility and obligations to offer assistance for 
people  with  disabilities,  which  helped  to  justify  our 
informants’ receptions of assistances from them.  
“Helping Others Makes Me Happy.”  
Not  simply  declining  others’  help,  our  informants  also 
actively tried to give help, although the opportunity did not 
occur  often  for  some  informants.  For  example,  over  our 
study,  P1  decided  to  donate  her  used  disability  bed  to  a 
senior  center  after  she  got  a  new  one  from  Shanghai 
Disabled  Persons'  Federation.  To  her,  this  was  a  way  to 
show  her  “loving  heart”  and  to  pay  back  and  express 
gratitude  for  the  help  she  had  received  from  them  some 
time ago. She said: “I may not be able to repay their favor 
in my life. This bed, I wouldn’t use anymore, so I think that 
could be a way to pay them back.” But the response she got 
from  the  senior  center  –“we  won’t  need  it  if  you  want 
money, but we will take it if you give it for free”— upset 
her,  as  she  felt  that  her  good  intention  for  gratitude  was 
misunderstood  for  self-interest.  Over  the  process  during 
which we built a smart home environment for her, she often 
offered us little gifts such as fruit cans, as a way to express 
her gratitude [23]. An important lesson we learned from this 
study  was  that,  to  truly  support  those  in  need,  besides 
offering  favors  to  them,  receiving  favors  from  them  was 
also important. 
Previous 
that  helping  others  and 
volunteering work have positive impact on happiness, self-
esteem and life-satisfaction [25, 33]. Similarly, in our study, 
the  sentiment  that  “helping  others  makes  me  happy” 
explicitly  expressed  by  our  informants  several  times.  For 
instance,  when  we  interviewed  P11,  the  founder  of  the 
online disability community ZiQiang Net, two of his friends 
also  with  disabilities  were  around  in  his  office,  and  they 
almost spoke as one when the issue of help came up: “If I 
helped  you,  I  feel  happy,  very  happy.”  P2,  although  her 
health condition was worsening, still actively sought ways 
to  give  help  (e.g.,  thinking  of  sharing  her  own  medical 
experiences to others who suffered from similar diseases), 
as  it  would  prove  that  she  was  still  useful  to  others,  and 
would help her hold up. Over our interviews, she expressed 
that  she  even  “envied”  us  as  we  had  capability  to  help 
others,  and  to  her,  that  was  an  important  element  of  “life 
quality.”  Interestingly,  her  participation  in  our  study,  with 

research 

shows 

the idea that her involvement could help our research, made 
her  happy.  She  said  that  our  presence  during  her  “most 
depressing time” was like “sunshine coming in.”   
Eagerness  to  give  help  is  similarly  found  in  other  studies 
(e.g.,  see  [31]).  For  our  informants  in  particular  who 
suffered from disabilities and relied on others more often to 
get  things  done,  we  suggest  that  being  able  to  “give” 
instead  of  “receiving”  help  meant  something  more  special 
and meaningful to them. 
Using ICT to Provide Help  
Interestingly,  we  found  that  the  use  of  ICT  and  the 
existence  of 
the  digital  divide  actually  provided 
opportunities  for  some,  especially  younger  ones,  to  give 
help.  This  was  especially  true  as  our  informants  were 
mainly  of  low  limb  disabilities,  so  it  did  not  pose  more 
trouble  for  them  to  adopt,  access  and  use  ICT.  Actually, 
from  the  study,  we  found  that  their  adoption  or  non-
adoption  of  ICT  had  more  to  do  with  their  ages  and 
financial conditions than with disabilities. P2, for instance, 
shared  us  with  such  a  story  of  how  she  used  ICT  to  help 
others: 

My senior sister fellow in Ottawa…I happened to have a 
neighbor there, so I thought I could ask her if got time 
through  Skype.  Then  I  called  some  of  her  elders  in 
Shanghai,  “Have  you  seen  that?  Don’t  worry.  I’ve 
contacted her, and she is fine.” Probably they thought I 
was meddling, but he was a solitary older person, and I 
think 
that,  he  would  be 
worried…he  would  be  worried  if  he  could  not  get  in 
touch. So I told him in advance, and he said he got it. I 
feel  I  could  do  things,  and  actually  it  means  I  am 
capable when I can help others.  

if  he  happened 

to  see 

Besides  sharing  information  from  online,  online  shopping 
and  online  payment  were  the  most  commonly  reported 
favors our informants could give to others. P10 said that she 
helped  do  online  shopping  for  some  of  her  elderly 
neighbors  who  did  not  have  online  payment  accounts: 
“They do not have online banks, and can’t buy things online, 
so  I  can  buy  things  online  on  their  behalf.”  She  also 
reported  how  her  disabled  friends  helped  others  fixing 
computers. Similarly, P9 said that when in the hospital, he 
did not have many chances to help his peers, as they all had 
their  own  caregivers  around,  but  he  could  help  them  do 
online shopping: “Helped them to buy stuff online…or help 
recharge their phone bills.” This was then the other side of 
the story of “socially mediated use” of ICT for the elderly, 
reported  in  Sun  et  al.’s  work  [44];  in  our  study,  it  was  a 
group of people with disabilities who had used ICT to offer 
help to others, mainly the elderly. P10, however, pointed it 
out  that  this  kind  of  opportunity  was  decreasing,  as  more 
and  more  people  had  crossed  the  digital  divide  and  not 
many people needed help anymore in that respect.  
Our informants leveraged ICT not simply to provide favors, 
but also to do work for income and employment. This was 

1601

similar  to  the  micro-work  done  on  Mechanical  Turk  by 
people  with  disabilities,  as  reported  by Zysokwski  [52].  It 
was especially evident among those relatively young people 
with  disabilities,  those  from  the  remote  areas  (where  the 
welfare for disability was not as good as for those living in 
big cities such as Shanghai), or those who did not receive 
compensation as much as those injured from work did. P10 
was  such  a  case.  She  reported  the  various  kinds  of  digital 
work  that  she  and  her  friends  had  done,  including 
transcribing  and  typing  pictures,  photo  processing,  PPT 
making, website promotion, online store promotion, and so 
on.  Our  informants  also  pointed  us  to  a  website  called 
MutualAid  Net  (互帮网 HuBangNet,  www.bangcn.com) 
that  was  dedicated  to  publishing  digital  work,  and  quite  a 
few subscribers were people with disabilities. From this site, 
we  found  all  kinds  of  ICT-related  work,  including  cyber 
marketing,  text  processing,  and  writing.  This  network 
showed,  upon  the  time  of  study,  that  around  5,000  out  of 
the  29,676  subscribed  members  were  people  with 
disabilities,  and  there  were  13,331  units  of  digital  work, 
with the minimal compensation of 10 RMB/hour.  
However, as suggested by P10, some digital work was no 
longer  available,  due  to  the  advancement  of  ICT.  For 
example,  P10  used  to  do  typing  and  to  transcribe  words 
from pictures into texts (e.g., from scanned books), and she 
found  that  this  kind  of  job  was  disappearing  with  related 
software made available: “Some software came out and can 
convert  words  in  pictures  into  texts,  so  this  kind  of  part-
time jobs are disappearing.” As a response, she had started 
working hard to practice Mandarin and reading, with a hope 
to  do  audio  reading  work  online,  which  was  more 
rewarding and more fun to her.  
Regarding work opportunities with ICT, P11, the founder of 
ZiQiang Net, was more optimistic about it. He believed that 
the  emergence  of  any  new  platforms,  services,  or 
applications  would  mean  new  demand  for  human  work  to 
maintain  them  and  this  would  be  suitable  for  people  with 
disabilities to do: 

service  work  will 

The  emergence  of  any  new  platforms  and  any  new 
applications  means  that  it  will  require  many  service 
people  to  maintain,  and  this  kind  of  maintenance  and 
customer 
profitable 
opportunities  for  people  with  disabilities…You  don’t 
need to look good, or sound nice, and you don’t need to 
run  to  other  places  for  business.  So  you  can  imagine, 
blind people can do it and deaf people can do it, not to 
mention the rest.  

create 

This  is  an  interesting  observation,  suggesting  that  the 
development  of  ICT  has  a  great  potential  to  empower 
people  with  disabilities  by  creating  new  employment 
opportunities especially suitable to them, other than simply 
helping them access existing job opportunities as previously 
expected [21].  

1602

SESSION: ACCESSIBILITY AND UNIVERSAL DESIGN

trainings  or 

We  also  learned  that  some  organizations  were  quite 
supportive  of  helping  people  with  disabilities  to  do  ICT-
related  work,  by  providing  related 
job 
opportunities. For example, we learned from our study that 
there was a “Ten Thousand Online Store Customer Services 
for  Disabled  People”  by  Mayun,  the  founder  of  the  most 
popular online shopping site Taobao in China. In addition, 
the pressure to make a living and the ability to use ICT, as 
well  as  the  relatively  more  time  to  spare  online,  has  led 
some  people  with  disabilities  to  become  a  major  corps  of 
shuijun (水军, the "water army", astroturfers), who get paid 
by posting comments online to influence people’s opinions, 
a phenomenon popular in today’s China.  
Helping  Others  with  Disabilities  and  Communistic 
Interactions 
While  our 
informants  shared  some  concerns  about 
interacting with others without disabilities, their interaction 
with  others  with  disabilities  was  a  very  different  story.  In 
this  subsection,  we  will  show  how  they  turned  to  others 
with disabilities to give help, for example by helping others 
come  out  from  home  and  meet  each  other,  and  how 
communities  were  formed  online  and  offline  as  a  result, 
which  in  turn  provided  more  opportunities  for  them  to 
fulfill their needs to contribute and provide help. 
Helping Others with Disabilities to Come out 
As mentioned, except for P1 and P2, most of our informants 
were  well  connected  with  other  people  with  disabilities, 
were  regularly  engaged  in  information  exchange,  and 
experienced  sharing  through  online  or  offline  means. 
However, while our informants all expressed the comforts 
and  benefits  of 
interacting  with  other  people  with 
disabilities,  it  was  actually  not  easy  for  them  to  make  the 
first step to physically come out and meet each other in the 
first place. As mentioned, during our study, it was common 
to hear that they had been staying home and isolated for 10 
to  20  years,  and  it  took  various  forces  to  get  them  out. 
Institutions tried to help here. For example, Halfway Home 
( 中 途 之 家 ZhongTuZhiJia)  organized  activities 
to 
encourage them to venture out, Shanghai Disabled Person’s 
Federation  supplied  them  with  assistive  technologies  such 
as wheelchairs and electric tricycles with low prices, and so 
on.  
However, more importantly, we found, it was people with 
disabilities themselves who played the most important role 
here. Especially, our informants mentioned several pioneers 
who actively reached to them in order to convince them to 
come out. In Shanghai locally, many mentioned Sister Han, 
who persistently persuaded them to go out and join related 
activities.  One  notable  activity  she  introduced  was  the 
yearly  Yellow  Mountain  Climbing  organized  by  Jian, 
another  pioneer  who  lived  and  ran  a  restaurant  by  the 
Yellow  Mountain  and  organized  people  with  disabilities 
from all around the country to gather and climb the Yellow 
Mountain together every year (with the help of volunteers). 
This event has been organized for eight times now. Several  

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

 
Figure 1. Photo of Yellow Mountain climbing organized by 

Jian 

of our informants mentioned this event and described it as a 
life-changing experience. With this event, not only had they 
achieved something that they had thought to be impossible, 
but  also  they  got  to  meet  their  peers  from  all  around  the 
country.  Jian,  in  an  interview,  revealed  his  intention:  “My 
feet can’t touch the ground, but I am a down-to earth man. I 
just  hope  more  and  more  friends  with  disabilities  can  get 
out from their home.”  These  pioneers,  then,  by  turning  to 
other  people  with  disabilities  to  give  help,  truly  made  a 
difference in their lives.  
Pay-It-Forward and the Emergence of Community  
Interestingly, being helped by these pioneers, other people 
with disabilities, in turn, started to help others to come out 
from home, as a way to contribute and repay what they had 
received from others. This way, one by one, more and more 
people came out from their home and started to meet each 
other  and  even  travel  together.  For  example,  P4,  who 
started  traveling  after  the  Yellow  Mountain  trip,  often 
served as a guide helping others to travel, even to places he 
had  been  before.  He  shared  with  us  that  it  was  exactly 
because  he  himself  had  received  help  and  been  guided  by 
others:  

If they are not familiar with the directions, I will guide 
the ways for them. In the past when I did not go out that 
often,  others  had  been  going  out  for  many  times,  and 
they knew where was fun and took me there, right? One 
by one, and one by one, we took people out. 

This  is  similar  to  the  generalized  exchange  reported  in 
Lampinen  et  al.’s  analysis  of  online  exchange  sites  [31], 
where  they  do  not  pay  back  directly  to  their  exchange 
partners, but indirectly to other members of the community. 
What  is  notable  here  is  that  this  help  was  being  passed 
around and spread to more people, and so more and more 
people  started  to  come  out  and  meet  each  other.  After 
meeting offline, these people often employed ICT such as 
QQ and WeChat to stay connected. Gradually, a community 
of people with disabilities emerged. 
Once connected, our informants shared with us all kinds of 
benefits they gained. They told stories of how they shared  

 

Figure 2. Photo of disabled friends traveling 

together, 

information  and  experiences,  how  they  learned  from  each 
other,  and  how  they  collectively  discussed  and  interpreted 
related  government  policies 
the  kind  of 
informational  support  shown  in  previous  work  of  online 
health  communities  [28,  47].  One  activity  they  often 
engaged  in  doing  and  sharing  was  DIYing  assistive 
technologies, both to reduce cost and to customize things to 
truly  fit  their  needs—as  similarly  reported  in  [29].  For 
instance,  P4  shared  with  us  how  they  met  in  the  park 
regularly and how they learned from each other in making 
assistive technologies and constructing accessible facilities: 
 Some  fellow  patients  made  something  at  home,  and 
would  share  how  they  did  it.  If  it  was  well  done,  we 
learned from them. Mainly, what we talked about were 
all those that we all had genuine concerns, such as how 
to transform things at home, making it better, right?  

Similar  sharing  practices  took  place  online.  For  example, 
some  people  shared  photos  and  discussed  how  to  DIY 
things  through  QQ  and  WeChat  groups.  Figure  3  shows 
photos of assistive technologies they made for rehabilitation 
practices through QQ groups. 
For these people who had been isolated for so long, getting 
connected was of special significance. P3 emphasized how 
connections  changed  his  life:  “We  have  a  group,  and  we 
meet every other week. … so we see more and hear more. 
Those  who  hide  at  home  will  know  nothing.”  His  wife’s 
comment was even more telling in how meaningful it was 
getting connected and simply seeing how others were doing: 
Once you started to interact with others, your life quality 
got  improved  day  by  day.  Otherwise,  to  put  it  in  a  an 
unpleasant  way,  it  was  like  waiting  to  die…it  was  just 
like waiting to die when you were home. Take a look at 
others, these, and those all had the same problems, but 
all in good spirits. So we should, should be happy!  

Getting connected then suggested new possibilities for their 
lives, and gave them new hope.  
Forming Community Online 
Besides physically coming out and meeting others offline, 
some, especially those relatively young, turned to the  

1603

SESSION: ACCESSIBILITY AND UNIVERSAL DESIGN

In  particular,  they  often  followed  not  the  principle  of 
reciprocity  but  the  principle  of  “from  each  according  to 
their  abilities,  to  each  according  to  their  needs”  [22],  or 
communistic interactions.  
Besides  some  pioneers  we  mentioned  above,  during  our 
study we heard all kinds of stories of how some people with 
disabilities  devoted  themselves  to  the  cause  of  disability. 
P11, just mentioned, founded the largest online community 
for people with disabilities in China. They also mentioned 
Tao, who suffered from  polio and recovered from cancers 
but  still  managed  to  enjoy  a  very  successful  career 
managing funds in a finance company, and yet she decided 
to give up her finance career and devoted herself to helping 
others  with  disabilities  as  her  new  career.  She  founded 
ZhiLiao  GongYi  (知了公益  Awareness  Organization  for 
Public Welfare, an NGO organization for disabled people), 
ran  restaurants  and  created  employment  opportunities.  A 
touching case was provided by P4. He shared with us how 
his friend suffered from spinal cord injury and cancers, had 
several  major  operations,  and  “couldn’t  move  much 
anymore.” Yet, she was still actively organizing volunteers 
to  provide  free  tutoring  services  for  kids  of  people  with 
disabilities.  These  people,  then,  while  suffering  from 
physical  disabilities,  still  found  a  way  to  leverage  their 
business senses, organizational skills, or social influences to 
help others, by organizing activities, findings ways to create 
job  opportunities,  providing  job  trainings,  teaching  (e.g., 
rehabilitation,  computer  skills,  English)  and  others.  What 
we  see  here  is  a  focus  on  their  abilities  despite  their 
disabilities, as they contributed to the community.  
Importantly, many of these assistances were ICT-mediated. 
Figure  4 
lecturing  about 
rehabilitation practices by and for people with disabilities in 
a QQ Group. It suggests that, with the use of ICT, it makes 
it much easier for them to provide assistance, as it relieves 
the need for them to physically move much to engage in the 
activities.  
From  the  study,  we  also  learned  that  sharing  and  helping 
among these members were largely done for free, without 
expecting  any  payment.  As  mentioned,  they  called  each 
other  disability 
the 
relationships among people with disabilities are of a special 
kind:  “We  are  disability  friends…not  customer  relations” 
(describing her relation with a Taobao store owner who was 
also  disabled).  As  mentioned,  it  was  common  for  people 
with  disabilities  to  do  digital  work  online  for  income; 
however, they would usually do it for free if it was for their 
disability 
friends.  For  example,  some  people  with 
disabilities ran online stores on Taobao, and their disability 
friends  would  help  promote  the  online  store  for  free.  The 
aforementioned school course tutoring services for children, 
job trainings, and teaching, were all provided for free if it 
was for people with disabilities.  
 

friends.  As  P10  emphasized, 

shows  a 

screenshot  of 

 
Figure 3. Photos of DIY works shared through QQ groups 

Internet  to  find  each  other.  As  they  suffered  from  mobile 
disabilities, the Internet became a natural choice for them to 
meet others. Interestingly, we found that the motivation for 
them to give help also figured in the way of their reaching 
out and making connections with others. For example, P11 
shared with us that his original intention to join an online 
community was to share his own medical experiences with 
those who suffered from similar diseases: 

That  was  a  site  for  people  suffering  from  Ankylosing 
spondylitis, so my original intention was to serve other 
fellow patients well, because I felt that I had learned a 
lot  from  my  own  experiences,  and  can  [offer]  help  for 
new fellow patients. 

However, that ankylosing spondylitis site he mentioned was 
later disbanded, and then he decided to found the ZiQiang 
Net  to  continue  interacting  with  others  online,  as  he  had 
learned  how  to  run  an  online  community  from  the 
ankylosing  spondylitis  site.  For  other  informants,  they 
commonly reported that it was just natural for them to seek 
out each other with disabilities when they got online. 
Compared  to  offline  meetings,  the  Internet  provided  a 
means  for  them  to connect  to others on  a scope and scale 
that was incomparable before. P4, who had stayed home for 
seven or eight years, described the eye-opening experience 
he  had  from  the  online  community  and  how  it  greatly 
influenced his life:  

It  was  all  from  others:  some  had  very  bad  paraplegia, 
but not simply could they go out, but also they could ride 
their wheelchairs—not the electrical ones—and go from 
Beijing to Tibet.  

These  people,  after  they  met  and  got  to  know  each  other 
online, became interested in meeting each other offline and 
seeing each other in person. P11 reported that that was why 
they  often  organized  offline  gatherings  and  many  had 
become friends in real life.  
Communistic Interactions: Holding together for Warmth 
Our data also suggests that relations and interactions among 
members of communities of people with disabilities, unlike 
interactions with non-disabled others, were of a special kind. 

1604

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

integration.  While  it  is  generally  true  that  people  find 
happiness  by  helping  others  [5],  we  believe  it  plays  out 
more  strongly  for  people  with  disabilities.  Because  it  is 
more  likely  that  they  need  aid  from  others  to  get  things 
done, it is more important for them to give aid as a way to 
maintain  a  balanced  portfolio  of  personal  assets  for 
happiness  [14].  Based  on  these  findings,  we  will  discuss 
alternatives to design for disability, in particular, in terms of 
focusing on abilities, not disabilities, and communities, not 
individuals. 
Focusing on Abilities, not Disabilities 
As highlighted in our study, one of the barriers that people 
with disabilities face in interacting with others is feelings of 
indebtedness  when  always  receiving  help,  and  feeling 
unable  to  return  the  favors.  This  is  not  unique  to  people 
with disabilities, as it has been uncovered from other social 
groups,  such  as  in  Lampinen  et  al.’s  work  on  Kassi  [31]. 
However, while for the non-disabled population, the norm 
of  reciprocity  could  have  positive  effects,  such  as 
motivating people to contribute, for people with disabilities, 
especially  those  with  severe  disabilities,  the  norm  of 
reciprocity,  if  not  handled  well,  may  have  destructive 
effects.  As  shown  in  our  findings,  feeling  incapable  of 
returning,  they  may  opt  to  avoid  social  interactions 
altogether. 
Previous work suggests ways of reducing their feelings of 
indebtedness  as  a  way  to  support  interactions  [31].  For 
example,  a  number  of  strategies  participants  use  to  offset 
feelings  of  indebtedness  are  identified  to  reduce  negative 
effects on people’s participation in social exchange services, 
including offering small tokens of appreciation to exchange 
partners, understanding and accepting the indirect nature of 
generalized  exchange,  managing  expectations  by  framing 
offers and requests carefully, and so on.  
With  our  data,  we  suggest  focusing  on  their  abilities,  not 
disabilities  as  a  step  further  to  support  their  social 
interaction and integration. Previous work suggests similar 
ideas, calling for emphasis on ability and not disability [17, 
20],  or  ability-based  design  [48].  While  a  notable  step 
forward, the notion of “ability” in this line of work is still 
limited—mainly  focusing  on  their  physical  and  cognitive 
abilities and modeling these abilities for computing to adapt 
to it. Based on our study, we argue for extending this work 
further  by  broadening  the  conception  of  ability  to  include 
strengths  in  various  fields  including  social  and  technical 
skills.  
As highlighted in this work, our informants, while suffering 
from physical abilities, still tried to contribute by leveraging 
their  range  of  social  and  technical  strengths,  such  as 
medical experiences, traveling experiences, business senses, 
organizational  skills,  social  influences,  nice  voices,  ICT 
literacy and so on. This suggests to us, when designing for 
people with disabilities, we should not just think about how 
to compensate for their physical deficiency, but also think 
about  how  to  leverage  their  strengths  and  capabilities  to 

 
Figure 4. Computer-mediated lecture of habitation in a QQ 
Group of disabled friends. ① shows the lecture PPT; ②，③ 
and ④ show three disabled friends  who participate in the 

lecture and can speak in class. The one with a little green voice 

sign (③) is the lecturer. 

Interactions  among  these  members  with  disabilities,  then, 
were  closer  to  the  communistic  interactions  described  by 
Graeber than reciprocal interactions, as people shared what 
they  could  and  gave  to  others  based  on  what  they  needed 
[22]. P11 revealed to us why people with disabilities tended 
to get together: “We want to form such an entity, especially 
for us as people with disabilities. Probably because we felt 
we were unfairly treated in the society … so we particularly 
would want an entity of our own.”  Graeber  points  out  that 
people tend to revert to communistic interactions in extreme 
situations,  such  as  when  services  or  market  goods  are  not 
affordable. With this data, we suggest that, for people who 
share  some  common  problems  and  feel  disadvantaged—
such  as  those  with  disabilities—it  is  natural  for  them  to 
become  tighter  and  revert  to  communistic  interactions  to 
support each other – “holding together for warmth,” to use 
their own words. By getting together, serving, and fighting 
for themselves, they can find a way to face and address the 
problems collectively together. 
What we also see here is that the value of community goes 
beyond  simply  providing 
informational  or  emotional 
support [19, 28], but also includes providing opportunities 
and  means  for  people  to  contribute,  build  self-worth,  and 
survive  together.  This  principle,  as  mentioned  before, 
proves  of  particular  importance  here  for  people  with 
disabilities,  who  tend  to  be  treated  as  help  receivers.  On 
ZiQiang Net, we found it was common for them to organize 
donations  for  the  left-behind  children,  the  victims  of 
earthquake and so on.  
DISCUSSION 
We  have  just  presented  our  findings  of  how  people  with 
motor disabilities interact with non-disabled others as well 
as  others  with  disabilities,  highlighting  how  people  with 
disabilities have sought ways of giving, not receiving, help 
to  build  self-esteem,  crucial  for  social  interaction  and 

1605

contribute.  For  the  particular  group  we  focused  on  in  this 
study, besides the strengths mentioned above, the fact that 
they could spend more time in front of the computer due to 
their limited mobility makes some quite good at computer 
skills  and  suitable  to  do  computer-related  work,  such  as 
maintaining or promoting websites. So one implication for 
design  is  to  provide  platforms  for  them  to  leverage  their 
strengths to give aid to others, such as their neighbors and 
friends.  For  instance,  with  their  computer  skills,  we  can 
match  them  with  older  adults  who  have  difficulties  using 
ICT.  
Studies of disability, especially from a cultural perspective, 
have  already  warned  us  that  when  approaching  issues  of 
disabilities, “normalcy” may not be the appropriate ultimate 
goal to achieve [34]. Our proposal of focusing on what they 
can do and what they are good at, not what they cannot do 
or how they are incompetent, is then one way to go beyond 
“normalcy” as the ultimate goal.  
Focusing on Communities, not Individuals 
As  mentioned,  previous  work  on  disabilities  almost 
exclusively focuses on accessibility and independence, with 
few exceptions such as [10]. From the perspective of social 
interactions,  we  agree  that  accessibility  and  independence 
are  important,  to  reduce  the  burden  on  others  and  reduce 
recipients’  feelings  of  indebtedness  for  social  interactions. 
At the same time, we also argue that focus on accessibility 
and  independence  per  se  is  insufficient.  As  shown  in  our 
findings,  besides  reducing  burden  on  others,  people  with 
disabilities also want to feel useful and helpful to others—
even more strongly than people without disabilities.  
With  this  work,  we  would  also  like  to  point  to  the 
importance  of  communities  of  people  with  disabilities, 
beyond  those  provided  by  caregivers  or  intimate  family 
members,  in  helping  them  establish  self-confidence  and 
merge  with  society.  We  call  this  communally  mediated 
integration. Specifically, based on this study, we would like 
to emphasize here the nature and values of community for 
people with disabilities, beyond those values that have been 
emphasized more in previous work for online communities, 
such as informational or emotional support [19, 28, 47]. 
First,  communities  of  people  with  disabilities  offer 
opportunities  for  them  to  not  simply  receive  but  also  give 
help,  and  this  is  crucial  for  their  self-confidence,  survival 
and social integration. The study has shown that there were 
a number of leaders who devoted themselves to the causes 
of 
creating 
employment opportunities, cultivating communities, and so 
on. Not limited to leaders, other members also found ways 
to contribute to others and to the community, no matter in 
how  small  a  way:  whether  sharing  their  own  experiences 
and practices, teaching skills, getting people out from home 
or guiding ways for others when traveling.   
Second,  with  communities,  not  simply  is  it  possible  to 
engage  in  indirect  generalized  exchange  [49],  but  such 

disabilities, 

organizing 

activities, 

by 

1606

SESSION: ACCESSIBILITY AND UNIVERSAL DESIGN

similar 

Sharing 

disadvantages, 

interaction leads to the transfer and spreading out of favors 
to more members of the community, which further expands 
and strengthens the community, as shown in our study.  
Finally, we note that such community is of a special kind in 
that members give what they can and what other members 
need for free, instead of on a reciprocal basis. Compared to  
a  sharing  economy  [8],  or  coproduction  [36],  this  sort  of 
community  gives  people  with  disabilities  another  level  of 
significance. 
their 
community is a way for them to “hold together for warmth,” 
a means of survival and more, thriving.  
Will  it  be  possible  that  such  community  members  will  be 
locked  within  a  circle  of  their  own,  causing  further 
separation  and  division  between  “us” 
(people  with 
disabilities)  and  “others”  (non-disabled  others)?  Maybe. 
From this study, however, we believe that for most, if there 
were no “us” to start with, it would be even more difficult 
for  them  to  integrate  with  the  society  as  individuals.  For 
design, then, the findings suggest that we should design for 
community as a whole, not simply for individuals.  
CONCLUSIONS 
In  this  paper,  we  presented  a  study  of  people  with 
disabilities,  and  motor  disabilities  in  particular,  in  China. 
The fact that we focused on a group mainly with low limb 
disabilities,  not  visual  or  other  impairments,  helped  us  to 
look  beyond  issues  of  ICT  accessibility  and  into  issues  of 
social  interaction  and  integration,  with  or  without  ICT. 
Specifically,  we  illustrated  that  the  perceived  limited 
capability for such people to return help, and their feelings 
of  indebtedness,  had  prevented  some  from  interacting  and 
integrating with others; and ICT and communities of people 
with  disabilities  could,  to  some  extent,  help  address  these 
issues, by providing opportunities for them to give favors, 
and by relieving tensions of interactions. Based on findings 
from  this  study,  we  propose  that  instead  of  focusing  on 
people  with  disabilities  simply  as  help  receivers,  we  shall 
also view them as help givers, as an alternative to support 
their social interaction and integration.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We  thank  all  our  participants  and  collaborators  in  this 
research.  The  work  is  supported  by  the  National  Natural 
Science  Foundation  of  China  (NSFC)  under  the  awards 
No.61332008  &  No.61300201,  Science  and  Technology 
Commission  of  Shanghai  Municipality  under  the  award 
No.13ZR1401900, and Fudan Young Teacher Initial Grant 
No. 20520131119. 
REFERENCES  
 1. Shiri Azenkot, Richard E. Ladner, and Jacob O. 

Wobbrock. 2011. Smartphone haptic feedback for 
nonvisual wayfinding. In Proceedings of the 13th 
international ACM SIGACCESS Conference on 
Computers and Accessibility  (ASSETS'11), 281-282. 
 2. Shiri Azenkot, S. Prasain, A. Borning, E. Fortuna, R.E. 

Ladner, and J.O. Wobbrock. 2011. Enhancing 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

independence and safety for blind and deaf-blind public 
transit riders. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI'11), 
3247-3256. 

 3. Gary S. Becker. 1978. The economic approach to human 

behavior. University of Chicago Press Economics 
Books. 

 4. Victoria Bellotti, et al. 2015. A Muddle of Models of 
Motivation for Using Peer-to-Peer Economy Systems. 
In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI'15), 1085-
1094. 

 5. Victoria Bellotti, et al. 2013. Random acts of kindness: 
The intelligent and context-aware future of reciprocal 
altruism and community collaboration. In Collaboration 
Technologies and Systems (CTS'13), 1-12. 

 6. Victoria M. Bellotti, et al. 2014. Towards community-

centered support for peer-to-peer service exchange: 
rethinking the timebanking metaphor. In Proceedings of 
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI'14). 

 7. Jeffrey P. Bigham, et al. 2010. VizWiz: nearly real-time 
answers to visual questions. In Proceedings of the 23nd 
annual ACM symposium on User interface software and 
technology (UIST'10), 333-342. 

 8. Rachel Botsman and R. Rogers. 2010. What’s mine is 

yours. The Rise of Collaborative Consumption. 

 9. Samuel Bowles and H. Gintis. 2004. The evolution of 

strong reciprocity: cooperation in heterogeneous 
populations . Theoretical Population Biology  65, 1: 17-
28. 

10. Stacy M. Branham and S.K. Kane. 2015. Collaborative 
Accessibility: How Blind and Sighted Companions Co-
Create Accessible Home Spaces. In Proceedings of the 
33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI'15), 2373-2382. 

11. Stephanie L. Brown, et.al. 2003. Providing Social 

Support May Be More Beneficial Than Receiving It. 
PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE 14, 4:320-327. 
persuasion New York: Morrow. 

12. Robert B. Cialdini. 1993. Influence: the psychology of 

13. US National Council. 2011. The Power of Digital 
Inclusion. Retrieved July 22, 2015 from 
http://www.ncd.gov/publications/2011/Oct042011. 
14. Ed Diener and Robert Biswas-Diener. 2002. Will 
Money Increase Subjective Well-Being? SOCIAL 
INDICATORS RESEARCH  57, 2:119-169. 

15. Tawanna R. Dillahunt and Amelia R. Malone. 2015. 

The Promise of the Sharing Economy among 
Disadvantaged Communities. In Proceedings of the 
33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI'15), 2285-2294. 

16. Lizbeth Escobedo, et al. 2012. MOSOCO: a mobile 

assistive tool to support children with autism practicing 
social skills in real-life situations. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI'12), 2589-2598. 

17. Shelley Evenson, Justin Rheinfrank, Hugh Dubberly. 
2010. Ability-centered design: From static to adaptive 
worlds. Interactions 17, 6: 75-79. 

18. Navid Fallah, I. Apostolopoulos, K. Bekris, and E. 
Folmer. 2012. The user as a sensor: navigating users 
with visual impairments in indoor spaces using tactile 
landmarks. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI'12), 
425-432. 

19. Jeana H. Frost and Michael P. Massagli. 2008. Social 

uses of personal health information within 
PatientsLikeMe, an online patient community: What can 
happen when patients have access to one anothers data. 
Journal of Medical Internet Research 10, 3. 

20. Krzysztof  Z. Gajos, Jacob O. Wobbrock, and Daniel S. 

Weld. 2008. Improving the performance of motor-
impaired users with automatically-generated, ability-
based interfaces. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI'08), 1257-1266. 

21. GOVPH. 2014. ICT enabling persons with disabilities 
to work from anywhere. Retrieved May 21, 2015 from 
http: //www.gov.ph/2014/06/17/ict-enabling-persons-
with-disabilities-to-work-from-anywhere/. 
Melville House. 

22. David Graeber.2011. Debt: The First 5,000 Years. 

23. Martin S. Greenberg and Solomon P. Shapiro. 1971. 

Indebtedness: An adverse aspect of asking for and 
receiving help. Sociometry  2, 34: 290-301. 

24. Kotaro Hara, et al. 2015. Improving Public Transit 

Accessibility for Blind Riders by Crowdsourcing Bus 
Stop Landmark Locations with Google Street View: An 
Extended Analysis. ACM Transactions on Accessible 
Computing (TACCESS) 6, 2: 5. 

25. Bruce Headey. 2010. The Set Point Theory of Well-
Being Has Serious Flaws: On the Eve of a Scientific 
Revolution? SOCIAL INDICATORS RESEARCH 97, 1: 
7-21. 
elementary forms. New York , Harcourt. 

26. George Caspar Homans.1961. Social Behavior. Its 

27. Juan Pablo Hourcade, et al. 2013. Evaluation of tablet 

apps to encourage social interaction in children with 
autism spectrum disorders. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI'13), 3197-3206. 

28. Jina Huh, L.S. Liu, T. Neogi, K. Inkpen, and W. Pratt. 

2014. Health Vlogs as Social Support for Chronic 
Illness Management. ACM Transactions on Computer-
Human Interaction (TOCHI) 21, 4: 219-260. 

29. Amy Hurst and jasmine Tobias. 2011. Empowering 

individuals with do-it-yourself assistive technology. In 
The proceedings of the 13th international ACM 
SIGACCESS conference on Computers and accessibility 
(ASSETS'11), 11-18. 

30. Shaun K. Kane, Meredith R. Morris, J.O. Wobbrock. 

2013. Touchplates: low-cost tactile overlays for visually 
impaired touch screen users. In Proceedings of the 15th 

1607

SESSION: ACCESSIBILITY AND UNIVERSAL DESIGN

46. Lin Wan, et al. 2014. Addressing the subtleties in 

dementia care: pre-study & evaluation of a GPS 
monitoring system. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI'14), 3987-3996. 

47. Jing Wang, Patrick C. Shih, and John M. Carroll. 2015. 

Life After Weight Loss: Design Implications for 
Community-based Long-term Weight Management. 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work 24,4:353-384. 
48. Jacob O. Wobbrock, et al. 2011. Ability-Based Design: 
Concept, Principles and Examples. ACM Trans. Access. 
Comput. 3, 3: 1-27. 

49. Toshio Yamagishi and Karen S. Cook. 1993. 
Generalized exchange and social dilemmas. SOCIAL 
PSYCHOLOGY QUARTERLY 4, 56: 235-248. 

50. Koji Yatani, Nikola Banovic, and Khai Truong. 2012. 
SpaceSense: representing geographical information to 
visually impaired people using spatial tactile feedback. 
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI'12), 415-424. 
51. Lingang Zhou 2011. The Disabled Social Security 
System and Public Service System Construction. 
Chinese Journal of Population Science, 02: 93-101. 

52. Kathryn Zyskowski, et al. 2015. Accessible 

Crowdwork?: Understanding the Value in and 
Challenge of Microtask Employment for People with 
Disabilities. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
& Social Computing (CSCW'15), 1682-1693. 

  
 

International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on 
Computers and Accessibility (ASSETS'13), 1-8. 
31. Airi Lampinen, V. Lehtinen, C. Cheshire, and E. 

Suhonen. 2013. Indebtedness and reciprocity in local 
online exchange. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference 
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW'13), 
661-672. 
Basic Books. 

32. Claude Levi-Strauss.1974. Structural Anthropology. 

33. Sonja Lyubomirsky, Kennon M. Sheldon, and David 

Schkade. 2005. Pursuing happiness: The architecture of 
sustainable change. REVIEW OF GENERAL 
PSYCHOLOGY 9, 2: 111-131. 

34. Jennifer Mankoff, Gillian R. Hayes, and Devva Kasnitz. 

2010. Disability studies as a source of critical inquiry 
for the field of assistive technology. In Proceedings of 
the 12th international ACM SIGACCESS Conference on 
Computers and Accessibility (ASSETS'10), 3-10. 
35. United Nations. 2014. Convention on the Rights of 

Persons with Disabilities. Retrieved May 1, 2015 from 
http://www.un.org/disabilities/default.asp?navid=15&pi
d=150. 

36. Elinor Ostrom. 1996. Crossing the great divide: 

coproduction, synergy, and development. WORLD 
DEVELOPMENT 24, 6: 1073-1087. 

37. Jerome Pasquero, Scott J. Stobbe, and Noel Stonehouse. 
2011. A haptic wristwatch for eyes-free interactions. In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI'11), 3257-3266. 
38. Dennis T. Regan. 1971. Effects of a Favor and Liking 

on Compliance. JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL 
SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY 7, 6: 627-639. 
Transaction Pub. 

39. Marshall David Sahlins.1974. Stone Age Economics. 

40. John Scott. 2000. Rational choice theory. 

Understanding contemporary society: Theories of the 
present 129. 

41. Kristen Shinohara and Jacob O. Wobbrock. 2011. In the 
shadow of misperception: assistive technology use and 
social interactions. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI'11), 705-714. 

42. Panote Siriaraya and Chee Siang Ang. 2014. Recreating 

living experiences from past memories through virtual 
worlds for people with dementia. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems  (CHI'14), 3977-3986. 
43. Anselm Leonard Strauss and Juliet M. Corbin.1990. 

Basics of Qualitative Research. Sage publications 
Newbury Park. 

44. Yuling Sun, X.Ding, S. Lindtner, Tun Lu, and N. Gu. 
2014. Being senior and ICT: a study of seniors using 
ICT in China. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI'14), 3933-3942. 
altruism. The Quarterly Review of Biology 46, 1: 35-57. 

45. Robert L. Trivers. 1971. The evolution of reciprocal 

1608

