CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Promoting Joint Attention with Computer Supported 

Collaboration in Children with Autism  

Sumita Sharma1, Saurabh Srivastava2*, Krishnaveni Achary3, Blessin Varkey3,  
Tomi Heimonen1, Jaakko Hakulinen1, Markku Turunen1, and Nitendra Rajput4  

1University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland  

2Xerox Research Centre India, Bangalore, India 

3Autism Research Center, Tamana School of Hope, New Delhi, India 

4IBM Research, New Delhi, India 

{firstname.lastname, sumita.s.sharma}@sis.uta.fi, saurabh.srivastava@xerox.com, 

{krishnaveni.achary, blessinvarkey}@gmail.com, rnitendra@in.ibm.com 

 

in  social 

improvements 

ABSTRACT 
There  exists  mounting  evidence  in  favor  of  computer 
supported  autism  interventions  at  the  individual  level. 
However, 
the  potential  benefits  of  using  computer 
supported  collaboration  to  encourage  social  interactions 
between  individuals  with  autism  and  typically  developed 
individuals  are  underexplored,  particularly  in  developing 
regions. We present an exploratory study of a collaborative 
gesture-based  application,  Balloons.  The  application 
encourages  joint  attention,  which  is  defined  as  the  shared 
attention between two individuals towards the same object. 
Using  mixed  methods,  we  evaluated  Balloons  for  three 
weeks  in  New  Delhi  with  ten  medium-low  functioning 
autistic children. Our findings suggest that employing CSC 
interventions for children  with autism  in India provide (a) 
observable 
interaction  with 
typically developed peers, (b) the opportunity to customize 
and individualize intervention to cater to a large spectrum 
of  children  and  (c)  the  potential  opportunity  of  reducing 
fears of certain objects. 
Author Keywords 
Computer  Supported  Collaborative  Work;  Gesture-based 
Interaction; Joint Attention; Autism Spectrum Disorder 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.3  [Information  Interfaces]:  Group  and  Organization 
Interfaces - Computer-supported cooperative work. 
General Terms 
Design and Human Factors 
INTRODUCTION 
Autism is highly individualized and hence, the term Autism 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  the  author(s)  must  be 
honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or 
republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific  permission 
from 
Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
Copyright  is  held  by  the  owner/author(s).  Publication  rights  licensed  to 
ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819930 

fee.  Request  permissions 

and/or 

a 

1560

Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is used to represent the varying 
levels  of  behavioral,  cognitive  and  social  challenges  the 
individual  faces.  Previous  research  has  established  that 
computer supported interventions provide a controlled and 
safe environment for individuals on the autism spectrum [4 
and 21]. However, research on computer supported autism 
interventions  is  primarily  focused  at  either  the  individual 
level  [5,  14,  17,  21,  26],  asynchronous  online  social 
communication [7] or human-robot social interaction [6, 27, 
28].  Furthermore,  much  of  the  research  is  concentrated  in 
the  developed  world,  neglecting  emerging  economies, 
where  Autism is largely  misunderstood. Studies show that 
in  India,  autism  diagnosis  is  affected  by  inherent  social 
taboos regarding mental illnesses, the lack of awareness, the 
lack of relevant information for parents and first level local 
pediatricians,  and  the  limited  number  of  schools  and 
therapeutic centers [10 and 18]. For children on the autism 
spectrum  early  interventions  are  critical  for  maximizing 
outcomes  [11]  and  thus,  as  soon  as  a  child  is  diagnosed, 
they  require 
individualized 
interventions.  
In  this  paper,  we  draw  attention  to  the  use  of  computer-
to1encourage 
social 
supported 
(CSC) 
interaction  between  medium-low 
functioning  autistic 
children and typically developed individuals. Medium-low 
functioning autistic children have a limited vocabulary, low 
motivation for social interaction and are prone to displaying 
socially isolating repetitive behavior. Our goal was to study 
ways  to  facilitate  the  adoption  of  the  critical  skill  of  joint 
attention [8], defined as the shared focus of two individuals 
on the same object. Working with a special school in New 
Delhi,  India,  we  explored  the  potential  benefits  of  using 
gesture-based  CSC  within  the  classroom  environment. 
Although  the  school  is  already  working  with  tablet-based 
interventions for autism, the TOBY Playpad [31], they have 
found that tablets themselves tend to limit the collaborative 
nature  of  social  interactions  and  confine  the  children  to 
uncomfortable stationary positions. Additionally, the school 

intensive  and 

collaboration 

immediate 

                                                           
*  This  work  was  done  while  Saurabh  was  affiliated  with 
IBM Research. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

two 

individuals 

encourages 

lacked interventions focused on joint attention. To address 
these  issues,  we  designed,  developed,  and  evaluated  a 
gesture-based  application  to  support  joint  attention,  called 
Balloons,  which 
to 
simultaneously  select  an  object.  Our  work  started  with  a 
user-centered  design  process  of  the  application  wherein 
researchers  held  group  discussions  with  school  specialists 
consisting  of  educators,  occupational  therapists,  speech 
therapists  and  psychologists.  An  exploratory  user  study, 
using  mixed  methods  analysis,  was  carried  out  over  three 
weeks  with  ten  medium-low  functioning  autistic  children 
collaborating with typically developed individuals.  
Our study is one of a kind at two levels. First, we employed 
gesture-based  interaction  for  underserved  Indian  children 
on the autism spectrum. Second, we applied gesture-based 
CSC  for  joint  attention  between  medium-low  functioning 
children  with  autism  and  typically  developed  individuals. 
To  our  knowledge,  the  only  study  close  to  our  work  is 
reported  by  Bauminger-Zviely  et  al.  [5]  who  looked  at 
socially collaborative interventions, but using multi-mice or 
multi-touch  interactions  and  for  collaboration  among  high 
(not medium-low) functioning autistic children in Israel.  
In  our  study  we  observed  that  the  social  and  cognitive 
challenges  faced  by  medium-low  functioning  Indian 
children  with  autism  are  similar  to  those  documented  by 
Bartoli et al. [3 and 4] from a developed world context. Our 
findings suggest that by supporting collaborative interaction 
the  autism  spectrum  can  be 
paradigms,  children  on 
introduced 
interactions.  This  builds 
confidence and independence, and provides a mechanism to 
be  integrated  with  typically  developed  peers.  We  propose 
tapping  into  the  potential  of  using  virtual  objects  and 
environments to reduce fears or phobias of individuals with 
autism. Furthermore, specialists can use these applications 
in innovative ways for promoting social collaborations, and 
motor  and  verbal  skills.  For  example,  by  using  target 
pointing 
including 
different objects to teach vocabulary.  
Specific to the Indian context, it was interesting to observe 
the  motivation  to  customize  and  individualize  a  simple 
gesture-based application to teach several different skills to 
several  different  children  on  the  autism  spectrum.  This 
resonates  with  the  observable  Indian  attitude  of  jugaad  or 
innovative problem solving with limited resources [32]. The 
school  educators  also  played  the  role  of  social  mediators 
helping promote technology acceptance in the community.  
In this paper, we first situate our research with the related 
work in this domain, followed by a description of our user-
centered  design  process,  and  the  Balloons  application  and 
its interaction. Next, we present our user study at the school 
including the evaluation methodology. Then we present our 
results  and  extend  our  observations  to  bring  out  several 
common  themes  as  identified  by  the  interviews  with  the 
school  specialists.  We  conclude  by  discussing 
the 

improve  postural  stability  and 

to  subtle  social 

to 

the 

implications  of  our  results  and  findings  to  gesture-based 
CSC research in autism.  
RELATED WORK 
We  describe  the  previous  research  by  first  understanding 
the  role  of  joint  attention  in  autism  and  associated  CSC 
interventions.  Second,  we  present 
technological 
interventions  focused  on  individual  interaction  and  not 
collaboration.  We  then  highlight  the  opportunities  for 
employing  gesture-based  interaction  for  joint  attention 
interventions in CSC applications. What must be noted here 
is  that  current  research  on  technological  interventions  for 
children with autism is spread across the developed world, 
with little to no reports from the developing world. 
Joint Attention and Autism 
Joint attention pays a pivotal role in early autism detection 
and is linked to language acquisition and social interaction 
in  the  later  stages  of  the  neurological  development  of  a 
child [8]. Joint attention is defined as the social interaction 
over  a  common  goal  or  object  relating  to  shared  attention 
and experience, regarded as  a critical skill  for children on 
the autism spectrum. In fact, lack of joint attention plays a 
crucial role in diagnosing autism in infants [13]. Befittingly, 
interventions  for  young  children  focus  on  improving  joint 
attention  and  shared  experiences  between  children  with 
autism  and  their  caregivers  [23].  These  interventions  are 
largely video recorded and later analyzed by the therapist to 
extrapolate the object of attention by observing the child’s 
gaze and attention [16, 22], which is laborious. The focus in 
towards 
technology-driven 
employing 
[14] 
to 
individuals  with  autism,  largely  ignoring  CSC  for  joint 
attention  between  individuals  with  autism  and  typically 
developed individuals.  
In the last 15 years significant research has focused on joint 
attention  mediated  by  virtual  conversational  agents  [1  and 
2] or robots [5, 27, and 28]. In the Aurora project [27, 28], 
researchers  studied  social  interaction,  mediated  by  robot-
toys, between children with autism and their care-givers or 
therapists. They also studied how the appearance of robots 
affected the child’s interaction, specifically the less human 
features (clothes, face) the robot had, the more appealing it 
was. Although Bekele et al. [6] developed an adaptive and 
individualized  robot  to  encourage  social  interaction,  using 
speech  and  gaze,  between  children  with  autism  and  the 
robot;  it  was  only  evaluated  with  typically  developed 
individuals.  ECHOES  is  a  serious  game  with  intelligent 
virtual  characters  for  encouraging  social  communication 
employing gaze and large touch screens [1, 2]. However, it 
also  remains  to  be  studied  if  interaction  with  virtual 
characters  promotes 
social  communication  between 
children with autism and typically developed individuals. 
for 
Bauminger-Zviely  et  al. 
collaboration  among  high  functioning  autistic  children 
using  multi-mice  and  multi-touch  interfaces.  Their  results 
showed that children with autism gradually improved their 

[5],  developed  games 

shifted 
instructions 

computer-supported 

interventions  has 

1561

to 

face 

in 

that 

social 

challenges 

social  conversation,  joint  collaborations,  and  problem-
solving skills strengthening the case for computer supported 
collaboration  for  joint  attention  interventions.  However, 
they  do  not  consider  bodily  interaction  and  the  inherent 
benefits it offers for children with autism. 
Technology for Individual Interactions 
Technology  can  be  used  to  provide  a  controlled,  safe  and 
stimulating  environment  for  children  with  autism  who  are 
known 
interaction, 
communication,  and  imagination.  Previous  research  also 
strongly  suggests 
information  and  entertainment 
technologies,  including  tablets,  mobile  phones,  TV  and 
video  games,  are  appealing  to  autistic  children  [14,  21]. 
Consequently, emerging HCI research in autism is heading 
towards autism interventions employing various interaction 
technologies. For example, The TOBY (Therapy Outcomes 
by  You)  Playpad  is  an  iPad  educational  intervention  for 
autistic  children,  which  “aims  to  empower  parents  to 
commence  early  intervention  to  maximize  their  child’s 
development”  [31].  It  provides  touch-based  interactive 
games  focused  on  improving  cognitive  abilities  such  as 
attention,  memory,  object  recognition,  and  learning  of 
complex activities by imitation using videos. 
As  stated  by  Keay-Bright  [17],  computer-based  learning 
environments  as  a  medium  help  reduce  the  multi-sensory 
distractions  occurring  in  real  world,  which  can  induce 
anxiety  in  many  people  with  autism  and  may  hinder  their 
participation  in  social  communication.  Her  ReacTickles 
software,  popularly  used  with  the  Smart™  Interactive 
Whiteboard, promotes relaxation in children with autism by 
spontaneous  playful  activities.  Moreover,  Ringland  et  al. 
[26]  focused  on  augmenting  existing  physical  sensory 
integration  therapies  by  employing  tangible  interaction 
using  rubber  balls.  Their  application,  SensoryPaint,  was 
found  to  improve  body-awareness  and  proprioception  in 
children  with  autism.  Interestingly,  both  SensoryPaint  and 
ReacTickles support the use of bodily interaction to provide 
more  kinesthetic  forms  of  expressions  for  children  with 
autism. However, these applications  focused on individual 
interaction and do not fully utilize the potential of computer 
supported  social  interaction  between  children  with  autism 
and typically developed individuals. 
Gesture-based Applications for Autism 
With  affordable  motion  tracking  technologies,  such  as  the 
Microsoft  Kinect,  gaining  momentum  in  the  educational 
space,  ongoing  autism  research  is  also  moving  towards 
immersive  and  engaging  gesture  interactions  [3,  4,  9,  11, 
25]. There is a strong body of research by Bartoli et al. [3, 
4],  the  Lakeside  Center  for  Autism2,  MEDIATE  [24,  25] 
and Kinems3 providing evidence of the potential benefits of 
gesture interaction for therapeutic and learning experiences. 
We discuss their work to highlight the extensive benefits of 
                                                           
2 http://lakesideautism.com/ 
3 http://kinems.com/ 

1562

SESSION: ACCESSIBILITY AND UNIVERSAL DESIGN

gesture-based  interaction  for  children  with  autism,  which 
are extendable to CSC interventions.  
The Lakeside Center for Autism in Washington State, US, 
started a Kinetix Academy in 2012 to develop applications 
for  children  with  autism  focusing  on  motor,  speech, 
cognitive, and social skills for educational and therapeutic 
interventions.  MEDIATE  [24,  25] 
is  a  multisensory 
interactive  environment  that  “generates  real  time  visual, 
aural  and  vibrotactile  stimuli”  for  low  functioning  autistic 
children. Children are allowed to explore the spaces at their 
own  pace  and  there  is  no  time  limit  to  the  interaction. 
Results from user studies, conducted in London, Hilversum 
(Netherlands),  Barcelona,  and  Portsmouth  have  shown  a 
high acceptance of its interactive space by autistic children, 
who  are  able  to  creatively  express  themselves  using  the 
several multimodal applications presented in the space. 
A  more  recent  online  community,  Kinems,  spread  across 
the  US,  Greece,  and  Netherlands  develops  Kinect-based 
games  to  improve  cognitive  abilities  of  children  with 
learning  disabilities 
including  hand-eye  coordination, 
memory,  attention,  and  basic  problem  solving.  Their 
findings  suggest  that  even  though  kinesthetic  interaction 
induces  fatigue,  it  provides  an  immersive  and  engaging 
learning  environment  that  can  help  children  concentrate. 
There  is  also  research  on  gesture-based  games  to  match 
visual  facial  expressions  [9]  using  existing  Kinect  sports 
games  to  improve  hand-eye  coordination,  attention  and 
focus  [1],  and  gesture  recognition  to  detect  repetitive 
behavior or tantrums [12]. 
Furthermore, research by Bartoli et al. [4] provides design 
guidelines  for  gesture-based  playful  interactions  based  on 
their ongoing research with children in autism in Italy. They 
divide their guidelines as general or goal specific focusing 
on  motor,  cognitive,  and  social  skills  which  are  important 
considerations  for  children  classified  with  medium-low 
functioning autism.  
COLLABORATIVE BALLOON APPLICATION 
Our collaborative balloon application focuses on promoting 
joint  attention  between  medium-low  functioning  autistic 
children and typically developed individuals. Its users have 
the  task  of  collaboratively  selecting  one  of  three  balloons 
by  pointing  to  it.  This  necessitates  the  need  for  social 
interaction  between 
their 
typically  developed  team  mate.  The  use  of  a  CSC  system 
reduces  the  social  awkwardness  of  face  to  face  social 
communication  or  making  direct  eye  contact,  a  defining 
characteristic of autism. 
Design Process 
Our  application  was  designed  through  a  user-centered 
design  approach 
twenty-three  participants: 
nineteen  school  specialists,  three  parents  and  two  high 
functioning  autistic  children.  In  order  to  understand  the 
process  of  conducting  educational 
two 
researchers  spent  the  first  week  at  the  school  becoming 

the  autistic  participant  and 

interventions, 

involving 

to 

therapy 

rooms,  occupational 

familiar with the ongoing interventions and therapies. They 
observed  various  specialists  conduct  group  sessions  and 
visited each of the therapy labs in the school including the 
speech 
rooms, 
psychologist’s  rooms,  a  computer  lab,  the  TOBY  Playpad 
lab, and the dance halls. 
After  this  first  week,  semi-structured  interviews  were 
conducted  over  the  course  of  two  weeks  with  nineteen 
specialists:  twelve  educators,  two  occupational  therapists, 
two  psychologists,  two  speech  therapists  and  also  three 
parents who attended the school with their child. Two of the 
twelve  educators  were  responsible  for  technology-based 
intervention for the school and were involved in the TOBY 
Playpad  [31]  interventions.  These  two  educators  worked 
very  closely  with  the  researchers;  they  were  present  in 
every  discussion,  moderated  the  evaluation  sessions,  and 
are  also  coauthors  of  this  work.  The  focus  of  these 
interviews was to uncover specialists’ challenges with their 
own specific therapy sessions and their suggestions on how 
to  overcome  them.  The  interviews  usually  started  with  a 
specialist  demonstrating 
their  usual  session  protocol, 
followed by in-depth discussions about the specific therapy, 
its  outcomes  and  challenges,  and  how 
introduce 
technological  aids.  The  specialist  also  shared  their  own 
intervention  design  guidelines  as  compiled  over  several 
years of hands-on work with the children.  
Based  on  the  common  themes  that  emerged  from  the 
interviews,  we  conducted  two  focus  group  discussions 
during the fourth week. We started by consolidating a list of 
application requirements, and then built on them to design 
and  develop  our  application’s  interaction,  interface,  and 
intension.  These  discussions 
school 
psychologists  and  the  two  educators  who  work  with  the 
TOBY  Playpad.  It  was  during  these  discussions  that  the 
familiarity  of  balloons  as  a  rewarding  object  for  the 
children, taken from the TOBY Playpad observations, was 
mentioned several times. This led us to incorporate balloons 
in  our  own  application.  After  developing  the  application, 
we  further  interacted  with  two  high  functioning  autistic 
children from the school to pilot test our application.   
We  summarize  the  school’s  prime  aim  as  being  able  to 
develop self-sustainable life skills in children with autism to 
allow  them  to  function  well  independently.  Children  with 
autism face several challenges including personal hygiene, 
concepts  of  collaborative  gameplay  and  team  work,  and  a 
lack  of  motivation  for  social  interaction.  The  children 
occasionally  display  repetitive  behavior  when  stressed  or 
uncomfortable, and even  while enjoying a certain activity. 
This type of behavior is socially isolating for the child and 
requires  special  attention.  The  specialists  mentioned  the 
success  of  occupational 
involving  bodily 
movement  for  self-expression  and  exercises  to  pacify  the 
children  behaving  hyperactively.  We  next  present  our 
consolidated set of application requirements.  

therapies 

included 

the 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

therapy 

its 

importance 

Application Requirements  
A.  Designing for improvement of social skills of medium-
low  functioning  autistic  children  in  the  school  who  have 
limited  verbal  communication.  The  skill  was  identified  as 
joint  attention  because  of 
in  social 
interaction  for  autistic  children  and  lack  of  such  a  joint 
attention  focused  technology  intervention  currently  at  the 
school.  
B.  Providing  adequate  rewards  to  encourage  children  to 
interact,  regardless  of  their  performance,  for  example, 
applause from the system.   
C.  Providing  a  well-defined  start  and  end  of  a  session  in 
order  to  allow  the  children  to  understand  when  a  task  is 
over.    
D.  Encouraging  socially  acceptable  gestures  and  a  simple 
pointing  gesture  was  decided  upon  for  the  application. 
Using gestures such as kicking or jumping were thought to 
possibly  provide  encouragement  to  kick  and  jump  outside 
of  the  session,  which  can  be  dangerous  and  socially 
isolating. 
E.  Providing  multimodal 
feedback,  both  visual  and 
auditory, as the children have varying levels of visual and 
auditory preferences, sensitivities, and capabilities.  
F.  Include 
smooth  visual 
movements  and  illustrations  to  captivate  attention  for 
longer time spans. 
G.  The interaction should be empowering by involving the 
child in decision making. 
Gesture Interaction Design  
Our CSC application focuses on encouraging medium-low 
functioning  autistic  children  to  explore  proto-declarative 
pointing  [15]  leading  to  shared  experiences  by  virtue  of 
joint  attention  (requirement  A).  The  application  interface 
consists of three different colored balloons (requirement F). 
A player’s hands are represented by onscreen hand cursors 
that  move accordingly (requirement G). A snapshot of the 
game with one player’s right hand is shown in Figure 1. 

colorful  graphics  with 

Figure 1: Application screen with a participant’s right hand 

pointing near the blue balloon 

 

requires  a 

two  member 

The  application 
to 
collaboratively  select  the  same  virtual  balloon  out  of  the 
three  possible  options,  further  encouraging  the  need  for 
social  interaction,  verbal  or  non-verbal,  between  the  team 
members.  Balloons  are  selected  by  pointing  for  a  fixed 
dwell time (requirement D). If one player member selects a 

team 

1563

SESSION: ACCESSIBILITY AND UNIVERSAL DESIGN

balloon, a star is shown on the screen as a reward. If both 
team  members  collaboratively  select  the  same  balloon,  a 
rainbow  that  grows  in  size  is  shown  on  the  screen  with 
pleasant  background  music  (requirements  B  and  E).  The 
rainbow and star are shown in Figure 2.  
The  balloon  application 
requires 
to 
simultaneously select one balloon (requirement G) and after 
trying  the  application  with  the  school  specialist  and  two 
high  functioning  autistic  children  (who  were  not  a  part  of 
our subsequent user study) the dwell time for selection was 
set to three seconds. To increase the level of difficulty, the 
balloons  would  slowly  fly  upwards  after  five  minutes  of 
continuous interaction. 

two  players 

Kinect  service  is  a  thin  client  over  the  Microsoft  Kinect 
SDK  that  connects  to  the  core  logic  over  TCP  socket. 
Microsoft Kinect is used to track a user’s hand with respect 
to his body  within a 3D pointing area, called the physical 
interaction  zone  [20].  This  physical  interaction  zone  is 
relative  to  the  user’s  hand,  and  not  the  display,  making  it 
more flexible to point at larger distances (Figure 4).  
All audio and graphical content is rendered using the Panda 
3D4  graphics  engine.  The  core  logic  is  a  Python  based 
application  that  consists  of  an  input/output  management 
module,  handling all  the  inter-process  communication  and 
acting  as  an  interface  between  the  core  logic,  the  Kinect, 
and the graphics engine.  

Figure 2: A star and a rainbow as visual rewards 

 

Figure 4: Physical interaction zone area, in blue, as seen from 
the (a) front (b) side (c) bird’s-eye view (adapted from [20]) 

 

The  application  has  a  predefined  active  area  where  the 
system  starts  responding  to  a  user’s  gestures  (Figure  3). 
This active area is 4 m x 1.5 m, 1 m away from the center 
of the Kinect. A game starts when the Kinect system detects 
at least one player in the active area and plays a welcome 
message  followed  by  a  short  music  clip  and  a  black 
background screen  fades out  to a  white application screen 
as shown in Figure 1 (requirement C). While a player is in 
the  active  area,  the  system  responds  to  his  gestures.  The 
application  allows  for  a  maximum  of  two  players  at  any 
given time. When there is no longer a player in the active 
area,  the  application  screen  goes  back  to  its  initial  black 
screen  and  an  applause  audio  clip  is  played  (requirement 
B). 
EVALUATION METHODOLOGY 
We  evaluated  Balloons  with  ten  medium-low  functioning 
autistic  children  from  the  school  over  a  course  of  three 
weeks, with two to four sessions per week. The application 
was  installed  in  one  of  the  school’s  classrooms,  which  is 
commonly  used  by  the  participants  in  order  to  provide  a 
familiar  environment.  The  evaluations  were  moderated  by 
the  two  school  specialists  who  are  a  part  of  our  research 
team.  There  were  no  external  researchers  present  during 
these  sessions  to  eliminate  any  unnecessary  stress  and 
discomfort  for  the  children  caused  by  an  unfamiliar 
presence.  The  absence  of  external  observers  was 
compensated  by  the  specialists  being  better  equipped  to 
understand 
the  participants’  emotional  response.  For 

                                                           
4 https://www.panda3d.org/ 

Figure 3: Game Setup showing the center line of Kinect 

 

The game setup consists of a Microsoft Kinect connected to 
a computer and display, as shown in Figure 3. The Kinect is 
placed at the center of the display and the two players stand 
more  than  one  meter  away  from  it.  Their  individual  on-
screen hand cursors are visible on the display and guide the 
interaction. Standing next to each other the players have to 
decide,  either  verbally  or  by  pointing,  which  balloon  to 
select  collaboratively.  They  watch  each  other’s  actions 
through  the  movement  of  the  respective  on-screen  hand 
cursors. Thus, the players use the on-screen hand cursor to 
select the same balloon, reducing the need for difficult face 
to  face  communication.  In  this  way,  Balloons  provides  a 
comfortable method for children with autism to collaborate 
with  a 
individual  without  being 
intimidated by being asked to make eye contact. 
System Description 
The  application  is  based  on  an  in-house  application 
framework  consisting  of  three  main  processes;  a  Kinect 
service,  graphics  engine,  and  application  core  logic.  The 

typically  developed 

1564

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

in 

issues 

example, they understood whether a participant’s tantrum is 
because  of  excitement,  boredom,  or  a  need  to  visit  the 
restroom. A session was held before the evaluations where 
they  were  briefed  on  the  observational  requirements  and 
provided easy to fill in data sheets with a behavioral signals 
table,  adapted  from  Bartoli  et  al.  [3].  The  behavioral 
observations  comprised  of  participant  specific  behavior  to 
indicate positive emotions, frustrations or distress, need for 
interaction  with  Balloons. 
assistance  and 
Furthermore,  the  specialists  were  extensively  interviewed 
after the evaluations. 
As  mentioned  in  the  design  process,  we  decided  to  use 
balloons  because  the  children  were  already  familiar  with 
them from the TOBY Playpad sessions. This removed the 
complexity of introducing a new object and eliminated the 
effects  of  joint  attention  motivated  by  interaction  with  a 
novel or unfamiliar object. During the evaluations, our ten 
participants  were  exempt  from  all  similar  activities  and 
applications  that  targeted  social  skills,  thus  these  sessions 
were conducted as a separate activity.  
To understand if the children are able to transfer learning of 
joint attention interactions from one context to another, we 
devised the physical balloon test. Children with autism find 
it difficult to draw parallels  between two similar contexts, 
for example,  what is  suitable behavior in the occupational 
lab such as jumping, is not suitable in other classrooms. The 
physical  balloon  tests  had  tasks  similar  to  the  virtual 
application  but  with  real  balloons  and  in  a  different 
classroom,  in  order  to  understand  whether  joint  attention 
skills carried over to the real world from the virtual.  
Ethical Considerations 
Parents  or 
for 
participation for all the children involved in our study. The 
school  insisted  that  all  children  be  provided  the  potential 
benefits  of  the  application  and  no  child  should  be  left 
behind.  To  honor  their  request,  we  did  not  establish  a 
control group for our user studies. The absence of a control 
group  steered  us  away  from  focusing  on  the  potential 
learning  gains  from  our  application.  Instead  we  chose  to 
understand the challenges and opportunities of introducing 
gesture-based  CSC  interventions  in  a  classroom,  and  as 
explained later, this provided us with a far more interesting 
perspective.  We  made  the  application  available  to  the 
school after the evaluation.  
Participants 
Studies were conducted with 10 autistic children (6 male, 4 
female)  diagnosed  by  the  Autism  Diagnostic  Observation 
Schedule  (ADOS)  [19].  These  ten  children  also  met  the 
criteria  for  autism  on  the  Childhood  Autism  Rating  Scale 
(CARS) [30] (M=34, SD=3) and the Social communication 
Questionnaire (SCQ) [29] (M=48, SD=13). Seven of the ten 
children  have  a  vocabulary  of  100-200  words  while  the 
other three were considered non-verbal communicators with 
a  vocabulary  of  less  than  50  words.  All  children  were 
categorized as medium-low functioning autistic children by 

legal  guardians  provided  consent 

the  school  therapist  as  they  had  low  motivation  for  social 
interaction  and  communication  (both  verbal  and  non-
verbal),  and  displayed  various  isolating  behaviors  and 
interests.  The  participants  were  able  to  understand  simple 
instructions,  and  displayed  repetitive  behaviors,  attention, 
mood  behaviors,  and  lacked  the  social  skill  of  joint 
attention. None of our participants had any prior experience 
with gesture-based interactions, gaming or otherwise. 
Procedure  
The  procedure  consisted  of  three  phases;  phases  I  and  III 
were carried out with actual balloons for a pre and post-trial 
analysis  and  phase  II  with  the  Balloons  application.  This 
also  helped  us  understand  whether  the  learning  from  a 
virtual  application  is  translated  to  the  physical  world.  The 
‘autistic participants’, referred to as ‘participants’ from now 
onwards,  were asked to choose a typically developed peer 
or a school specialist as a team member, depending on their 
comfort 
the  causal  effect  between 
participants’  familiarity  with  their  teammate  and  their 
improved task performance is difficult to measure, we must 
note  here  that  our  participants  lacked  joint  attention  skills 
regardless of their familiarity  with  their team  mate,  which 
suggests 
familiarity  effect  was  minimal. 
Conducting  the  evaluations  in  a  known  environment  and 
with  a  known  teammate  reduced  the  participants’  social 
discomfort allowing for serendipitous interactions.     

level.  Although 

that  any 

Figure 5: A participant (center) and his teammate (left) 

 

 

Figure 6: A participant playing Balloons 

Phases I and III: Physical Balloon Test 
In a physical balloon test, actual balloons of different colors 
were arranged on the school’s wall as shown in Figure 5.  
The task included two steps: 
1.  A  participant’s  typically  developed  team  mate  had  to 
select  one  of  the  colored  balloons  on  the  wall  and  point 
towards it, standing at a distance. 
2.  The participant had to then go and touch that balloon.  

1565

For  collaboration,  the  team  mate  used  both  physical 
prompting  (pointing)  and  verbal  prompting  (saying  the 
color).  This  task  was  repeated  three  times  with  different 
colored  balloons.  The  pre-trial  physical  balloon  tests 
assisted  in  understanding  a  participant’s  ability  for  social 
interaction  and  joint  attention  by  pointing.  The  phase  I 
participants then also took part in the phases II and III. 
Phase II: Balloons Application 
Phase II consisted of the virtual balloon application and the 
Kinect setup was installed in one of the classrooms of the 
school as shown in Figure 6. Phase II evaluation consisted 
of a maximum of eleven sessions (n=4) and a minimum of 
three  sessions  (n=1)  per  participant  during  the  three  week 
period  (M=8,  SD=3). This  large  variation  was  due  to  two 
participants who did not attend the school regularly during 
the evaluations. The ten participants spent an average of 1 
minute and 46 seconds per session (SD=24 seconds).  
Data Collection 
During the phase II trials, we collected system logs for the 
number  of  balloons  selected,  specialist  observations,  and 
behavioral responses of the participants.  These behavioral 
responses  consisted  of  commonly  expressed  gestures  or 
habits  by  the  participants  to  indicate  positive  emotions 
(such as  smiling or clapping), frustrations or distress (loss 
of  attention,  asocial  or  inappropriate  gesturing),  need  for 
assistance  (verbal  or  physical  pacifying)  and  issues  with 
system  interactions  [3].  When  working  with  participants 
with  autism,  these  behavioral  signals  provide  a  way  to 
understand their experience as whole and are also a means 
of communication with their care-giver and therapists. 
In phases I and III, the task completion time and outcomes 
were  collected.  The  school  specialists,  who  conducted  the 
sessions, were later interviewed to understand in detail the 
various themes that emerged from their observations.  The 
interviews  were 
on 
understanding  the  participants’  and  specialists’  experience 
with Balloons. 
RESULTS 
the  moderators 
During 
observed  changes  in  participants’  interaction  experiences 
with  the  task  and  our  application.  During  phase  I,  the 
participants familiarized themselves with the task, and they 
possibly  carried  over  the  understanding  of  the  task  from 
phase  I  to  phase  II.  During  phase  II,  the  participants  first 
learnt how to use the application and then collaborate with 
their team mates, which carried forward to phase III where 
we  noticed  an  improvement  in  average  balloon  selection 
time. In phase I (pre-trial) the average time to select the first 
balloon collaboratively was 66 seconds (SD = 65). In phase 
III  (post-trial),  average  time  to  select  the  first  balloon 
collaboratively  was  7  seconds  (SD  =  5).  This  shows  a 
the  Balloons 
promising 
application to the real world scenario. 

three  evaluation  phases, 

semi-structured 

learning  from 

translation  of 

focused 

and 

the 

1566

SESSION: ACCESSIBILITY AND UNIVERSAL DESIGN

to 

Interestingly, the school specialists found two ways to use 
Balloons  for  joint  attention.  The  first  innovative  method 
materialized  upon  need  and  consisted  of  the  specialist 
standing behind the participant to guide the interaction, as 
show  in  Figure  7.  This  way,  the  specialist  was  able  to 
collaboratively point and guide at the same time, although 
the system would recognize them as a single user and show 
the  star  as  a  reward.  The  second  was  as  intended,  by 
standing  next 
the  participant  and  collaboratively 
selecting  the  same  balloon.  In  this  case  the  system  would 
recognize two users and a rainbow would be shown as the 
reward.  The  sessions  started  with  the  first  method  of 
collaboration and gradually moved towards the second. We 
also  observed  that  this  transition  from  the  first  method  to 
the second started with the blue balloon, probably because 
of  its  central  position.  Out  of  a  total  of  280  successful 
balloons  collaboratively  selected  in  phase  II,  146  (52%) 
were  by  the  first  method  (star  as  the  reward)  and  the 
remaining  134  (47%)  by  the  second.  This  shows  a  clear 
potential for the application in improving joint attention and 
shared  experiences,  from  instructional-based  collaboration 
to collaborating as individuals. 

 
Figure 7: A specialist guides the child’s interaction 

0123456

 

s
n
o
o
l
l
a
B
 
f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N

 

 

 

 

n
i
m
r
e
p
d
e
t
c
e
l
e
S

1

2

3

4

5

6

Sessions 

7

8

9 1011

 

Figure 8: Average number of balloons selected per minute for 

each session in Phase II 

the 

transition  between 

Figure 8 shows the average number of balloons selected per 
minute  in  each  session  for  the  ten  participants.  It  must  be 
noted  here  that  the  slight  dip  in  the  5th  and  6th  sessions 
indicates 
two  modes  of 
collaboration. Although we can see an overall improvement 
in  the  average  number  of  joint  attention  collaborations 
between the first and the last session; actual improvements 
varied  across  participants.  This  can  be  seen  by  the 
increasingly varied SD from sessions 8 to 11. We attribute 

the 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

(b) 

(n=6)  and 

this to (a) the number of participants who did not complete 
all  11  sessions 
the  variability  of 
improvements  commonly  expected  within  the  autistic 
spectrum.  
Looking at the individual performance of participants who 
attended 8 or more sessions in phase II (n=5) in Figure 9, it 
is  evident  that  participants  P1  and  P5  do  not  show  any 
improvement  while  participants  P2,  P3  and  P4  do.  We 
purport  that  given  enough  sessions,  all  our  participants 
would  have  benefited  from  the  phase  II  intervention.  We 
discuss  next  the  implications  of  our  results  and  the 
challenges and opportunities of our study. 

 

0246810

s
n
o
o
l
l
a
B
 
f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N

 

everything  for  everyone.  We  also  note  the  collaborative 
nature  of  our  entire  study;  from  designing  the  application 
with  the  educators  to  empowering  them  as  social  and 
technology  agents  of  change.    Next,  we  expand  on  these 
findings and discuss the benefits of using CSC applications 
for children with Autism. 
Behavioral Observations and Post Evaluation Interviews 
Overcoming Fear of Balloons 
One  of  the  participants  was  scared  of  balloons,  and  as 
observed  during  phase  I  he  would  not  touch  the  physical 
balloon but stand next to it with his ears covered. However, 
during  phase  II  evaluations,  he  realized  that  the  virtual 
balloons  did  not  pop  loudly  and  instead  have  pleasant 
rewards. He began to interact with the application. This was 
extremely exciting for the specialists, who were able to use 
our  application  to  reduce  his  fear  of  balloons,  and  they 
expressed  their  desire  to  apply  this  to  other  children  who 
might fear other specific objects. Using a virtual application 
to overcome phobias in children with autism is a relatively 
unexplored, with the exception of the Blueroom project5.         
Rewards and Feedback 
Bartoli et al. [4] emphasize motivating children with autism 
by  using  appropriate  rewards  and  feedback.  We  also 
noticed  that  audio  feedback  (applause)  was  successful  in 
making  the  participant  feel  rewarded  regardless  of  their 
performance  as  several  participants  would  also  start 
clapping.  The  specialists  suggested  the  use  of  culturally 
specific  objects  or  the  participant’s  current  object  of 
affection for more effective rewards. From their experience 
with 
that 
firecrackers,  emblematic  of  the  Indian  festive  of  Diwali, 
were  highly  fascinating  for  the  children.  However,  our 
participants  in  the  study,  as  observed  with  children  with 
autism,  were  generally  more  inclined  towards  visual 
stimuli.  Whether  fire-crackers  are  a  cultural  reinforcement 
or have a more universal appeal, remains to be studied.  
Attention and Engagement 
Although the application supported movement of balloons, 
the configurable delay of five minutes was too long and not 
changeable  on  the  fly.  The  specialists  also  noted  that  the 
three second dwell time was too quick for some participants 
to collaboratively select the balloon, resulting in a star and 
not a rainbow as the reward. This caused a loss of attention 
and interest. One of the participants with known behavioral 
emotion  of  walking  out  of  the  room  when  bored,  would 
walk  out  of  the  classroom.  Such  sudden  inattention  and 
disengagement  are  common  behavioral  responses  from 
children with autism [4].  
found  Balloons 
However,  one  of 
background  color  change,  from  black  (system  inactive)  to 
white 
intriguing.  He  would 
purposefully move between the active and inactive area to 
                                                           
5 http://www.ncl.ac.uk/ion/news/news/blueroom/ 

(system  active),  very 

the  participants 

interventions, 

tablet  based 

they  found 

the 

P1P2P3P4P5

 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011

who attended 8 sessions or more (P1-P5) 

Figure 9: Individual Performance in Phase II of Participants 

DISCUSSION 
Our results suggest that using gesture-based interaction for 
CSC between medium-low functioning autistic children and 
typically developed individuals is a promising way forward. 
Although  the  lack  of  a  control  group  steers  us  away  from 
strongly  claiming  our  potential  learning  benefits,  our 
behavioral  observations  and  post-evaluation  interviews 
reveal  several  challenges  and  the  opportunities  of  our 
intervention.  Collaborative  gesture-based  applications  can 
utilize  the  appeal  of  visual  stimuli  and  provide  engaging 
classroom  activities  that  allow  caregivers  to  control  the 
learning  environment,  and  the  possibility  to  improve 
postural  stability;  findings  that  resonate  with  previous 
research  from  the  developed  world  [3,  24].  Additionally, 
these  applications  provide  a  mechanism  to  help  children 
overcome  fears  of  specific  object.  These  user  specific 
findings seem to be culturally independent for medium-low 
autistic children using gesture interaction for joint attention. 
Thus,  we  believe  that  developed  world  interventions  can 
largely benefit children with autism in India, and vice versa.   
The benefits of using CSC for promoting joint attention, as 
uncovered from our study, include motivating the educators 
to  employ  innovative  method  for  social  collaboration  and 
overcoming 
tablet-based 
interventions. While these benefits seem to be extendable to 
the developed world, further research is required to support 
it.  Furthermore,  we  experienced  a  high  expectation  of 
technology from the school educators and caregivers, due to 
the  Indian  need  of  using  a  single  resource  to  try  to  solve 

limitations 

the 

the 

of 

1567

improvement 

is  quite  a  common  phenomenon 

experience this dramatic visual change, but was then unable 
to focus on the application tasks.  
The two school educators, who moderated the evaluations, 
foresee these digital interventions as a catalyst in enhancing 
learning outcomes while keeping the participants interested 
and engaged. One of them mentioned that engaging digital 
medium of learning encourages classroom activities, “when 
a  student  is  engaged  with  a  system,  I  get  enough  time  to 
focus and monitor them one by one”. The other said that “in 
special  needs  school  like  ours,  the  management  greatly 
values  how  we  handle  our  students,  and  maintain  the 
decorum of the class.  This  system is very helpful as  while 
one  student  performs,  other  students  are  engaged  in 
watching his activities.”  
We  observed  several  different  behavioral  attitudes  of  the 
participants;  ranging  from 
the  positive  emotions  of 
excitement  and  happiness  (clapping  and  hugging  the 
specialists)  to  the  more  negative  feeling  of  frustration 
(physically abusive).  For instance, one of the participants 
repeatedly requested to play the game over and over again. 
This 
in  autism 
interventions; participants become too attached to a specific 
object or game.  
Improving Postural Stability 
The  specialist  noticed  an 
the  hand 
movement  of  two  participants  as  the  gesture  interaction 
required  a  steady  hand  increasing  postural  stability  [4].   
These participants were able to use the on-screen cursor to 
guide their hands to the balloon and with the dwell time of 
three seconds, encouraged them to keep their hands steady 
for  that  duration.  This  can  potentially  improve  hand-eye 
coordination,  body  awareness  and  pointing  at  a  target, 
which  was  highly  motivating  for  the  specialists  as  the 
benefits  were  quickly  visible  and  experienced  and  also 
carried  forward  to  real  world  situation  (pointing  with  a 
steady  hand).  The  specialist  suggested  being  able  to  vary 
the  balloon  (target)  size  and  dwell  time  (hold  steady)  for 
continuing the improvement in postural stability. 
Benefits  of  Computer  Supported  Collaboration  for 
Children with Autism  
The benefits of gesture-based interaction for children  with 
autism are well established in the developed world [3, 4, 9, 
24,  25].  We  discuss  our  findings  from  our  collaborative 
gesture-based CSC application for children with autism.   
Innovative Method for Collaboration 
Our  most  positive  finding  is  from  the  school  specialist’s 
usage of balloons in two innovative ways for joint attention. 
They  initially  used  the  first  method,  i.e.,  standing  behind 
the  participants  and  helping  them  to  select  a  balloon. 
Although  this  method  would  produce  only  a  star  as  the 
reward, it proved to be beneficial for our participants who 
were all new to gesture interaction. The second method was 
the intended way, two players selecting the same balloon to 
be  rewarded  with  the  rainbow.  In  this  way,  the  school 
specialists  were  able  work  collaboratively  in  teaching  the 

in 

1568

SESSION: ACCESSIBILITY AND UNIVERSAL DESIGN

the 

tablet  based 

child  how  to  use  the  interaction  by  focusing  on  the  same 
balloon.  We  find  this  in  line  with  the  Indian  jugaad,  or 
innovative  life-hacks,  a  practice  observed  across  various 
domains [32].  
Moreover, after the evaluation period, several parents of our 
participants (n=3) commented on how their child mentioned 
a balloon game at home. This is very surprising because our 
participants  did  not  have  a  tendency  to  share  their 
experiences from the school at home. We believe this to be 
an  extension  of  joint  attention  via  sharing  of  experiences 
outside  of  the  evaluation  context,  a  promising  outcome  of 
our study. These parents also wanted the school to continue 
the rigorous Balloons trials, which is a big breakthrough in 
technology acceptance for the school.  
Touch vs Touchless Interaction 
The  specialists  discussed  their  different  experiences  in 
conducting  the  intervention  between  touch  and  touchless 
interactions.  With 
interventions, 
participants  are  able  to  serendipitously  discover  the  close 
button  on  an  application  window  or  the  device.  Upon 
discovery,  they  tend  to  close  the  application  or  device  as 
soon  as  they  are  bored  or  disengaged.  With  the  gesture-
based  interaction,  the  specialists  commented  that  distance 
between the actual hardware and the participants eliminated 
such  disruptive  behaviors  and  encouraged  the  participants 
to  work  longer.  Another  important  observation  is  that 
participants  sometimes  tend  to  throw  or  swing  a  tablet, 
increasing  the  chances  of  getting  hurt  or  hurting  someone 
else.  With  a  gesture-based  system  such  behavior  was  not 
supported,  much 
the  specialists. 
Furthermore,  one  of  the  specialists  mentioned,  “we  have 
limited tablets with us and children have to wait to work on 
them, but a system like Balloons allows more students to be 
engaged while viewing the activity on the screen together.” 
Furthermore,  when  the  participants  learn  to  use  the  touch 
modality for the tablet, they tend to extend this interaction 
to other objects and also to different applications within the 
tablet.  A  gesture-based 
touchless  system  allows  for 
different modes of interaction, even using different parts of 
the  body  such  as  hands  or  feet,  making  it  easier  to 
differentiate  between  applications.  It  will  be  interesting  to 
study how participants carry forward their interaction with 
the Balloon application to other gesture-based applications 
requiring different hand gestures. Although not used in the 
Balloons  application,  a  gesture-based  intervention  could 
also study participants’ body posture or gait and share the 
data with the occupational therapists. 
Technology Expectations 
The  school  specialists  expressed  their  desire  to  customize 
the  application  based  on  the  participant’s  individual  skill 
level,  for  example,  varying  the  virtual  balloon’s  color  (to 
teach  different  colors)  or  the  size  (to  teach  postural 
stability). They also suggested including culturally specific 
or  participant  specific  (participant’s  current  object  of 
affection) rewards to increase motivation [4] and supporting 

relief  of 

to 

the 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

multiple  languages.  For  a  multilingual  country  like  India, 
participant’s  parents  prefer  using  a  specific  language  at 
home  and  wish  that  their  child  also  learn  the  same  in 
school. 
This  desire  to  customize  an  application  for  individual 
autistic  participants  resonates  with  previous  research  [4] 
and  can  be  handled  in  various  ways,  for  instance  by 
creating user profiles for the participants. However, what is 
surprising is the high level of expectation, of customization 
on  the  fly,  from  a  simple  application  focused  on  joint 
attention.  As  discussed  before,  when  working  with  users 
from  emerging  markets,  it  has  been  observed  that  their 
expectations  of  technology  can  be  higher  because  devices 
are  usually  seen  as  a  shared  resource  that  should  cater  to 
each  user’s  need  [32],  and  there  is  an  inherent  scarcity  of 
such  resources.  Technology  needs  to  satisfy  both  the 
individualized learning goals and the stakeholders’ resource 
utilization  goals.  Thus,  there  is  a  strong  desire  to  use  one 
application for all children on the autism spectrum; that is, 
the expectation that a single technical intervention can solve 
everything for everybody.  
CSC Applications for Children with Autism in India 
The  specialists  shared  their  experiences  with  introducing 
technology  based  educational  interventions  at  the  school. 
They  have  noticed  an  overall  reluctance  to  adopt  new 
technology-driven interventions, as was evident during the 
introduction  of  the  tablet  based  therapies  in  their  school. 
However,  this  attitude  has  gradually  changed  and  as  we 
mentioned  before,  several  parents  of  our  participants 
insisted  on  the  continual  use  of  Balloons  for  their  child. 
Many also enquired about the Kinect hardware cost and if 
they  could  use  this  system  at  home  with  a  TV  or  even  a 
mobile  phone.  One  of  the  parents  stated,  “I  am  a  strong 
believer  of  doing  things  practically.  I  am  happy  that  the 
school  has  taken  an  initiative  where  children  are  being 
exposed to physical real life interventions.” This makes us 
believe  that  the  urban  Indian  attitude  is  experiencing  a 
positive  shift  towards  technology  creating  a  hotbed  of 
opportunities for further research.  
Our  findings  of  participants’  behavioral  responses  to  new 
technological interventions resonate with previous research 
[3,  24]  suggesting  that  Indian  children  with  medium-low 
autism face similar behavioral challenges to their developed 
world  peers.  We  thus  argue  that  children  with  autism  in 
India  can  benefit  from  interventions  available  to  the 
developed  world.  However,  we  also  observed  extremely 
high  expectations  of  technology  from  the  educators  and 
caregivers of children with autism, which we purport to be 
culturally specific to developing countries. 
Extending Collaboration Beyond the Application  
We  note  here  the  collaborative  nature  of  our  entire  study; 
educators from the school worked with us from its design to 
its publication. The study also invoked innovative responses 
to  crucial  needs;  from  the  two  methods  of  joint  attention 
collaborations  to  the  call  for  further  individualization  and 

1569

Rajendran, Tim Smith, Oliver Lemon, Kaska Porayska-
Pomsta, Mary Ellen Foster, Katerina Avramides, 

customization  to  cater  to  a  larger  group  of  children  with 
incremental  learning  goals.  The  application  provided  a 
mechanism to empower educators to conduct and plan more 
efficient  and  effective  interventions,  and  benefit  from  the 
increasingly  positive  researched  phenomenon  of  bodily 
interaction  for  children  with  autism.  Additionally,  the 
educators also played an important role as social mediators 
to  promote  technology  acceptance  among  caregivers  and 
other stakeholders. Based on the positive experiences from 
this  study,  the  school  has  already  dedicated  resources  to 
further  explore  gesture-based  interventions  for  children 
with  autism.  We  believe  our  small  study  has  sparked  a 
revolution in the special school in New Delhi and we hope 
to carry it forward to other schools around India.  
CONCLUSION 
Employing gesture interaction for children with autism has 
gained favor in recent years with many researchers working 
towards developing innovative applications to motivate and 
encourage  autistic  children  to  learn  and  interact  socially. 
However, much of this research is focused on children from 
developed countries and is at the individual level, as most 
of  the  applications  are  not  collaborative  in  nature.  Our 
research  examined  the  challenges  and  opportunities  in 
introducing  CSC  for  social  interaction,  focusing  on  joint 
attention,  through  pointing  gestures  for  children  with 
autism.  
Our  study  is  a  first  of  its  kind  by  employing  gesture 
interaction  for  (a)  children  with  Autism  in  India  and  (b) 
designing  collaboration  between  children  with  autism  and 
typically  developed  individuals.  We  identified  several 
challenges 
introducing  computer  supported  social 
interventions  in  developing  countries;  such  as  catering  to 
the high expectations of technology by providing on the fly 
customization and allowing  for one application to be used 
by a spectrum of children and overcoming low technology 
acceptance. 
Through  our  promising  findings  we  encourage  other 
researchers  to  actively  extend  their  participation  to  the 
underserved  community  of  children  with  autism  from 
emerging economies. We also encourage other researchers 
working  in  this  domain  to  design  collaborative,  not  only 
individual,  social  interaction  paradigms  for  children  with 
autism.  This  assists  them  in  building  confidence,  gaining 
independence  and  provides  a  mechanism  to  be  integrated 
with 
the 
motivation behind most autism interventions.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We  express  our  sincere  gratitude  to  all  the  children  who 
took  part  in  our  study  and  also  thank  all  the  school 
specialists for their valuable time and guidance.  
REFERENCES 
1.  Alyssa Alcorn , Helen Pain, Gnanathusharan 

typically  developed 

in 

individuals,  which 

is 

Christopher Frauenberger, and Sara Bernardini. 2011. 
Social communication between virtual characters and 
children with autism. Artificial Intelligence in 
Education. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 7-14. 

2.  Sara Bernardini, Kaśka Porayska-Pomsta, and Tim J. 

Smith. 2014. ECHOES: An intelligent serious game for 
fostering social communication in children with 
autism. Information Sciences, 264, 41-60. 

3.  Laura Bartoli, Clara Corradi, Franca Garzotto, and 

Matteo Valoriani 2013. Exploring motion-based 
touchless games for autistic children's learning. In 
Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on 
Interaction Design and Children (IDC’13), ACM, 102-
111. 

4.  Laura Bartoli, Franca Garzotto, Mirko Gelsomini, 

Luigi Oliveto, and Matteo Valoriani.  2014. Designing 
and Evaluating Touchless Playful Interaction for ASD 
Children. In Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Interaction Design and Children 
(IDC’14), ACM, 17-26.   

5.  Nirit Bauminger-Zviely, Sigal Eden, Massimo 

Zancanaro, Patrice L. Weiss, and Eynat Gal. 2013. 
Increasing social engagement in children with high-
functioning autism spectrum disorder using 
collaborative technologies in the school environment. 
Autism, 17(3), 317-339. 

6.  Esubalew Bekele, Uttama Lahiri, Julie Davidson, 

Zachary Warren, and Nilanjan Sarkar. 2011. 
Development of a novel robot-mediated adaptive 
response system for joint attention task for children 
with autism. In RO-MAN 2011 IEEE, 276-281. 

7.  Moira Burke, Robert Kraut, and Diane Williams. 2010. 

Social use of computer-mediated communication by 
adults on the autism spectrum. In Proceedings of the 
ACM conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work (CSCW’10), ACM, 425-434. 

8.  Tony Charman. 2003. Why is joint attention a pivotal 

skill in autism? Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences 
358(1430), 315-324. 

9.  Eirini Christinaki, Georgios Triantafyllidis, and 

Nikolas Vidakis. 2013. A gesture-controlled Serious 
Game for teaching emotion recognition skills to 
preschoolers with autism. In Proceeding of the 
International Conference on the Foundations of Digital 
Games, (FDG’13), 417-418. 

10.  Tamara C Daley, 2004. From symptom recognition to 
diagnosis: Children with autism in urban India. Social 
Science & Medicine, 58(7), 1323-1335. 

11.  Geraldine Dawson and Julie Osterling. 1997. Early 
intervention in autism. In M. J. Guralnick (Ed.), The 
Effectiveness of Early Intervention. Baltimore, 307–
326.  

1570

SESSION: ACCESSIBILITY AND UNIVERSAL DESIGN

12.  Niall Firth. 2012. Kinect cameras watch for autism. 

New scientist, 214(2863), 17.  

13.  Kristen Gillespie-Lynch. 2013. Response to and 

initiation of joint attention: Overlapping but distinct 
roots of development in autism? OA Autism (2013, 
May) 01;1(2):13. 

14.  Tina R. Goldsmith and Linda A. LeBlanc. 2004. Use of 
Technology in Interventions for Children with Autism. 
Journal of Early and Intensive Behavior Intervention, 
1(2), 166-178. 

15.  Frances Goodhart and Simon Baron-Cohen. 1993. How 

many ways can the point be made? Evidence from 
children with and with-out autism. First Language, 
13(38), 225-233. 

16.  Connie Kasari, Stephanny Freeman, and Tanya 

Paparella. 2006. Joint attention and symbolic play in 
young children with autism: A randomized controlled 
intervention study. Journal of Child Psychology and 
Psychiatry, 47(6), 611-620. 

17.  Wendy Keay-Bright. 2007. Can computers create 
relaxation? Designing ReacTickles© software with 
children on the autistic spectrum. CoDesign, 3(2), 97-
110. 

18.  Achary Krishnaveni. 2009. Autistic Children in India: 

An Insight. PhD Thesis, University of Delhi, New 
Delhi, India. 

19.  Catherine Lord, Susan Risi, Linda Lambrecht, Edwin 

H. Cook Jr, Bennett L. Leventhal, Pamela C. DiLavore, 
Andrew Pickles, and Michael Rutter. 2000. A standard 
measure of social and communication deficits 
associated with the spectrum of autism. Journal of 
autism and developmental disorders, 30(3), 205-223. 
20.  Microsoft Corporation, Kinect for Windows Human 

Interface Guidelines v1.8.0, 2013. 

21.  Beth A. Mineo, William Ziegler, Susan Gill, and 
Donna Salkin. 2009. Engagement with electronic 
screen media among students with autism spectrum 
disorders. Journal of autism and developmental 
disorders, 39(1), 172-187. 

22.  Peter C. Mundy, Marian Sigman, and Connie Kasari. 

1990. A longitudinal study of joint attention and 
language development in autistic children. Journal of 
Autism and developmental Disorders, 20(1), 115-128. 
23.  Peter Mundy and Mary Crowson. 1997. Joint attention 

and early social communication: Implications for 
research on intervention with autism. Journal of Autism 
and Developmental disorders, 27(6), 653-676. 

24.  Narcís Parés, Anna Carreras, Jaume Durany, Jaume 

Ferrer, Pere Freixa, David Gómez, Orit Kruglanski et 
al. 2005. Promotion of creative activity in children with 
severe autism through visuals in an interactive 
multisensory environment. In Proceedings of the 2005 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

conference on Interaction design and children, 
(IDC’05), ACM, 110-116. 

25.  Narcís Parés, Anna Carreras, Jaume Durany, Jaume 

Ferrer, Pere Freixa, David Gómez, Orit Kruglanski et 
al. 2004. MEDIATE: An interactive multisensory 
environment for children with severe autism and no 
verbal communication. In Proc. of the Third 
International Workshop on Virtual Rehabilitation. 
26.  Kathryn E. Ringland, Rodrigo Zalapa, Megan Neal, 
Lizbeth Escobedo, Monica Tentori, and Gillian R. 
Hayes. 2014. SensoryPaint: a multimodal sensory 
intervention for children with neurodevelopmental 
disorders. In Proceedings of the International Joint 
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing, 
(UbiComp’14), ACM, 873-884. 

27.  Ben Robins, Ben, Paul Dickerson, Penny Stribling, and 

Kerstin Dautenhahn. 2004. Robot-mediated joint 
attention in children with autism: A case study in 
robot-human interaction. Interaction studies, 5(2), 161-
198. 

28.  Ben Robins, Ben, Kerstin Dautenhahn, and Janek 
Dubowski. 2006. Does appearance matter in the 

interaction of children with autism with a humanoid 
robot? Interaction Studies, 7(3), 509-542.  

29.  Michael Rutter, Anthony Bailey, and Cathrine Lord. 

2003. The social communication questionnaire: 
Manual. Western Psychological Services. 

30.  Eric Schopler, Robert J. Reichler, Robert F. DeVellis, 

and Kenneth Daly. 1980. Toward objective 
classification of childhood autism: Childhood Autism 
Rating Scale (CARS). Journal of autism and 
developmental disorders, 10(1), 91-103. 

31.  Svetha Venkatesh, Dinh Phung, Thi Duong, Stewart 

Greenhill, and Brett Adams. 2013. TOBY: early 
intervention in autism through technology. In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, (CHI’12), ACM, 3187-
3196. 

32.  Amanda M. Williams and Lilly Irani. 2010. There's 

methodology in the madness: toward critical HCI 
ethnography. In CHI'10 Extended Abstracts on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, (CHI’10), ACM, 2725-
2734. 

 

 

1571

