CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

A Contingency View of Transferring and Adapting Best 

Practices within Online Communities 

Haiyi Zhu 
GroupLens 

University of Minnesota, Twin Cities 

200 Union Street SE 

Minneapolis, MN, USA 

haiyi@cs.umn.edu 

Robert E. Kraut, Aniket Kittur 
Human Computer Interaction Institute 

Carnegie Mellon University 

5000 Forbes Avenue 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA 

robert.kraut@cmu.edu; nkittur@cs.cmu.edu 

ABSTRACT 
Online communities, much like companies in the business 
world,  often  need  to  transfer  “best  practices”  internally 
from  one  unit  to  another  to  improve  their  performance. 
Organizational  scholars  disagree  about  how  much  a 
recipient  unit  should  modify  a  best  practice  when 
incorporating it. Some evidence indicates that modifying a 
practice  that  has  been  successful  in  one  environment  will 
introduce problems, undercut its effectiveness and harm the 
performance of the recipient unit. Other evidence, though, 
suggests that recipients need to adapt the practice to fit their 
local  environment.  The  current  research  introduces  a 
contingency  perspective  on  practice  transfer,  holding  that 
the  value  of  modifications  depends  on  when  they  are 
introduced and who introduces them. Empirical research on 
the  transfer  of  a  quality-improvement  practice  between 
projects  within  Wikipedia  shows  that  modifications  are 
more  helpful  if  they  are  introduced  after  the  receiving 
project  has  had  experience  with  the  imported  practice. 
Furthermore,  modifications  are  more  effective  if  they  are 
introduced by members who have experience in a variety of 
other projects.  
Author Keywords 
Best 
Contingency view, Propensity Score Matching (PSM).  
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.3 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: Group and 
Organization Interfaces, Web-based interaction; K.4.3 
[Computers and Society]: Organizational Impacts.  
INTRODUCTION 
Online communities, like companies in the business world, 
often need to transfer best practices internally from one unit 

Practice  modification, 

adaptation, 

practice 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal  or  classroom  use  is  granted  without  fee  provided  that  copies  are  not 
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear  this 
notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for components  of 
this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be  honored. Abstracting  with  credit 
is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or  republish, 
to  post  on  servers  or  to 
redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior  specific  permission  and/or  a  fee.  Request 
permissions from Permissions@acm.org.  
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA  
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:17)$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819976 

729

to  another  to  improve  their  performance.  For  example, 
communities  in  the  Stack  Exchange  network  of  question 
and  answer  websites  use  a  common  reputation  system 
modeled on Stack Overflow’s original one. Similarly, many 
non-English  language  Wikipedia  versions  have  borrowed 
policies and procedures originally developed in the English 
Wikipedia. Barnstars, the badges Wikipedia editors give to 
each  other  to  reward  meritorious  work  and  motivate  each 
other,  originated  in  the  MeatballWiki  and  were  imported 
into  Wikipedia  in  2003  [47].  Since  then  Wikipedia  has 
developed  over  100  distinct  Barnstars,  and  thousands  of 
Wikiprojects have created their own specialized Barnstars. 
Similar  tales  could  be  told  of  Wikipedia’s  various  quality 
improvement programs, such as Collaborations of the Week 
(CotW),  a  practice  designed  to  increase  the  quality  of 
under-developed  content  areas,  that  has  diffused  across 
hundreds of Wikiprojects [46,51].  
While  the  effectiveness  of  particular  practices  has  been 
studied  in  isolation  [10,27,33,46,51],  we  are  aware  of  no 
research  that  examines  how  the  process  of  acquiring  and 
changing  these  practices  influences  their  effectiveness. 
Understanding the factors that determine how practices are 
internally transferred and effectively adapted could provide 
insights into community success that go beyond individual 
practices. This is also one of the central topics in the field 
of organization research in the last two decades [1,30,41]. 
As  organization  scholar  Szulanski  noted,  “Identification 
and transfer of best practices is emerging as one of the most 
important and widespread management issues” [43].  
One  important  question  regarding  best  practice  transfer 
within organizations is the extent to which recipients need 
to modify an original practice to make it effective in a local 
context  [49].  Organization  scholars  have  a  long-standing 
  According  to  the  re-creation 
debate  on  this  topic. 
perspective,  strict  replication 
incompatibility 
between the new practice and the recipient’s environment, 
rendering 
effective 
[1,11,36,37,25].  The  recipient  units  need  to  continuously 
modify the original practice to create their own practice that 
better  fits  with  their  culture,  structure  and  approach.  For 
example,  according  to  this  approach,  McDonalds,  which 
sells  billions  of  beef-based  burgers  in  the  US,  needed  to 
change  its  menu  by  introducing  localized  products  like 

imported 

practice 

leads 

less 

the 

to 

that 

the  risk 

the  replication  perspective  argues 

McVeggie™  for  India,  where  half  of  the  population  is 
vegetarian [24].  
In  contrast, 
that 
modifying  a  successful  practice  for  a  new  environment 
increases 
the  modifications  will  harm 
performance  (e.g.,  [1,16,34,40,48,49]).  Some  empirical 
evidence  shows  that  in  a  large  franchise  organization 
changing  a  successful  practice  (by  selling  non-standard 
products)  harms  franchisees’  survival.    A  one-standard-
deviation  increase  in  revenue  derived  from  nonstandard 
products  more  than  doubles  a  franchise  unit’s  hazard  of 
failure [49, p. 678]. 
In this paper, we propose that in online communities neither 
replicating  an  original  practice  without  modification  nor 
freely implementing modifications is a successful approach 
to transfer best practices. Instead, we propose a contingency 
perspective  and  hypothesize  that  modifications  are  most 
successful if they are introduced after the receiving unit has 
had experience with the imported practice. This allows for a 
form of iterative organizational design, in which a receiving 
site  can  tweak  an  imported  practice  based  on  experience. 
We  also  hypothesize  that  modifications  will  be  more 
effective  if  they  are  introduced  by  people  who  are  core 
members  of  the  receiving  unit  and  who  participate  in  a 
variety  of  other  communities.    These  are  the  people  who 
likely to be knowledgeable about what their unit needs and 
about alternative practice tweaks used by others.  
To test these hypotheses, we analyzed historical data about 
Collaborations  of  the  Week  (CotW)  in  Wikipedia.  A 
Collaboration of the Week is quality-improvement practice 
in  Wikiprojects  that  organizes  editors  collaboratively  to 
improve  a  designated  article  in  a  limited  time  period.  
Collaborations of the Week spread from project to project 
and are often modified both before they are adopted and as 
they  are  used.  We  collected  the  history  of  CotW  in  146 
Wikiprojects  and  measured  how  different 
types  of 
modifications  influenced  their  success,  in  terms  of  the 
length of time the CotW continued to be used in a project, 
the amount of work they elicited from project members and 
the number of unique editors who contributed to them. The 
results generally supported the hypotheses.  
THEORY AND HYPOTHESES 
The Best Practice Adaptation Dilemma 
Practice  refers 
to  an  organization’s  routine  use  of 
knowledge  for  conducting  a  particular  function  [43]. 
According  to  organization  scholars,  the  ability  to  transfer 
best  practices 
firm  provides  a 
competitive  advantage  [2]  and  is  one  reason  they  can  be 
more effective than other institutional arrangements such as 
markets [5,28]. The benefits of transferring good practices 
between  parts  of  a  single  organization  have  been 
documented in many different organization settings (see [2] 
for a review).  For example, Darr et al. showed how pizza 
franchises  benefited  from  learning  from  other  franchise 

internally  within  a 

730

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

is  evidence  showing 

stores  how  to  place  pepperoni  [12].  Similarly,  Baum  and 
Ingram [7] found that hotels within a single chain benefited 
from  the  experience  of  other  hotels  in  their  chain  in  the 
same environment.  
An important question is the extent to which units within a 
larger organization benefit by modifying practices received 
from  another  parts  of  the  organization  to  fit  their  local 
environments.  On  one  hand,  modifying  a  successful 
practice increases the risk that the modifications will harm 
performance.  On  the  other  hand,  strict  replication  might 
lead  to  incompatibility  between  the  imported  practice  and 
the  recipient’s  environment,  reducing  the  benefit  derived 
from  the  imported  practice.  In  this  section  we  review 
existing  evidence  relevant  to  this  debate.  Based  on  this 
review, we suggest a contingency perspective to understand 
when  and  how  to  modify  best  practices.  We  develop  and 
test  hypotheses  about 
the  conditions  under  which 
modifications  to  source  practices  lead  to  more  successful 
organizational performance.     
Not to Modify: The Replication Approach 
Winter and Szulanski [48] claimed that knowledge transfer 
is  maximally  effective  when  only  value-creating  facets  of 
the  knowledge  are  replicated,  and  no  time  or  effort  is 
devoted  to  the  creation  of  addition  features,  which  could 
harm  performance.  There 
that 
attempting  to  modify  a  successful  working  practice  could 
be harmful, even when these modifications initially seemed 
sensible,  promising,  or  desirable.  Work  in  population 
ecology  has  found  negative  survival  effects  of  modifying 
core  features  of  organizations  in  a  variety  of  contexts, 
including  voluntary  social  service  organizations  [40]; 
Finnish  newspapers  [1];  U.S.  medical  diagnostic  imaging 
firms  [34];  U.S.  bicycle  manufacturers  [16];  and  French, 
German, and British auto manufacturers [15]. Recent work 
on  franchises  provides  empirical  evidence  supporting  the 
replication  perspective:  deviations  from  a  franchisor’s 
template 
source  practice)  have  negative 
consequences  for  the  survival  of  franchise  units  within  a 
larger  franchise  organization  [49].  According 
the 
replication perspective, modification of a working practice 
introduces risks, and the risk increases when the practice is 
complex.  Modification  of  complex  practice  can  lead  to 
unanticipated  deleterious 
that  are 
causally ambiguous and difficult to interpret [49, 31]. 
Modify: The Re-creation Approach 
However,  the  problem  with  replication  is  that  a  practice 
might  encounter  incompatibility  problems  when  moving 
from a source environment to the recipient one. According 
to  Argote  and  Ingram  [2],  practice  is  often  embedded  in 
structural  elements  of  an  organization,  such  as  its  people 
and  their  skills,  technical  tools,  or  other  routines  and 
systems used by the organization, as well as in the networks 
formed  between  and  among  these  elements.  Failure  of 
transferring practice often results from incompatibility with 
the  new  context.  And  the  risk  of  failure  caused  by 

interaction  effects 

(i.e., 

a 

to 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

in 

is  more 

innovation 

the  practice 

learning  and 

increases  when 

the  recipient  site 

into  an  organization 

interact  with  customers  and  suppliers 

incompatibility 
complex [2,18]. 
The re-creation approach advocates modifying and adapting 
the  source  practice 
to  reduce 
incompatibility.  The  re-creation  perspective  is  influenced 
by  literature  in  organization  innovation,  technological 
adaptation and organization routine [11,17,25,43]. Kim and 
Nelson  examined 
in  newly 
industrializing  economies  and  proposed  that  knowledge 
transfer is a dynamic learning process where organizations 
continually 
to 
innovate or creatively imitate. Orlikowski [36] explored the 
introduction  of  groupware 
to 
understand  the  changes  in  work  practices  and  social 
interaction  it  facilitated.  She  found  that  people’s  mental 
models  and  an  organization’s  structure  and  culture 
significantly  influenced  how  the  technology  was  actually 
used.  She  further  proposed  that  change  is  endemic  to  the 
practice  of  organizing  and  is  enacted  through  the  situated 
practices  of  organizational  actors  as 
improvise, 
innovate,  and  adjust  their  work  routines  over  time  [37]. 
Feldman  and  Pentland  [17]  challenged  the  traditional 
understanding of organization routines as creating inertia in 
organizations. They argued that organization routines are a 
source  of  change  that  create  on-going  opportunities  for 
variation,  selection  and 
retention  of  new  practices. 
Synthesizing  these  perspectives,  practice  is  seen  as  being 
continuously  modified  in  the  transfer  process.  Practice 
transfer  is  a  dynamic  learning  process,  involving  the 
continuous modification, re-configuration and re-creation.  
Contingency view of best practice modification 
Prior  research  suggests  that  modifying  practices  when 
adopting them can ameliorate the incompatibility between a 
source  practice  and  the  local  environment,  but  can  also 
increase  the  risk  of  introducing  deleterious  features  to  a 
successful  working  practice.  The 
risks  of  both 
incompatibility  and  deleterious  modifications 
increase 
when the practice is more complex.  
Neither  strictly  replicating  an  original  practice  without 
modification  nor  freely  modifying  it  will  optimize  the 
effectiveness of the imported practice. Instead, we need to 
understand  the  conditions  under  which  modifications  are 
more  or  less  effective.  In  the  following  sections,  we 
develop  testable  hypotheses  about  when  and  who  should 
make  modifications  to  improve  the  performance  of  the 
imported  practice.  Specifically,  we  propose  hypotheses 
about  the  effectiveness  of  modifications  at  an  early  stage 
(i.e.,  pre-implementation)  versus 
(i.e.,  post-
implementation), and the influence of characteristics of the 
people involved in the modification on their success.  
When  to  modify:  Effectiveness  of  Pre-  versus  Post-
implementation Modification 
Tyre and Orlikowski [45] examined the temporal pattern of 
modifications  to  a  new  technology  in  organizations.  They 
found  modifications  disproportionately  occurred  when  the 

they 

later 

idea 

technology was first introduced (and even before its official 
use).  Thus,  they  suggested  that  managers  and  engineers 
have  only  a  relatively  brief  window  of  opportunity  to 
explore and modify new technology. However, the authors 
only  examined  when  modifications  occurred,  not  their 
effectiveness at different stages.  
We propose that modifications early in the adoption process 
are  often  based  on  presumptions  (i.e.,  predictions  about 
which  components  of  the  new  practice  might  go  wrong). 
These  presumptions  may  be  wrong  because  they  are  not 
based  on  evidence.  In  contrast,  when  people  modify  a 
practice after implementing it, they are basing their changes 
on  experience.  Their  changes  are  more  likely  to  be 
responses  to  actual  compatibility  problems  between  the 
imported practice and the receiving site. Making changes to 
a  practice  after  implementing  it  is  a  form  of  iterative 
organizational design, in which a receiving site can tweak 
an  imported  practice  based  on  experience.  Therefore,  we 
hypothesize that post-implementation modifications are less 
likely  to  introduce  deleterious  changes  compared  to  pre-
implementation  modifications  and,  thus,  will  be  more 
effective than pre-implementation modifications. 
The 
that  experience-based,  post-implementation 
modifications  will  be  effective  is  consistent  with  the 
organization learning and knowledge creation literature (see 
[4] for a recent review). According to organization learning 
theories, new knowledge is iteratively created as experience 
interacts  with  context.  We  propose  to  use  an  iterative 
organization 
post-
implementation  modification  of  source  practice  as  an 
ongoing  use-mismatch-create  cycle.  In  this  cycle,  the 
recipient site adopts and implements the new practice, uses 
it, detects mismatch, fixes the mismatch, and creates a new 
iteration. Each iteration results in more effective utilization 
of the practice. The re-creation process does not end when 
the  new  practice  achieves  satisfactory  results  at  the 
recipient site. Even after successfully incorporating the new 
practice for a period of time, changes in the local context at 
the  recipient  site  (e.g.,  environmental  change,  member 
turnover, introduction of new tools or policies) might result 
in a new mismatch and thus prompt a new iteration.  
The 
iterative 
organizational  design  is  analogous  to  the  iterative  user-
interface  design  [35,39].  Nielson  proposed  that  software 
improves  more  rapidly  when  users  use  the  interface  and 
developers learn from their feedback, rather than designing 
and  iterating  without  evidence  [35].  He  provided  data  to 
show  that  redesigning  user  interfaces  on  the  basis  of  user 
testing substantially improved usability [35].  
This  hypothesis  might  reconcile  differences  between  the 
replication  and  re-creation  perspective  discussed  above. 
Szulanski and Jensen [42] and Winter et al. [49] provided 
empirical  evidence  showing  that  deviation  from  corporate 
templates  negatively  affected  the  survival  chances  of 
franchise units within a large organization. However, those 

post-implementation, 

design  model 

process 

depict 

the 

of 

to 

731

and 

the  post-implementation  modifications 

studies  only  focused  on  presumptive  modifications  (i.e., 
modification  based  on  managers’  assumptions,  without 
evidence,  about  what  should  work)  [42]  or  conflated 
presumptive  modifications 
post-implementation 
modifications  [49].  We  suggest  that  modifications  made 
before  implementation  (i.e.,  presumptive  modifications) 
will  generally  not  lead  to  successful  use  of  the  practice, 
while 
should 
significantly improve its successful utilization. 
H1.  Modifications  made  after  implementing  the  practice 
are  more  effective 
than  modifications  made  before 
implementation. 
Who  should  modify:  Effectiveness  of  Modifications 
Created by People in Different Network Positions 
We  next  consider  how  the  network  structures  of  the 
individuals who propose and implement modifications to a 
practice  in  a  recipient  site  influence  the  success  of  the 
practice.  
We hypothesize that members who are central in the local 
site can create better modifications because they know more 
about  the  local  environment.  Central  people  should  be 
better able to identify a mismatch between the new practice 
and  local  needs  and  to  craft  a  good  solution  to  fix  the 
mismatch.   
In addition, members’ network ties to other sites that have 
already  adopted  the  practice  can  also  affect  whether  they 
will  create  successful  post-implementation  modifications. 
Prior research on the transfer of knowledge in organizations 
has  shown 
their 
organization  are  often  successful  at  searching  for  and 
importing  new  ideas  into  their  organization  [20,  21]. 
Therefore, we propose that people’s external ties will also 
help 
successful 
post-implementation 
modifications at the recipient site.   
This proposal about the usefulness of external ties is based 
on  the  concept  of  “learning  in  a  world  of  learners”  from 
Levitt  and  March  [32]  and  an  ecological  approach  to 
understanding  the  role  of  external  ties  in  successful 
knowledge  transfer.  The  key  element  of  creating  an 
effective  modification  is  to  resolve  a  mismatch  between  a 
new  practice  and  the  local  environment.  Since  many 
recipient sites may have modified the source practice to fit 
it  into  their  local  environments,  some  of  their  solutions 
might be relevant to another site that is trying to incorporate 
the practice.  Members in a local site with ties to other sites 
that have already adopted the practice are in a good position 
to search for solutions from those other sites. Furthermore, 
according  to  research  on  analogical  reasoning  [44],  even 
though  a  local  site  is  not  experiencing  problems  that  are 
identical  to  other  in  other  recipient  sites,  exposure  to  the 
mismatch-fixing cycle in the other sites might inspire good 
solutions at the local site. 
Although people who have external ties with other recipient 
sites  are  more  likely  to  generate  good  solutions  for 

individuals  with 

ties  outside 

that 

them 

create 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

mismatches  at  the  local  site,  acceptance  of  their  solutions 
cannot  be 
taken  for  granted.  Gruenfeld  et  al.  [19] 
investigated  the  consequences  of  temporary  membership 
changes  for  itinerant  members  (i.e.,  those  who  leave  their 
group of origin temporarily to visit a foreign work group) 
and  indigenous  members  of  those  origin  and  foreign 
groups.  They  found  that,  although  itinerant  members 
produced  more  unique  ideas  than  indigenous  members, 
their ideas were significantly less likely to be utilized by the 
group. Kane et al. [23] later found that groups were more 
likely to adopt the ideas from itinerant members when they 
shared a superordinate social identity with them than when 
they did not. Therefore, our final hypothesis is that people 
with external ties who are also central in the local units can 
generate  good  solutions  that  result  in  a  higher  acceptance 
rate.  Those  persons,  therefore,  are  most  likely  to  create 
more effective modifications.  
H2a. People who are central at the recipient units are more 
likely to create effective post-implementation modifications.  
H2b.  People  who  have  external  ties  with  other  recipient 
units are more likely to create effective post-implementation 
modifications. 
H2c.  People  who  have  external  ties  with  other  recipient 
units  and  are  central  in  the  focal  unit  are  most  likely  to 
create effective post-implementation modifications. 
STUDY PLATFORM 
We  conducted  our  research  in  the  context  of  Wikiprojects 
in  Wikipedia.  Wikiprojects  are  subgroups  of  Wikipedians 
who organize to curate articles around different topics. Our 
research  examines  how  Wikiprojects  adopt  and  modify  a 
project-based  practice  called  Collaboration  of  the  Week 
(CotW). 
Collaborations of the Week (CotW) 
CotW is a practice whereby members of a project designate 
one  or  two  articles  to  improve  within  a  week  or  other 
defined time period. Collaborations of the Week started as a 
Wikipedia-wide  activity,  not 
to  any  specific 
project.  However,  hundreds  of  Wikiprojects  have  adopted 
and modified this practice since 2004 and created their own 
project-specific  variants,  which  often  have  dedicated 
project  pages.  Figure  1  shows  the  CotW  project  page  in 
Wikiproject Video Games (WVG). 
CotWs have two phases: selection and collaboration. In the 
selection  phase,  project  members  nominated  candidate 
articles  for  improvement  and  then  voted  on  which  they 
would work on. During the collaboration phase, the project 
tagged  the  chosen  article(s)  with  a  special  template  in  its 
talk page. In addition, the project typically announced on its 
project  pages  which  articles  were 
the 
collaboration for that period. 
CotW  is  an  important  practice  to  direct  volunteer  editors’ 
attention  to  articles  that  are  important  to  the  group  but 
which  may  not  attract  individual  members’  interests.  As 

targets  of 

tailored 

732

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Zhu et al. [51] have shown, without coordination techniques 
like  CotWs,  editors  often  gravitate  to  work  on  popular 
articles and neglect less popular ones. CotWs can motivate 
project  members  to  contribute  to  these  less  popular,  but 
important,  articles.  Their  research  also  showed  that,  in 
addition  to  motivating  contributions  on  important  but  less 
popular  articles,  CotWs  have  other  benefits.  For  example, 
during periods when CotWs were active, project members 
also  increased  their  work  on  non-CotW-target  articles. 
Furthermore,  editors  who  worked  on  CotWs  seemed  to 
learn  from  central  members  in  the  project,  who  served  as 
role  model;  after  participating  in  a  CotW,  editors  became 
more  likely  to  perform  similarly  to  the  role  models,  and 
they increased their work on assessment and anti-vandalism 
activities. 
Despite  the  benefits  of  CotWs,  their  use  by  Wikiprojects 
varies  widely.  Among  146  Wikiprojects  that  had  ever 
hosted a CotW, 72 hosted only a single one, 74 hosted more 
than  one  and  55  successfully  hosted  more  than  five 
collaborations.  
CASE STUDY: COTW IN WVG 
To better understand how Wikiprojects used and modified 
the Collaboration of the Week practice, we conducted an in-

depth case study on the Wikiproject Video Games (WVG)’s 
Collaboration of the Week, named “Gaming Collaboration 
of the Week” (GCOTW). The case study can help us better 
understand the hypotheses in the context of Wikipedia and 
CotW. 
Method 
We  analyzed  the  complete  revision  history  of  GCOTW 
project  page  (3431  revisions)  and  discussions  on  WVG’s 
talk  page  that  mentioned  GCOTW.  We  also  cross-linked 
key  participants’  activities  in  GCOTW  and  other  parts  of 
Wikipedia  during  the  period  the  CotW  were  active. 
Wikipedia  records  almost  all  actions  by  editors  and 
provides an API for researchers to conveniently retrieve and 
analyze the activities. We rely on these complete records to 
reconstruct WVG’s experience using CotW.   
Findings 
On  3  Oct  2004,  editor  pie4all88  started  a  discussion  on 
WVG’s talk page and expressed an interest in developing a 
WVG-specific  CotW  similar  to  those  used  by  many  other 
projects.  After  receiving  supportive  messages  from  two 
other members within 24 hours, pie4all88 created a CotW 
page  on  4  Oct  2004  called  “Gaming  Collaboration  of  the 
Week” (GCOTW). 

1. Illustrate the goal of CotW. For instance, this page says: 
“Each week a Gaming Collaboration of the week will be 
picked  using  this  page”…“The  aim  of  this  project  is  to 
improve  the  quality  of  Wikipedia's  computer  and  video 
game  articles  through  widespread  cooperative  editing.” 
“The project is also used to fill gaps in Wikipedia, to give 
users  a  focus,  and  to  give  us  all  something  to  be  proud 
of. ” 

2.  Template  designed 
the 
collaboration each week. The template shows “the current 
focus of collaboration of the week is XX. The last article 
was XX – see how it improved.” 

to  announce

targets  of 

about 

running 

to 

and 

guidelines 

candidate,  what 

3.  Policies 
the 
collaborations.  The  policy  on  this  iteration  includes  five 
parts:  how  to  vote,  how  to  deal  with  vote  ties,  how  to 
nominate  a 
consider  before 
nominations,  and  how  to  prune  nominations  that  do  not 
receive  enough  votes.  For  instance,  the policy  for  voting 
says “Please vote for as many of the following candidates 
as you like. Please add only support votes. Opposing votes 
will not affect the result, as the winner is simply the one 
with  the  most  support  votes  (see  Approval  voting). 
Remember: Any registered user is encouraged to vote.”    

4.  This  is  the  area  for  editors  to  participate  in  the 
nomination and voting. They post the title (with a link) of 
the  article  they  nominate  and  reasons  why  they  want  to 
nominate 
this  article.  Other  users  will  support 
the 
nominations or leave comments about the nominations. 

 

Figure 1. The page for the collaboration of the week in Wikiproject Video Game on Oct. 5th 2004.

733

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

these 

four 

GCOTW.  In  the  discussion,  people  believed  that  this 
change could remove the stress caused by nomination and 
voting  and  focus  on  the  contribution.  Also,  the  random 
nature  of 
the  selection  was  more  enjoyable.  After 
implementing  the  new  bot-selecting  schema,  GCOTW  ran 
successfully for another 2.5 years. 
Pre- and Post- implementation Modifications 
The first example modification was made before the WVG 
officially  implemented  the  GCOTW  (i.e.,  the  date  of 
announcing 
the  first  GCOTW).  The  remaining  four 
example  modifications  were  made  after  the  GCOTW  was 
officially implemented. Prior to the official implementation, 
the  modifications  were  created  based  on  people’s 
predictions  about  which  component  might  go  wrong.  For 
instance,  in  the  first  example,  editor  pie4all88e  predicted 
that members of WVG might be enthusiastic about a niche 
topic  without  considering  its  importance  for  the  whole 
gaming community. No discussion was found related to the 
problem of proposing a niche topic. In other words, it was 
uncertain whether nominating niche topic articles would be 
problematic. In contrast, the remaining four examples were 
all based on lessons learned from previous iterations, such 
as  the  high  pruning  threshold,  the  lack  of  contributions 
despite  the  number  of  votes,  false  votes,  and  decreased 
enthusiasm.  We  found  discussion  histories  related  to  each 
examples.  The  post-implementation 
of 
modifications  are  more 
to  actual  problems 
compared to pre-implementation modifications. 
People in the modification process  
The  third  example,  about  voters  not  contributing,  shows 
how people with external ties can generate good solutions 
to resolve problems of using new practice at the local site 
by  borrowing  solutions.  The  editor  (Jacoplane)  mentioned 
that  another  project  created  a  template  that  “gets  put  on 
every  user’s  talk  page  that  vote”.  The  editor  suggested 
borrowing  this  solution:  “I  think  we  should  do  something 
similar  to  remind  people  that  they  voted.”  We  checked 
Jacoplane’s  editing  history  and  found  that  this  editor 
participated  in  nine  other  Wikiprojects  that  hosted  CotWs 
that  year.  Despite  the  multiple  project  participation,  the 
editor  was  based  in  WVG  (87.7%  of  his/her  project  page 
contributions are devoted to WVG at that year). In WVG, 
the  editor  was  a  top  3  contributor  among  the  group’s  347 
members.  The  central  role  of  this  editor  in  WVG  might 
make it easier for him/her to identify the problem. Second, 
the  external  relationship  with  other  projects  was  an 
advantage for him/her to find a solution. Finally, the central 
role of this editor made it easier for his/her suggestions to 
be accepted. 
The  case  study  provides  real  examples  to  help  better 
understand  the  hypotheses  about  modification  of  best 
practice  in  the  context  of  CotW.  In  the  following  section, 
we conduct quantitative analysis to test the hypotheses. 

targeted 

Modifications of GCOTW 
Table 1 shows five iterations of the GCOTW as examples 
to  illustrate  what  we  mean  by  “modifications”  in  the 
context of CotW. The first example discusses guidelines for 
nomination.  The  original  guideline  inherited  from  the 
source  CotW  simply  reminded  people  to  justify  why  they 
nominated  particular  articles.  Editor  pie4all88e  had  a 
concern that members of WVG might be enthusiastic about 
a particular niche topic yet not consider its importance for 
the  whole  gaming  community.  Therefore,  in  the  new 
iteration,  pie4all88  added  a  new  guideline  to  remind 
nominators  to  consider  the  impact  to  the  wider  gaming 
community of the articles they nominated. 
The  second  example  considers  the  pruning  policy,  which 
defines  the  threshold  to  prune  unsuccessful  nominations 
(i.e.,  those  that  fail  to  receive  adequate  support).  After 
implementing  the  original  pruning  policy  that  would  drop 
articles that failed to receive five votes within a week, users 
stated  that  this  threshold  was  too  high.  In  the  talk  page, 
people proposed lowering the number of needed votes per 
week  because  “this  CotW  does  not  get  as  much  traffic  as 
the  original  CotW.”  That  change  is  reflected  in  the  new 
iteration. 
The third example relates to the voting policy. The original 
policy  encouraged  members  to  “vote  for  as  many  of  the 
following  candidates  as  you  can.”  That  policy,  however, 
encouraged  people  to  vote  but  not  contribute.  Because  of 
this,  articles  selected  as  GCOTW  targets  received  little 
contribution  during  the  collaboration  period.  One  member 
expressed this problem in the discussion and suggested that 
the weekly improvement drive (itself a variant of the source 
CotW) create a template to remind voters to contribute. As 
a result, two changes were made in the new iteration. First, 
the  description  was  changed  to  “A  vote  …  shows  your 
commitment  to  support  and  aid  in  collaborating  on  that 
specific  article  if  it  is  chosen.”  This  change  highlighted 
votes  as  a  commitment  to  contribute  rather  than  a  simple 
social gesture. Second, an editor created a new template to 
remind voters when the articles they voted for were chosen. 
The  fourth  example  also  concerns  voting  policy.  The 
original  policy  stated 
that  any  registered  user  was 
encouraged  to  vote.  To  increase  the  likelihood  that  their 
preferences  would  be  selected,  some  members  created 
“sockpuppets” (i.e., fake accounts) to cast false votes. In the 
new iteration, sockpuppets were forbidden from voting. 
The  final  example  relates  to  the  selection  mechanisms  in 
GCOTW.  After  hosting  GCOTWs  for  over  four  years, 
member  enthusiasm  eroded.  Low  participation  frustrated 
members who were still actively organizing the nomination 
and  voting.  To  address  this  problem,  the  nominate-vote-
select schema was changed to a bot-selecting schema. Each 
week, a bot would randomly select an article from the low-
the 
quality-high-importance  category  and  post 

it  as 

734

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Old Iteration 

Discussion

New Iteration 

Guidelines for nominations 
- Giving reasons as to why an article 

should become the COTW may 
assist others in casting their vote. 

No discussion found specifically related 

to this change. 

Pruning policy: 
Nominations will be moved 
to /Removed if they have not 
received 5 votes after 7 days on the 
list, 10 votes after 14 days, 15 votes 
after 21 days, and so on. 
Voting policy: 
Please vote for as many of the 
following candidates as you like. 
Please add only support votes. 
Opposing votes will not affect the 
result, as the winner is simply the 
one with the most support votes 

5 votes per week? 
“I propose we lower the needed votes per 
week to 4 or even 3, as this CotW does not 
get as much traffic as the original CotW 
gets.” 

People voting but not contributing 
“I’ve noticed that there seems to be a lot 
more people voting in the GCOTW lately, 
but the number of contributors hasn’t really 
seemed to increase much. Is the idea that 
anyone can vote, or only people who intend 
to contribute? With the Weekly 
improvement drive, the Template:AIDvotes 
gets put on every user’s talk page that 
voted. I think we should do something 
similar to remind people that they voted.” 

Voting policy: 
Remember: Any registered user is 
encouraged to vote. 

Fake votes 
“It seems that someone is adding other 
people’s signature to the nomination XXX” 

The selection of collaboration 
article is based on nomination and 
voting.  

GCOTW is big letdown this week 
“This week’s Wikipedia:Gaming 
Collaboration of the week was Prima 
Games. It’s been rather a poor show.” 
No longer working? 
“So, is Gaming Collaboration of the week 
now nonfunctional? As is, no one working 
on it.” 
Reactivating Collaboration of the Week 
–with ROBOTS!!!
(Propose the plan of having robots 
randomly select one article from the 
category of low quality but high importance 
as collaboration) “Removing the stress of 
nomination and voting will reduce 
frustration, and make participation the 
focus, not bureaucracy (this isn't an RfA). 
The random nature will make it more fun, 
as part of it is wondering which article will 
be chosen. “ 

Guidelines for nominations 
- Giving reasons why an article should 
become the GCOTW may convince others 
to support your nomination. 
- Can the wider gaming community easily 
contribute to the article? Or is it something 
only a small number of people will know 
about? 
Pruning policy: 
Nominations will be moved to /Removed if 
they have not received 4 votes after 7 days 
on the list, 8 votes after 14 days, 12 votes 
after 21 days, and so on. 

Voting policy: 
A vote or a show of support for an article 
shows your commitment to support and aid 
in collaborating on that specific article if it 
is chosen. Although you are not required to 
fulfill that commitment, we ask that you 
only support articles that you are able to 
contribute to so that this collaboration's 
goals of expanding and improving articles 
can adequately be achieved. Feel free to 
vote for as many of the following candidates 
as you like. 
Add template to remind voters:

Voting policy: 
Any registered user is encouraged to vote so 
long as you abide by the policies of 
Wikipedia, especially 
Wikipedia:Sockpuppets. 
Introduction: 
The WikiProject Video games collaboration 
is a collective effort to improve related 
articles covered by the project's scope. An 
article is chosen every Monday, by a bot 
that randomly selects one video game-
related article that is rated Stub or Start or 
C class, and Top or High priority for 
WP:VG. The bot then updates 
Template:Collab-gaming with the pick, and 
the collaboration begins. If there is 
consensus that a selected article is not felt to 
be suitable for collaboration, then the bot 
will be requested to "re-roll" and select a 
different article. Articles that have 
previously been chosen for collaboration 
will not be chosen again. Previous 
collaborations can be found at /History. 

Table 1. Example modifications in Wikiproject Video Games. 

735

to 

select  collaboration  articles, 

QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS 
Method 
We  ran  a  quantitative  analysis  on  146  Wikiprojects  that 
adopted CotW. The first step is to identify the modifications 
of CotW in these projects. 
Automatically identify modifications in CotW 
We wanted to automatically identify modifications from the 
CotW pages’ historical revisions. We defined modifications 
as  the  changes  to  the  practice,  which  modify  the  way  of 
organizing  and  operating  CotW.  Not  all  the  historical 
revisions of CotW pages were “modifications”. The goal of 
this section is to automatically identify the modifications. 
We found that a large proportion of the historical revisions 
on  the  CotW  pages  are  actually  candidate  nominations  or 
votes 
than 
modifications to the CotW rules. To rule out these types of 
nomination and voting activities, we excluded the revisions 
that  only  modified  the  sections  of  nomination  and  voting. 
Results  show  that  88.6%  of  the  revisions  on  the  CotW 
pages are the nomination or voting activities.   
To further detect the modifications in the remaining 11.4% 
revisions we used a machine-learning approach in which we 
hand-coded 335 non-nomination-voting revisions from two 
Wikiprojects’  CotWs  as  a  training  set.  We  then  created  a 
feature  set  containing  nine  different  features  (see  Table  2 
for details). We trained statistical models (rule-based model 
generated  based  on  our  domain  knowledge,  decision-tree, 
and  SVM)  on  the  training  set  and  evaluated  them  using  a 
separate  set  of  hand-coded  data  (113  non-nomination-
voting revisions from another two Wikiprojects). Details of 
the feature set and model shown in Table 2.  
We  compared 
the  performance  of  rule-based  model, 
decision-tree, and SVM. Results are shown in Table 3. The 
rule-based model and decision tree outperformed SVM on 

rather 

Feature 

Set 

Model 

Number of total inserted characters, Length of the 
longest inserted word sequence, Number of total 
deleted characters, Length of the longest deleted 
word sequence, Add templates, Add sections, 
Maintenance, Being reverted in the next revision, 
Revert previous revision 
• Rule-based  model  generated  based  on  our
domain  knowledge:  1)  Must  have  the  length  of
the longest inserted word sequence no less than
five Or Add new sections Or Add new templates
but  excluding 
the  Wikipedia’s  maintenance
templates; 2) Must not being reverted in the next
revision or reverting previous revision.

• Decision-tree
• SVM

Rule-based 
  Pre.          Rec. 
93% 
93% 
93% 
92% 

Table 2. Feature set and model to classify modifications. 

 Pre.        Rec. 
Train
81% 
82% 
Test
84% 
84% 
Table 3. Performance of three models on training & test set. 

Decision Tree 
  Pre.          Rec. 
94% 
94% 
91% 
91% 

SVM 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

both  the  training  set  and  test  set.  On  the  training  set,  the 
decision-tree  performed  slightly  better  than  the  rule-based 
model.  However,  in  the  test  set,  the  rule-based  model 
performed  slightly  better  than  the  decision-tree  model. 
Because the rule-based model performed the best in the test 
set  and  is  easy  to  interpret  we  used  it  in  the  following 
analysis.   
Analysis overview
This analysis seeks to identify the effects of different types 
of modification on the successful utilization of CotWs. We 
measured  the  success  of  CotW  according  to  three  criteria: 
(1)  the  survival  of  CotW  (i.e.,  the  likelihood  that  projects 
continuously use CotW), (2) the number of contributions on 
CotW target articles during the collaboration period, and (3) 
the  unique  contributors  to  CotW  target  articles  during  the 
collaboration  period.  The  analysis  was  conducted  on  the 
project-collaboration-period  level.  We  predicted  outcomes 
(i.e., survival, contribution, and participants) in the current 
collaboration period according to whether the project made 
a new iteration in the last collaboration period. 
Since  we  used  observational  data  to  run  the  analysis,  the 
creation  of  a  new  iteration  is  not  a  true  experimental 
treatment.  New  iteration  creation  (i.e.,  modification  on 
CotW), as with most events in the real world, is endogenous 
in  the  sense  that  it  is  caused  by  other  factors  inside  the 
system.  In  our  data,  Wikiproject  activity  correlates  to 
project  members’  participation  in  CotW,  as  well  as  their 
tendency to modify its procedures of CotW. Not controlling 
for  confounding  factors  that  influence  both  the  treatment 
(CotW  modifications)  and  the  outcome  (CotW  utilization) 
can  lead  to  biased  estimates  of  the  treatment  effects.  To 
ameliorate  the  endogeneity  problem,  we  used  propensity 
score matching (PSM). We will discuss the details of PSM 
method later. 
Data preparation 
The data were longitudinal, following the same project 
across multiple collaboration periods. The data comprised 
1588 project-collaboration-period observations. 
Dependent variables 
• Practice  Death.  We  defined  a  CotW  as  near
abandonment  (i.e.,  dying)  if  the  project  did  not  have  at
least two collaborations after a focal collaboration period
(a  sensitivity  analysis  with  differing  threshold  values
showed  no  difference  in  the  pattern  of  results).  This
variable  was  assigned  to  1  if  the  project’s  CotW  was
dying  (i.e.,  had  no  more  than  two  collaborations  in  the
future); it was assigned 0 if the project’s CotW was still
active (had more than two collaborations in the future).

target  articles  during 

• Contributions. We measured the number of revisions to
the  collaboration  period,
the 
controlling for the number of revisions on these articles
during  the  non-collaboration  period.  Particularly,  we
divided  the  number  of  revisions  on  the  target  articles
during  the  collaboration  period  by  the  number  of
revisions  on 
the  pre-

target  articles  during 

the 

736

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

period.  The 
lasted 

and 
collaboration 
length  (e.g., 
collaboration  periods 
normally  between  a  week  and  a  month  long).  This 
variable is log transformed in the analysis. 

pre-collaboration 
the  same 

• Participants.  We  measured  the  number  of  unique
contributors  who  edited  the  target  articles  during  the 
collaboration period, controlling for the number of unique 
contributors  during 
the  non-collaboration  period. 
Specifically, we divide the number of contributors during 
the  collaboration  period  by  the  number  of  contributors 
during  the  pre-collaboration  period.  Both  periods  lasted 
the same length. This variable is also log transformed in 
the analysis. 

Independent variables 
• Post-implementation  modification.  We  measured  the
number of modifications the project’s CotW had in post-
implementation periods.   

• Pre-implementation  modification.  We  measured  the
number  of  the  modifications  the  project’s  CotW  had  in 
the  pre-implementation  period  (i.e., 
the  preparation 
period). 

We  further  divided  the  modifications  according  to  which 
editors would implement the modifications.  
• “Modification made by core members in the recipient
project”  versus  “modification  made  by  non-core 
members  in  the  recipient  project”.  We  defined  core 
members  as  those  whose  overall  contributions  to  the 
project  are  among  the  top  10%.  We  then  divided  the 
modifications  into  two  groups:  those  made  by  core 
members versus those made by non-core members. 

• “Modification  made  by  members  with  more  external
ties”  versus  “modification  made  by  members  with 
fewer  external  ties”.  We  measured  external  ties  as 
multiple  memberships  in  other  projects  that  also  adopt 
CotWs.  If  a  member  participated  in  three  projects  in 
addition  to  the  focal  project,  he/she  had  three  external 
ties.  We  defined  members  with  more  external  ties  as 
those  with  external  ties  greater  than  or  equal  to  the 

median  (external ties (cid:1)3). Similarly, we define member 
median (external ties (cid:1)3).  

with fewer external ties as those with ties lower than the 

In addition to the above variables designed to measure the 
main  effects  of  core-ness  in  the  focal  project  and  external 
ties,  we  also  measured  the  interaction  effects.  We  defined 
four  more  interaction  measurements:  (1)  modifications 
made  by  core  members  in  the  recipient  project  and  that 
have  more  external  ties,  (2)  modifications  made  by  core 
members  in  the  recipient  project  but  do  not  have  many 
external ties, (3) modifications made by non-core members 
in the recipient project but have more external ties, and (4) 
modifications  made  non-core  members  in  the  recipient 
project and do not have many external ties. 
In addition, we measured the popularity of the source. 

737

has 

since 

(which 

• Popularity of the source. In our data, we observed that
Wikiprojects have different sources. Many of the earliest
projects  learned  and  copied  rules  and  policies  from  the
Wikipedia-level  CotW 
been
terminated).  Some  projects  started  by  copying  other
Wikiprojects’ CotW. The very first revision of the CotW
page is likely to be the source CotW. We calculated the
popularity  of  the  source  by  comparing  the  structural
similarity of the given project’s first CotW page revision
with  all  the  other  CotWs  in  other  projects  at  that  time
period.  Higher  similarity  indicated  that  more  projects
were using the same structure, and that focal project was
starting with a more popular template.

Propensity score matching 
The basic idea of PSM is to pair the treated project and the 
control project. For a given project that had modifications, 
we selected a comparison project that was most similar on 
confounding variables but did not have modifications. We 
used Propensity Score Matching (PSM) to pair the projects 
(more precisely, project-collaboration-periods).  
Using  PSM  involved  three  steps.  In  the  first  step,  we 
estimated the propensity score (i.e., the tendency of having 
modifications)  from  a  set  of  conditioning  variables.  We 
chose  four  variables  indicating  the  activity  level  of  the 
project listed below as conditioning variables. In the second 
step,  we  matched  each  project  that  had modifications  in  a 
particular  week  with  another  project  that  did  not  have 
modifications,  but  which  had  the  most  similar  propensity 
score  based  on  our  four  activity  indicators.  Propensity 
scores  allow  researchers  to  control  for  many  variables 
simultaneously by matching on a single scalar variable. To 
conclude the second step, we tested whether the treatment 
group and control group were well matched in terms of the 
conditioning  variables.  In  the  third  step,  we  ran  fixed 
effects  regression  analyses  to  estimate  the  effect  of 
modifications on the treated groups and matched controls. 
Step 1: Estimate propensity score 
We first used logistic regression to estimate the probability 
of having modifications based on the project activity level. 
The estimated probability is the propensity score. The four 
predictors are listed below. 
• Active  members.  We  measured  the  number  of  active

members during the period of time.

• Number  of  CotW  hosted  before.  We  measured  how

many CotW were hosted.

• Project  page  activities.  Project  pages  are  places  where
Wikiproject organize activities. CotW is one of activities
organized  through  project  pages.  We  measured  the
amount of contributions on  the project pages during the
given period, indicating whole project activity during the
given period of time.

• Number of project pages. We measured the number of
pages  the  project  had  during  the  given  period,  which
indicates the size of the project.

Step 2: Matching based on propensity score. 
In this step, we matched projects that modified their CotWs 
with projects that did not, based on the estimated propensity 
score.  To  do  this,  we  ordered  the  treated  and  control 
projects  according  to  their  propensity  scores.  For  each 
treated project, we then selected a control project with the 
closest  propensity  score  within  a  maximum  distance  (we 
defined maximum distance as 0.1 in the analysis). 
Figure 2 reports the histogram of the propensity score (i.e., 
the  tendency  of  making  modifications)  for  treated  groups 
and  control  groups  before  and  after  matching.  Here  the 
treated  group  contains  projects 
indeed  made 
modifications  at  the  given  time  period  and  the  control 
group contains projects that did not make modifications at 
the given time period. Figure 2 shows that the treated group 
and control group are balanced on the tendency of making 
modifications after matching. 

that 

 

 

N of proj 
pages  

Reduced 

bias 
-59.9 

Treat 
mean 
83.3 
83.3 
277.5 
277.5 
40.4 
40.4 
31.9 
31.9 

Control 
mean 
89.0 
92.4 
215.9
270.3
35.0 
39.7 
32.9 
32.2 

Bias 
% 
-5.2 
-8.3 
8.1 
0.9 
7.3 
1.0 
-3.1 
-0.9 

Full 
Match 
Full 
Match 
Full 
Match 
Full 
Match 

88.3 

86.3 

Proj page 
activities 
Active 
members 
N of prev. 
CotWs 
Table 4. Comparison between treatment projects that 
made modifications (Treat) and control projects that did 

propensity score matching (Full vs. Match).  

not make modifications (Control) before and after 

Bias is calculated as follows:(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1),
where (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)and(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) are the sample means in the treated and 
control groups, and (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) and (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) are the corresponding 

70.8 

sample variance. 

 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

five 

times  more  project  pages 

Table  4  reports  the  details  of  the  matching  process.  Note 
that variables that correlate highly with the treatment (also 
having higher risk to introduce bias) will be balanced better 
than  variables  with  lower  correlation  with  the  treatment. 
This  explains  why  PSM  tends  to  favor  page  activities, 
active  members  and  previous  CotWs  over  the  number  of 
project pages during balancing.  
There  is  an  interesting  observation  that  the  bias  (i.e., 
unbalance) between the treatment group and control group 
is not that serious even before matching. In Zhu et al’s [52] 
study  where  they  used  PSM  to  match  an  editor  who 
received  messages  with  editors  who  did  not  receive 
messages, the bias was 79%-110% before matching. In this 
analysis, the bias is only 5%-8% before matching.  
The statistical results are consistent with our observations. 
We  observe  that  project  activity  and  project  size  do  not
correlate  with  the  number  of  modifications  made  on  the 
CotWs  (and 
the  success  of  CotWs).  For  example, 
Wikiproject  Military  History  is  considered  the  largest  and 
most  active  Wikiproject,  with  eight  times  as  many  active 
members  and 
than 
Wikiproject Oregon. But Wikiproject Military History only 
made four modifications in total while Wikiproject Oregon 
made  77  modifications.  Wikiproject  Oregon  hosted  89 
CotWs  while  Military  History  only  hosted  24  CotWs, 
although the latter project generally much more active than 
the former project. 
Step 3: Run the analysis on the match sample 
Using the matched sample, we then examined the effects of 
modifications on the outcomes (survival, contributions and 
participants).  We  used  fixed  effects  linear  regression  to 
predict outcomes, with each treated control pair as a group. 
Results 
The  temporal  patterns  of  the  modifications  are  shown  in 
Figure  3.  The  results  are  consistent  with  Tyre  and 
Orlikowski’s  (1994)  findings  (Figure  4)  that  a  substantial
proportion  (about  30%)  of  modifications  happened  in  the 
pre-implementation 
fewer  modifications 
happened in each post-implementation CotW period. 
Table  5  shows  the  main  findings  of  the  analysis  on  the 
effectiveness  of  the  modifications.  Models  1-41 test  how 
modifications affect the survival of CotW in Wikiprojects. 
Each coefficient in Models 1-4 represents the hazard ratio. 
A  hazard  ratio  is  the  ratio  of  the  risk  of  a  CotW  being 
abandoned in a given time period associated with a one-unit 
change in the explanatory variables. A hazard ratio smaller 
than  1  indicates  decreased  rate  of  abandonedness  (i.e., 

stage.  Far 

 

Figure 2. The distributions of propensity score for treated 
group,(i.e., projects made modifications, indicated by blue 
solid lines) and control group (i.e., projects that did not 
make modifications, indicated by red dot lines) before 
matching (left) and after matching (right). This figure 

shows that after matching, the treatment group and control 
group has more similar distribution of propensity score. 

                                                             
1 Note  that  here  we  do  not  use  the  traditional  interaction  model 
(e.g., with modification, modification X pre-post (interaction), and 
modification  X  pre-post  X  the  types  of  people  (interaction)  as 
explanatory variables in the regression) but divide the number of 
modifications into different groups. Our analysis is essentially the 
same as the traditional interaction method but is easier to interpret. 

738

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

increased survival rate), while a hazard ratio larger than 1 
indicates  increased  rate  of  abandonedness  (i.e.,  decreased 
survival rate).  
Models  5-8  show  the  results  of  the  random  effects  linear 
regression models (with each project as a group) predicting 
how  modifications  affect  the  amount  of  contributions 
received  by  CotW  target  articles.  Models  9-12  show  the 
results of the random effects linear regression models (also 
with each project as a group) predicting how modifications 
affect the number of unique contributors in CotW. Models 
5-12  report  the  regular  coefficients.  Coefficients  smaller 
than  0  indicate  decreased  contributions/participants,  while 
coefficients 
increased 
contributions/participants. 
Model  1  shows 
in  pre-
implementation modification decreases the hazard ratio by 
3%,  while  a  one-unit  increase  in  post-implementation 
modification  decreases  the  hazard  ratio  by  62%.  The 
difference  between 
the  pre-  and  post-implementation 
modification  is  significant  (χ2=14,  P  <  .01).  The  results 
confirm  Hypotheses  1,  showing  that  post-implementation 
modifications  have  a  much  stronger  positive  effect  on  the 
practice  survival.    Models  2-4  show  that  modification 
effectiveness  is  influenced  by  editor  type  (e.g.,  core  vs. 

that  a  one-unit 

increase 

indicate 

larger 

than 

0 

than  non-core  members  (24%)  and 

non-core  member  and  strong  external  ties  versus  weak 
external ties). Model 2 shows that the modification created 
by core members were more effective in decreasing hazard 
rate  (68%) 
the 
difference  is  marginally  significant  (χ2=3.0,  P  =  .09). 
Model 2 confirmed Hypothesis 2a partially. Model 3 shows 
that the modifications introduced by contributors with more 
external ties were more effective (decreasing the hazard rate 
by  83%)  than  modifications  introduced  by  people  with 
fewer  external  ties  (decreasing  the  hazard  rate  by  13%). 
This  difference  is  also  statistically  significant  (χ2=14,  P  
<.01).  The  results  of  Model  3  confirmed  Hypothesis  2b. 
Regarding  the  interaction  effects  of  being  a  core  member 
with  external  ties,  Model  4  provides  mixed  results.  The 
modifications  introduced  by  core  members  with  more 
external ties (V7) significantly decrease the hazard rate by 
82%. The modifications introduced by the other three types 
of contributors (core members with fewer external ties—V8, 
non-core  members  with  more  external  ties—V9  and  non-
core  members  with  fewer  external  ties—V10)  did  not 
significantly decrease the hazard rate. Also, core members 
with  more  external  ties  tend  to  create  more  effective 
modifications than those with fewer external ties (χ2=8.5, P  
<.01), which indicates that external relationships help core 
members  create  effective  modifications.  However,  among 

Survival 
Hazard Ratio

Contributions 

Coefficients

Participants 
Coefficients

Source Popularity 
Pre-implement 

Modifications (V1) 
Post-implement 
Modifications (V2) 
Modifications by 

core (V3) 

Modifications by 

non-core (V4) 

Modifications by 

external  (V5) 

Modifications by 
non-external (V6) 
Modifications by 
core & external 

(V7) 

Modifications by 

core & non-
external(V8) 

Modifications by 

non-core & 
external (V9) 

Modifications by 
non-core & non-
external (V10)

Model 1  Model 2  Model 3  Model 4  Model 5  Model 6  Model 7  Model 8  Model 9  Model 10  Model 11  Model 12 
0.99 
0.03** 

0.03** 

0.03** 

0.03** 

0.03** 

0.03** 

0.03** 

0.03** 

0.99 

0.99 

0.99 

0.97** 

0.97** 

0.97** 

0.97** 

0.007

0.007 

0.006 

0.006 

0.01** 

0.01** 

0.01** 

0.01** 

0.38**

0.17** 

0.07* 

0.32** 

0.76 

0.17** 

0.87 

0.22** 

-0.12 

0.31** 

0.01 

0.10** 

-0.11 

0.13** 

-0.01 

0.18** 

0.77

0.04 

0.32** 

0.09

0.20 

1.13 

 

 

 

-0.23 

Table 5. Effectiveness of the modifications. *p<0.05, **p<0.01 

0.13** 

0.05

0.16 

-0.21* 

739

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

should  be  devoted  to  modifying  the  practice  after  the 
receiving units have experienced it. 
Effects of modifications introduced by core members 
Hypotheses related to core members (2a and 2c) are weakly 
supported  by  the  data.  For  instance,  modifications  created 
by  core  members  decreased  hazard  rate  of  CotW  by  68% 
and  those  modifications  created  by  non-core  members 
decreased  hazard  rate  by  24%,  but  the  difference  is  only 
marginally significant (p=.09).  
One  possible  reason  why  the  effects  are  not  as  strong  as 
anticipated is that the operationalization of core members—
top 10% contributors—might be arbitrary. According to this 
operationalization,  some  peripheral  members  might  be 
labeled as core members or vice versa, which might explain 
the relatively low significance.   
Second, 
the  current  core-ness  measurement,  which 
essentially measures people’s contribution levels, might not 
be  a  good  proxy.  There  are  two  possible  underlying 

Figure 3. Temporal patterns of the modifications on CotW as 

the percent of all modifications completed during each 

collaboration period in 147 Wikiprojects. 

the people with external ties, the difference between being 
core  members  and  non-core  members  is  not  significant 
(χ2=.62,  P  =.43).  The  results  support  Hypothesis  2c 
partially. 
Models  5-12  present  similar  patterns  as  Models  1-4.  For 
example, similar to Model 1, Model 5 shows that a one-unit 
increase  in  pre-implementation  modification  increases  the 
contributions  received  by  CotW  target  articles  by  0.7%2 
(P > .05), while a one-unit increase in post-implementation 
modification increases the contributions by 19%3 (P < .01).  
The results collectively support Hypotheses 1, and 2b, and 
provide partial support for Hypothesis 2a and 2c.  
DISCUSSION 
Modification timing of imported practice 
Research by Tyre and Orlikowski [45] as well as our own, 
although conducted in different organization settings, reveal 
similar patterns of new practice modifications (see Figure 9, 
top  and  bottom).  Specifically,  we  find  that  a  substantial 
proportion of modifications were made relatively soon after 
receiving the new practice and far fewer modifications were 
made  afterwards.  The  underlying  psychological  process 
might be as follows: when the recipient site receives a new 
practice, people are excited to adopt it yet believe that they 
can improve its potential value by modifying it. However, 
after implementing the practice for a while, people tend to 
become  reluctant  to  make  changes.  When  the  imported 
practice does not achieve expected performance, they might 
simply  abandon  rather  attempt  to  further  modify  the 
practice. 
However,  empirical  analysis  reveals  that  modifications 
introduced  before  implementation  are  less  effective  than 
those  introduced  after  implementation.  Results  show  that 
the  benefits  of  pre-implementation  modifications  are  one 
order  of  magnitude 
than  post-implementation 
modifications.  A  one-unit  increase  in  pre-implementation 
modification  decreased  the  hazard  of  failure  by  only  3%, 
while 
in  post-implementation 
modification  decreased  the  hazard  of  failure  by  62%. 
Similarly,  a  one-unit 
in  pre-implementation 
modifications  increased  member  contributions  on  targeted 
articles  by  only  0.7%,  while  a  one-unit  increase  in  post-
implementation  modifications  increased  the  contributions 
by 19%.  
The results suggest an alternative way to treat an imported 
practice. It might be better for a recipient unit to change the 
imported  practice  only  slightly—if  at  all—before  trying  it 
because 
(although 
initially  deemed  sensible  and  promising)  minimally 
improve  practice  utilization.  In  contrast,  more  resources 

pre-implementation  modifications 

a  one-unit 

increase 

lower 

increase 

2 0.7% = e^0.007-1 
3 19% = e^0.17-1 

740

Figure 4. Temporal patterns of new practice modifications as 
the percent of all modifications completed during each month in 

eight plants of a big manufacturing company. The graph is 

from Tyre and Orlikowski’s study [45]. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

in 

thus 

influential 

the  project  and 

mechanisms  of  the  effects  of  modifications  introduced  by 
core  members.  The  “expertise-based”  mechanism  suggests 
that  core  members  are  more  experienced  and  better 
understand  the  local  project.  Thus  they  can  better  identify 
or  proactively  search  for  effective  modifications.  The 
“influence-based”  mechanism  suggests  that  core  members 
are  more 
their 
modification suggestions are more likely to be accepted by 
other project members. Contribution levels might be a first 
order of approximation of the expertise or influence people 
have in the projects. However, this study will benefit from a 
closer examination on the roles of core members play in the 
practice  adaptation  process  and  more  nuanced  and  precise 
measurements  of  member  core-ness.  Future  work  should 
attempt to address these aspects. 
Generalization to offline organizations 
This  chapter  proposes  a  contingency  theory  aimed  at 
answering  one  management  question  that  applies  to  any 
online  community  or  offline  organization  that  attempts  to 
transfer  best  practices  from  one  unit  to  another.  The 
empirical study presented in this chapter provides evidence 
that the theory holds in the context of online communities. 
However,  it  remains  unknown  to  what  extent  the  findings 
may be generalized to an offline context.  
One  conjecture  is  that  the  findings  might  be  easier  to 
translate to offline organizations that share the some of the 
same  features  as  online  communities,  especially  those 
“organic organizations”. Roughly fifty years ago, Burns and 
Stalker  [9]  proposed  the  concept  of  “organic  management 
system”  as  an  alternative  to  bureaucratic  management 
systems  (what  they  called  a  “mechanistic  system”).  They 
suggested  that  organic  systems  and  mechanistic  systems 
represent  two  poles  of  organizing  forms:  a  mechanistic 
system  is  highly  formal,  rigid  and  centralized,  while  the 
organic  system  is  informal,  dynamic  and  flat.  Organic 
management  systems  feature  “the  contributive  nature  of 
special knowledge and experience to the common task” and 
“lateral  rather  than  a  vertical  direction  of  communication 
through  the  organization”  ([9],  Page  121).  Organizations 
fall  on  different  positions  on  the  organic-mechanistic 
spectrum.  For  example,  universities,  offline  volunteer 
organizations,  design  studios  and  research  labs  are  more 
organic  and  thus  more  similar  to  online  communities  in 
terms  of  organization  structures  than,  for  example,  the 
military  and  government,  which  are  more  mechanistic. 
Recently,  there  has  been  an  increasing  trend  to  adapt 
organizations to be “more organic” [13,14,29,38]. 
Given  the  similarity  between  organic  organizations  and 
online communities, we conjecture that the findings of this 
work  might  be  easier  to  transfer  to  organic  offline 
organizations  as  compared  to  mechanistic  organizations. 
However,  this  conjecture  must  be  regarded  with  caution 
until  it  is  confirmed  by  empirical  work.  Our  intent  of 
connecting online communities and organic organizations is 
to stimulate readers to bridge the CSCW and organization 

the 

science  areas,  and  consider  new  perspectives  in  studying 
important  organizational  phenomenon  in  both  new  and 
traditional organization forms.  
CONCLUSION 
In  this  paper,  we  propose  a  contingency  perspective  to 
understand  the  process  of  incorporating  and  adapting  best 
practice  within  online  communities.  We  conducted 
quantitative  analysis  on 
transfer  of  a  quality-
improvement  practice  between  146  Wikiprojects  within 
Wikipedia. The results show that modifications were more 
helpful  if  they  were  introduced  after  the  receiving  project 
already  had  experience  with 
imported  practice. 
Modifications were more effective if they were introduced 
by people who had experience in a variety of other projects. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
We  thank  Yochai  Benkler,  Yuqing  Ren,  Jason  Hong,  and 
the members of the GroupLens at University of Minnesota 
for  helpful  feedback.  We  also  thank  Doug  Phillips  and 
Jacob Thebault-Spieker for editing help. This research was 
supported  by  NSF  grants  IIS-1111166,  IIS-1217559,  IIS-
0968484,  IIS-1111124  and  IIS-1149797,  Google  Faculty 
Awards, Google Social Interactions program, and Facebook 
PhD Fellowship. 
REFERENCES 

the 

1. Terry L Amburgey, Dawn Kelly, and William P Barnett.

1993. Resetting the Clock: The Dynamics of
Organizational Change and Failure. Administrative
Science Quarterly: 51–73.

2. Linda Argote and Paul Ingram. 2000. Knowledge

Transfer: A Basis for Competitive Advantage in Firms.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes
82, 1: 150–169.

3. Linda Argote. 2012. Organizational learning: Creating,
retaining and transferring knowledge. Springer Science
& Business Media.

4. Linda Argote and Ella Miron-Spektor. 2011.

Organizational learning: From experience to knowledge.
Organization science 22, 5: 1123–1137.

5. Kenneth J. Arrow. 1974. The limits of organization. W.

W. Norton & Company.

6. Timothy T Baldwin and J Kevin Ford. 1994. Transfer of

7.

training: A review and directions for future research.
The training and development sourcebook 180.
Joel AC Baum and Paul Ingram. 1998. Survival-
Enhancing Learning in the Manhattan Hotel Industry,
1898–1980. Management Science , 996-1016.

8. Yochai Benkler. 2002. Coase’s Penguin, or, Linux and“

The Nature of the Firm.” Yale Law Journal: 369–446.
9. Tom E Burns and George Macpherson Stalker. 1961.

The management of innovation. University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign’s Academy for Entrepreneurial
Leadership Historical Research Reference in
Entrepreneurship.

10. Brian Butler, Elisabeth Joyce, and Jacqueline Pike.

2008. Don’t look now, but we've created a bureaucracy:
the nature and roles of policies and rules in wikipedia.

741

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

25. Linsu Kim and Richard R Nelson. 2000. Technology,

learning, and innovation: Experiences of newly
industrializing economies. Cambridge University Press.
26. Robert E Kraut, Paul Resnick, Sara Kiesler, et al. 2012.

Building successful online communities: Evidence-
based social design. Mit Press.

27. Travis Kriplean, Ivan Beschastnikh, and David W

McDonald. 2008. Articulations of wikiwork: uncovering
valued work in wikipedia through barnstars.
Proceedings of the 2008 ACM conference on Computer
supported cooperative work, ACM, 47–56.

28. Bruce Kogut and Udo Zander. 1993. Knowledge of the
Firm and the Evolutionary Theory of the Multinational
Corporation. Journal of International Business Studies
24, 4: 625–645.

29. Edward E Lawler, Susan Albers Mohrman, and George

Benson. 2001. Organizing for high performance:
Employee involvement, TQM, reengineering, and
knowledge management in the Fortune 1000: The CEO
report. Jossey-Bass.

30. Sunkee Lee, Florian Rittiner, and Gabriel Szulanski.
2015. The Past, Present, and Future of Organizational
Learning Research A Conversation With Professor
Linda Argote. Journal of Management Inquiry

31. Steven A Lippman and Richard P Rumelt. 1982.

Uncertain imitability: An analysis of interfirm
differences in efficiency under competition. The Bell
Journal of Economics: 418–438.

32. Barbara Levitt and James G. March. 1988.

Organizational learning. Annual review of sociology 14,
1988: 319–340.

33. Kimberly Ling, Gerard Beenen, Pamela Ludford, et al.

2005. Using social psychology to motivate contributions
to online communities. Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication 10 (4).

34. Will Mitchell and Kulwant Singh. 1993. Death of the

lethargic: Effects of expansion into new technical
subfields on performance in a firm’s base business.
Organization Science 4, 2: 152–180.

35. Jakob Nielsen. 1993. Iterative user-interface design.

Computer 26, 11: 32–41.

36. Wanda J Orlikowski. 1992. Learning from notes:

Organizational issues in groupware implementation.
Proceedings of the 1992 ACM conference on Computer-
supported cooperative work, ACM, 362–369.

37. Wanda J Orlikowski. 1996. Improvising organizational
transformation over time: A situated change perspective.
Information systems research 7, 1: 63–92.

38. Craig L Pearce and Jay A Conger. 2002. Shared

leadership: Reframing the hows and whys of leadership.
Sage Publications.

39. Ben Shneiderman. 1992. Designing the user interface:

strategies for effective human-computer interaction.
Addison-Wesley Reading, MA.

40. Jitendra V Singh, Robert J House, and David J Tucker.

1986. Organizational change and organizational
mortality. Administrative Science Quarterly: 587–611.

Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human 
factors in computing systems, ACM, 1101–1110.
11. Jeffrey L Cummings and Bing-Sheng Teng. 2003.

Transferring R&D knowledge: the key factors affecting
knowledge transfer success. Journal of Engineering and
Technology Management 20, 1-2: 39–68.

12. Eric D. Darr, Linda Argote, and Dennis Epple. 1995.

The acquisition, transfer, and depreciation of knowledge
in service organizations: Productivity in franchises.
Management Science 41(11), 1750–1762.

13. Angelo S DeNisi, Michael A Hitt, and Susan E Jackson.

2003. The knowledge-based approach to sustainable
competitive advantage. Managing knowledge for
sustained competitive advantage: Designing strategies
for effective human resource management: 3–33.

14. Vanessa Urch Druskat and Jane V Wheeler. 2004. How
to lead a self-managing team. MIT Sloan Management
Review 45, 4: 65.

15. Stanislav D Dobrev, Tai-Young Kim, and Michael T

Hannan. 2001. Dynamics of Niche Width and Resource
Partitioning1. American Journal of Sociology 106, 5:
1299–1337.

16. Glen Dowell and Anand Swaminathan. 2000. Racing

and back-pedalling into the future: New product
introduction and organizational mortality in the US
bicycle industry, 1880-1918. Organization Studies 21, 2:
405–431.

17. Martha S Feldman and Brian T Pentland.

Reconceptualizing Organizational Routines as a Source
of Flexibility and Change. Administrative Science
Quarterly 48, 1: 94–118.

18. Craig S Galbraith. 1990. Transferring core

manufacturing technologies in high-technology firms.
California Management Review 32, 4: 56.

19. Deborah H Gruenfeld, Paul V. Martorana, and Elliott T.

Fan. 2000. What Do Groups Learn from Their
Worldliest Members? Direct and Indirect Influence in
Dynamic Teams. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes 82, 1: 45–59.

20. Morten T Hansen. 1999. The search-transfer problem:

The role of weak ties in sharing knowledge across
organization subunits. Administrative science quarterly
44, 1: 82–111.

21. Morten T Hansen. 2002. Knowledge Networks:

Explaining Effective Knowledge Sharing in Multiunit
Companies. Organization science 13, 3: 232–248.

22. Robert J. Jensen and Gabriel Szulanski. 2007. Template

Use and the Effectiveness of Knowledge Transfer.
Management Science 53, April 2015: 1716–1730.
23. Aimée A Kane, Linda Argote, and John M Levine.
Knowledge transfer between groups via personnel
rotation: Effects of social identity and knowledge
quality. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes 96, 1: 56–71.

24. Shilpa Kannan. HOW MCDONALD'S CONQUERED

INDIA, BBC News, Delhi. 19 November 2014.
http://www.bbc.com/news/business-30115555

742

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

41. Gabriel Szulanski. 2000. The Process of Knowledge

Transfer: A Diachronic Analysis of Stickiness.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes
82, 1: 9–27.

42. Gabriel Szulanski and ROBERT J. JENSEN. 2006.

Presumptive adaptation and the effectiveness of
knowledge transfer. Strategic Management Journal 957,
February: 12.

43. Gabriel Szulanski. Exploring Internal Stickiness:

Impediments to the Transfer of Best Practice Within the
Firm. 17: 27–43.

44. Leigh Thompson, Dedre Gentner, and Jeffrey

Loewenstein. Avoiding Missed Opportunities in
Managerial Life: Analogical Training More Powerful
Than Individual Case Training. Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes 82, 1: 60–75.

45. Marcie J Tyre and Wanda J Orlikowski. Windows of

Opportunity: Temporal Patterns of Technological
Adaptation in Organizations. 5, 1: 98–118.

46. Morten Warncke-Wang, Vladislav R Ayukaev, Brent
Hecht, and Loren G Terveen. 2015. The Success and
Failure of Quality Improvement Projects in Peer
Production Communities. Proceedings of the 18th ACM
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
& Social Computing, ACM, 743–756.

47. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Barnstars
48. Sidney G. Winter and Gabriel Szulanski. 2001.

Replication as Strategy. Organization Science 12, 6:
730–743.

49. Sidney G. Winter, Gabriel Szulanski, Dimo Ringov, and

Robert J. Jensen. 2012. Reproducing knowledge:
inaccurate replication and failure in franchise
organizations. April 2015.

50. Jisun Yu and Srilata Zaheer. 2010. Building a process
model of local adaptation of practices: A study of Six
Sigma implementation in Korean and US firms. Journal
of International Business Studies. 41, 3: 475–499.

51. Haiyi Zhu, Robert E. Kraut, and Aniket Kittur. 2012.

Organizing without formal organization: group
identification, goal setting and social modeling in
directing online production. In Proceedings of the ACM
2012 conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work (pp. 935-944). ACM.

52. Haiyi Zhu, Robert E. Kraut, and Aniket Kittur. 2012.

Effectiveness of shared leadership in online
communities. In Proceedings of the ACM 2012
conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
(pp. 407-416). ACM.

743

