CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Can Visualization of Contributions Support Fairness in
Collaboration? Findings from Meters in an Online Game

Ryan Kelly, Leon Watts, Stephen J. Payne

Department of Computer Science

University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom
{r.m.kelly, l.watts, s.j.payne}@bath.ac.uk

ABSTRACT
In this paper we consider how visualizations might support
judgements about fairness in collaborative work. We present
a qualitative investigation of meters, existing artefacts that
enable awareness of contributions in the online game World of
Warcraft. Through in-depth interviews with game players, we
draw attention to the value of meters as tools for self-reﬂection
and group evaluation. Yet we also describe problematic con-
sequences that arise as a result of meters, distinguishing their
usage as in-the-moment awareness tools from instruments
used after the fact to apportion credit and blame. We argue
that representations like meters may be enough to provoke
initial questions about fairness, but are likely to undermine the
efforts of collaborators if they fail to combine a set of indices
that reﬂect important aspects of individual work in the context
of team activity. We consider broader lessons for the way in
which future designs might aim to support fairness in collab-
orative systems, pointing to multidimensional mechanisms
adapted speciﬁcally to real-time or retrospective usage.

Author Keywords
Awareness; Fairness; Social Coordination; World of Warcraft

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.3 Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g. HCI):
Collaborative Computing

INTRODUCTION
Developing systems to support collaboration is a signiﬁcant
research challenge, and part of that challenge involves under-
standing the properties of group interaction that are relevant
to harmonious working. One such issue that has received little
explicit attention in the HCI and CSCW literatures is that of
fairness—in particular, how perceptions about fairness impact
a group’s work process. Fairness is an important value that
guides many social exchanges and feeds into the dynamic
coordination of collaborative group work. In particular, per-
ceptions about what is fair can inﬂuence the allocation of work
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. Request
permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW ’16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA
©2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819977

664

among a team, the level of effort that is invested, and, later, the
distribution of rewards from a group’s effort [23]. Concerns
about fairness can present problems for groups; for exam-
ple, the well-known ‘free-rider problem’ occurs when “one or
more members of a group do not do their fair share of work
on a group project” [6]. Prevention of free-riding requires
that groups attend to the status of ongoing contributions to en-
sure that work is completed in line with fairness norms. Such
monitoring may, however, be difﬁcult in computer-mediated
environments where awareness of one’s colleagues is low and
knowledge about effort is incomplete [18, 24].
Research has long espoused the importance of awareness for
supporting collaborative work (e.g. [13, 15, 19]), and a range
of technologies have been developed to support awareness
among distributed teams [15, 22, 25]. However, no research
has yet explored the question of how awareness mechanisms
might speciﬁcally support fairness, or the impact that such
support might have on the behaviour of collaborative teams. In
this paper, we explore these issues through a qualitative study
of meters in the online game World of Warcraft (WoW). Meters
are interface widgets that quantify and visualize individual
contributions to the overall team effort. We regard meters as
an example of how support for awareness in service of fairness
judgements might be implemented in a collaborative system.
Our study focuses on how meters impact the work of WoW
teams during complex, intrinsically collaborative ‘raid’ tasks
in which players must work together to ensure success.
The present investigation describes how meters beneﬁt groups
in WoW, both in terms of enabling immediate assessments
about contributions and in supporting retrospective review over
the longer term. However, we also highlight a range of ten-
sions and sociotechnical concerns that arise as a result of how
meters are interpreted by players. We argue that meter-like
representations inevitably undermine valuable contributions to
group work, particularly when those contributions are difﬁcult
to measure. This research extends previous work on feedback
systems for groups (e.g. [1, 4, 11, 12, 29, 36]) to a context
beyond the realm of the laboratory, and derives lessons for en-
abling awareness of contributions and judgements of fairness
in other collaborative work applications.

BACKGROUND & RELATED WORK
This study is at the intersection of three areas of research:
fairness [6, 17, 23, 30], awareness technologies [13, 15, 19,
22] and collaboration in WoW [2, 3, 33]. Here we consider

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

how fairness might be supported through visualizations that
promote awareness of contributions, before presenting meters
as a case in point. We then provide contextual grounding on
WoW and the use of meters within WoW teams.

Understanding Fairness in Collaborative Work
There are many rules one can follow in order to determine
what is fair in the course of collaborative work. Perhaps the
simplest rule is that of equality [23]. That is, people may be
expected to provide equal or near-equal input to a project if
there is no good reason to behave otherwise. But while the
rule of “what is equal is fair” may be satisfactory in many
situations, it is unlikely to remain sufﬁcient when one begins
to consider the differential types of work that collaborative
projects typically involve, as well as the range of skills and
capacities available to project teams. Even if no differences in
capacities exist, there may be a predetermined distribution of
work that deviates from equality and yet still qualiﬁes as fair.
Research has identiﬁed that judgements about what is fair can
be inﬂuenced by a range of principles, including perceived
needs, rights, and entitlements, as well as claims about merit,
status, ability, efforts, or mitigating circumstances [9, 23, 30].
Each of these factors serves to legitimise particular patterns
of behaviour. In other words, fairness can be characterised in
terms of judgements about whether deviations from equality
are legitimate in one’s current situation [38]. In collaborative
work, an understanding of job roles, for example, may pre-
scribe a speciﬁc distribution of tasks, but task assignments
may be adjusted by knowledge about current workload or
other relevant factors that legitimise unequal contributions.
Fairness Theory [17] argues that assessments of legitimacy
occur through counterfactual thought; in short, comparing
what is to what should, could, or might have been in alternate
scenarios. Comparisons between imagined and actual states
allow one to assess whether current behaviour is justiﬁed, and
hence permissible, or whether there is evidence to suggest
that what is happening violates some normative standard and
is thus unfair [17]. The only way to answer questions about
what is fair is to collect information pertinent to the issues
about which one is concerned. Fairness is thus inferred from
behavioural information, invocation of relevant fairness rules,
and an understanding of how those rules should be applied in
one’s current social context [30]. However, this makes fairness
problematic in that it can be highly subjective; individuals
may weigh rules differently, and there may be differences of
opinion about what is legitimate in a given situation.
In collaborative work, perceptions about fairness are neces-
sarily tied to an understanding of the contributions that are
expected of one’s collaborators, as well as the extent to which
those contributions are being fulﬁlled. This means that teams
need to monitor the status of work to assess whether coworkers
are exceeding, adhering to, or failing to fulﬁl commitments
[30] relevant to the work situation. However, monitoring the
status of work is known to be difﬁcult when information about
the actions and efforts of one’s colleagues is not easily ac-
cessible [13, 21]. This issue was emphasised in early work
by Galegher & Kraut [18], who found that groups working
face-to-face perceived greater fairness in their work process

than other groups working via mediated communication tech-
nologies. The implication here is that groups may ﬁnd it
especially difﬁcult to make judgements about fairness when
the completion of contributions is obscured by technology.
In summary, we deﬁne fairness as a perceived quality that
arises through a process of social judgement about what is
legitimate in a given situation. In collaborative systems, it may
be difﬁcult to perform these judgements without sufﬁcient
awareness, deﬁned as “an understanding of the activities of
others, which provides a context for your own activity” ([13] p.
107). Following previous research that has demonstrated the
value of visual information for building awareness in teams
(e.g. [15, 20, 22, 25]), we focus on how contributions can
be presented in the form of a visualization. We reason that
information about contributions will be of intrinsic beneﬁt to
teams by improving collective awareness of individual efforts.
This might then allow individuals to engage in information
gathering, counterfactual thought, and checking adherence to
commitments, all of which are relevant to judging fairness.

Visualizing Contributions to Collaborative Work
Previous research has explored how contributions can be vi-
sualized, and although these studies were not designed to
investigate the issue of fairness, they are instructive in terms
of understanding how visualizations inﬂuence group work.
Studies of group mirrors—tools that provide feedback to
groups by reﬂecting speciﬁc aspects of their activity—have
found that visual information can promote equality of partici-
pation [1, 4, 36]. For example, Second Messenger [11, 12] is
a system that records speech acts in face-to-face discussions
and presents these contributions as a histogram on a shared
display. The system was found to increase equality of partici-
pation by encouraging over-contributors to surrender the ﬂoor
to their teammates [11, 12]. Turning to text-based communi-
cation, Leshed et al. [28, 29] describe GroupMeter, a system
that allows groups to reﬂect on their language use through
visualizations of word count and the frequency of agreement
words. They found that visualizations led to improved levels of
agreement compared to situations in which visualizations were
not present. The Participation Tool described in [27] caused
groups of students to increase the length of their utterances, a
change that was associated with improved coordination and
information sharing. Interestingly, students using the tool felt
more able to spot free-riding through monitoring of group
activities, implying that information about contributions can
indeed be useful for fairness-related assessments.
Other work has examined the role of visual information in
promoting awareness of efforts during collaborative writing.
Many modern word processing applications provide edit his-
tories that record changes made to a document. An interview
study by Birnholtz & Ibara [5] revealed that teams sometimes
use these histories to identify, monitor, and evaluate individ-
ual contributions. Recent design work by Wang et al. [40]
presents DocuViz, a tool that utilises the edit history of Google
Docs to present a timeline visualization of changes made to
a document. The authors highlight how the visual informa-
tion can help to draw attention to “seismic activity”—patterns
of work that appear to have been especially contentious and

665

thus worthy of further investigation. Similar representations
have also been demonstrated as useful for unveiling patterns
of collaboration on Wikipedia [39].
While these studies suggest that visualizations of contribution
can be of beneﬁt to groups, they also draw attention to chal-
lenges that arise as a result of making contributions visible.
For example, collaborators may fail to act on a visualization
if they believe that it does not accurately represent their own
behaviour [12]. Moreover, feedback about effort can lead pre-
viously successful groups to adopt detrimental strategies, e.g.
by encouraging groups to aim for equality of participation,
despite equality leading to poorer performance [11]. Infor-
mation about contributions may also have negative relational
consequences by provoking discontent about how work will
be evaluated by others [5]. This may be especially true if a
mechanism does not represent all of the contributions that are
meaningful to a task [40].
These issues stress that further research is required to under-
stand the impact that visualizations have on group behaviours,
both in producing positive outcomes but also in how they may
generate disharmony. Other than the research on collaborative
writing described above, prior studies have been short-term,
experimental, and focused on evaluating interactive prototypes,
suggesting a particular need for research in uncontrived con-
texts. Most importantly for our research, there is a lack of
exploration of speciﬁc parameters that would be required to
support fairness judgements. Studies of the extent to which
existing awareness artefacts are, and are not, sufﬁcient for
judging fairness would be instructive in this regard.
With these considerations in mind, we turn to the example of
meters, a type of mechanism that measures the contributions
that players make to groups in the online game World of
Warcraft (WoW). Our interest in WoW is motivated by the
fact that grouping in the game world is prevalent and often
highly regimented, involving structured divisions of labour,
tight coupling between individuals, and high coordination
requirements. This means that the ‘work’ required of players
is similar in several respects to collaboration in other settings—
several authors characterise WoW players as ‘working for fun’
(e.g. [8, 42]) and studies suggest that ﬁndings about game
groups can provide lessons that apply to other CSCW settings
[2, 3, 33, 34]. WoW grouping also involves concerns relevant
to fairness, including the prevention of free-riding [31] and
the distribution of rewards from teamwork [26].
In this paper we report ﬁndings from an interview study with
10 WoW players concerning their personal experiences with
meters. Our aim is to understand how meters support players’
inferences about the contributions of their teammates and, by
extension, how the information can be used to permit judge-
ments about the fairness of contributions. Furthermore, we
investigate how deﬁciencies of meters can make judgements
of fairness problematic. We also probe additional challenges,
beyond those reported previously in the literature, that arise as
a result of publicising contributions in a meter.
To provide contextual grounding for our study, the following
section offers an overview of WoW and the collaborative situ-

666

SESSION: GAMES

ations in which meters are used to record contributions. We
then outline the qualities of meters that we believe are relevant
to fairness, casting each as a more general design parameter
that could be leveraged in other tools that aim to promote
awareness of contributions.

Study Setting: World of Warcraft Raid Groups
World of Warcraft is a massively-multiplayer online game
(MMOG) in which players create a character and enter a vir-
tual environment populated by various three-dimensional fan-
tasy avatars (orcs, elves, gnomes and the like). Like other
MMOGs, WoW emphasises the collaborative and social as-
pects of gaming [14]. Players are encouraged to communicate
through voice- and text-based chat tools in order to form teams
and quest together. Grouping is especially prevalent at later
stages of the game, where players must band together in teams
of 10 or 25 to defeat challenging dungeons known as ‘raid’ en-
counters [2, 3]. Raids typically last several hours, and involve
a series of battles with increasingly tough ‘boss’ enemies [2].
Defeating each boss allows players to acquire rewards known
as ‘loot’, yet only a limited number of items are acquired from
each encounter, meaning that no individual is guaranteed to
be rewarded for their efforts [2, 26].
What makes raids compelling is that they are by no means
straightforward, with each requiring a great deal of advance
planning and intense coordination among players. Moreover,
the risks associated with raiding are high, and each encounter
requires teams to follow a speciﬁc strategy. The failure of one
or more individuals to execute this strategy can result in death
for the entire team, an outcome known as a ‘raid wipe’. Since
wipes are costly, it is critical for players to participate fully
in a raid if they want to maximise their chances of success.
These issues make collaborator awareness and accountability
central concerns in raid activity.
In raids, accountability is partially supported by formalised
social and ludic roles [3], each of which establishes a different
type of high-level division of labour among members of a raid
team. Social roles are those that are created by the players
themselves. For instance, all raids have a leader who acts as a
kind of project manager. He or she is typically responsible for
creating the group, assigning tasks before the start of the raid,
and outlining attack strategies. Other social roles include the
‘communications ofﬁcer’, responsible for issuing instructions
during battles, and the ‘loot master’, a player who oversees
the distribution of rewards from raid activities. These features
make raids akin to real-world work groups.
By contrast, ludic roles are deﬁned by each player’s ‘character
class’. Different classes have different abilities that deﬁne
individual responsibilities within a raid setting. Some classes,
like Warriors and Death Knights, must protect the raid by
holding the attention of bosses and other enemies (a practice
known as ‘tanking’). Classes like Warlocks, Mages, Hunters,
and Rogues focus on dealing damage required to defeat ene-
mies. Classes with healing abilities (Druids, Priests, Shamans)
are responsible for restoring the health of other players and
providing benefactions. Not only do these roles create inter-
dependencies within raid teams (characters responsible for

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

tanking enemies will not live long without the aid of heal-
ers, and neither healers nor tanks can complete a raid without
the support of damage dealers), they also establish certain
expectations about contributions in advance. For instance, it is
expected that healers will keep everyone else alive; thus, if a
character dies during a raid, suspicion of fault may initially be
directed towards players responsible for healing [3].

Awareness in Raid Groups
Awareness and monitoring of teammates are critical require-
ments for raids: because the line between success and fail-
ure is often very thin, teams can not afford to tolerate non-
participation or free-riding from their members. There are at
least three ways in which players build awareness in WoW:
• First, players can explicitly communicate about their activ-
ities via text-based chat channels. However, because text
chat is cumbersome (players need to use their hands to con-
trol their character) the majority of groups use third party
programs to enable voice communication [8].

• Second, as a mimetic representation of its user, an avatar
naturally conveys information useful for awareness as it
moves around the virtual environment [19]. This means
that simple observation of the physical positioning of one’s
comrades, as well as the animations portrayed by their avatar,
may sometimes be sufﬁcient to assess whether or not they
appear to be doing as they should be.

• Finally, WoW has a number of interface elements that sup-
port awareness, e.g. a minimap that shows a player’s current
location relative to others in the environment. These visual
elements lower coordination overheads by alleviating the
need to explicitly request information [34].

Prior work on awareness in WoW and other virtual environ-
ments has identiﬁed some deﬁciencies with the above methods
[7, 14, 31, 32, 34] but one issue that has not been investigated
is that these channels have proven to be insufﬁcient for mon-
itoring the contributions of raid members. To address this,
the majority of raid groups use meters as a mechanism for
capturing contributions and promoting more detailed aware-
ness of actions. These meters are a type of interface ‘add-on’
that players install to augment the standard WoW interface,
meaning that players are not ordinarily able to inspect the
contributions of other raid members without meter support.

Meters as Visualizations of Contribution
Figure 1 displays an example of a meter from WoW. The me-
ter works by parsing data from the system layer of the WoW
client. In order to see this data, each member of the raid must
have the relevant add-on installed. (Installation of a meter
is often a requirement to participate in organised raid teams
[37].) Members of the team are represented by coloured bars,
with each representing the damage an individual has inﬂicted
to the group’s enemies. (Meters also exist for other activities
like healing, and are qualitatively similar to that of Figure 1.)
All damage-related actions are collapsed into a single metric
and are automatically presented in aggregated form. Players
are ranked in accordance with total damage output, with those
at the top of the meter contributing the most damage. The

667

Figure 1. Screenshot of the ReCount addon, a damage meter used in
World of Warcraft.

colour of each bar pertains to the player’s character class and
is consistent with other aspects of WoW—yellow is associ-
ated with Rogue characters, green with Hunters, and so on.
The numbers overlaying each bar pertain to each individual’s
contribution, representing (from left to right in Figure 1) to-
tal damage inﬂicted by the player, their damage per second
(known as ‘DPS’), and their contribution as a percentage of the
overall group effort. These numbers, as well as the position
and size of the bars, ﬂuctuate in real time to match current
performance. Thus, one player may begin at the top of the
meter but can eventually be overtaken by others.
It is important to note that the interpretation of meter data has
its subtleties. In Figure 1, for example, the players represented
by bars 9 and 11 are healers who are not expected to deal
damage. Thus it is immediately possible for other players
to make an assessment about teammates—if a healer is high
on the damage meter, it would suggest that he or she is not
performing their duties in the correct way.
Beyond the surface representation of damage, players can
interrogate the meter data in several ways. This makes it
possible to explore actions that are not directly related to
damage but are nonetheless important to success on raids. For
example, some classes in WoW have abilities that they must
use at speciﬁc points in a ﬁght, e.g. ‘Mages’ have a spell that
turns an enemy into a benign character, preventing its attacks.
Players will be assigned these duties in advance, and most
meter applications are capable of recording their use. Clicking
through submenus allows groups to investigate this data as
an additional source of information about the effectiveness
of a player’s contribution. However, raids are frequently too
intense to permit extended interrogation, meaning that this
type of investigation typically occurs after the fact (as will be
evidenced by the results of our study).

Design Parameters of Meters Relevant to Fairness
We contend that meters have a number of properties that are
pertinent to supporting fairness in collaborative work. Here we
underscore these properties in terms of two design parameters,
positioning each in accordance with our earlier theoretical
considerations about fairness.

First, the hierarchical ordering and delineation of players based
on contributed work allows for social comparison [16] be-
tween individual contributions. This is important because
fairness is inherently social and people often assess fairness by
evaluating their own situation vis-`a-vis that of referent others
[17]. We believe that allowing for comparison of one per-
son’s contribution relative to the next will enable collaborators
to answer important questions related to fairness (e.g. “Am
I contributing fairly? Are those other people being fair?”).
Moreover, facilitating social comparison allows collaborators
to make judgements about similarity in contributions. This
should support fairness by allowing collaborators to observe
deviations from equality; subjective judgements can then be
made about the legitimacy of such deviations, and whether or
not it appears that collaborators are adhering to commitments.
The second parameter pertains to disclosure of detail about
contributions. That is, damage metrics are shown at a level
of detail that allows for social comparisons to be meaningful.
Prior research on awareness highlights the inherent tension
between the collective requirement to share information and
the individual need to avoid potentially damaging disclosures.
This is usually described as the problem of maintaining privacy
[25]. Some approaches to awareness, including social translu-
cence [15], indicate that obfuscating information about actions
can allow participants in a collaborative system to be aware of
who is around and active, without violating privacy. However,
simply knowing that others are ‘active’ would likely prove
insufﬁcient for judging fairness—collaborators may wish to
answer more speciﬁc questions, such as who is doing what, as
well as how much or how well work is being done.
One way to think about this parameter is in terms of a contin-
uum between the mere fact that a team member is expending
effort through to a complete representation of what that effort
entails. If sufﬁcient information about work is disclosed, one
might be able to answer questions about whether particular
levels of performance are appropriate to the current situation.
The type of meter shown in Figure 1 represents a single point
along this continuum. Simply eyeballing the mechanism is
enough to know who is in the raid and whether or not they
are active, especially when combined with visual information
available in the standard WoW interface (e.g. which avatars
are nearby, and what actions they appear to be performing).
Comparisons are then made more precise through the pro-
vision of exact ﬁgures about each player’s damage, thereby
indicating their current level of contribution. In this way, the
meter not only allows players to compare their contributions
but also to reason about the difference between rankings.
It is important to emphasise that we do not regard meters as a
panacea for fairness support. Rather, we see meters as a single
point within a broader design space for supporting judgements
about fairness. However, the nature of this space, as well as the
key research challenges that exist within it, are currently not
well deﬁned. An initial and obvious design critique of meters
is that they are limited in scope, providing only a small amount
of information about contributions and roles. Nevertheless,
meters do seem sufﬁciently rich to warrant some degree of
evaluation. Previous work by Taylor [37] noted that players

668

SESSION: GAMES

in WoW are ambivalent about the use of meters. On the one
hand, players ﬁnd them helpful in monitoring performance
and in encouraging friendly competition through observation
of the rankings. On the other, players can feel that their contri-
butions are not meaningfully represented because meters do
not capture all of the effort that is invested into the team. The
potential frustration that might arise from the ambiguity of me-
ter information suggests that future designs could be informed
by a careful analysis of player experiences before, during, and
after raids. The present study ﬁnds that Taylor’s observations
hold true, but also provides a deeper understanding of meters
derived from player narratives, raising new design-relevant
problems for contribution awareness mechanisms.

INTERVIEW STUDY: METHOD
Following the precedent set by earlier work on WoW [2, 3,
14], this study was informed on several levels. First, the lead
author is a former WoW player with several years’ experience
of raiding (50+ raids). This participation supports our analysis
by providing a grounded understanding of the social context
in which our participants’ collaboration occurs [41].
Second, we developed an up-to-date understanding of raid
behaviour by engaging in observation of players completing
current high-level raid content in WoW. Observations were
conducted by watching web streams of raid groups, broadcast
live via Twitch.tv. This phase did not involve collection of
data from players; rather, we took notes about aspects of the
observed raid encounter, including how the raid was organised,
coordinative behaviours performed by players, and the types
of interface elements used. These notes, combined with our
own experiences of WoW, helped shape the questions used in
our third and ﬁnal stage, where we performed semi-structured
interviews with current WoW players. These interviews aimed
to capture players’ experiences of raiding alongside topics
related to the use of damage meters. The ﬁndings we report in
this paper are derived solely from this latter data source.

Participants
We interviewed a total of 7 male and 3 female WoW players.
Interviewees’ ages ranged from 18–46 (M = 30). Interviewees
had been playing WoW for an average of 6 years (range =
4–8.75 years). All had experience of raid encounters ranging
from dungeons in WoW’s initial 2004 release through to those
in its most recent expansion at the time of study (Mists of
Pandaria). Our interviewees had experience with a variety of
ludic roles in WoW raids, including tanking (protecting other
players), dealing damage, and healing. Two players had held
the position of raid leader within their groups.
All interviewees had participated in formal raiding guilds. A
guild is a persistent collective of anywhere between two to sev-
eral hundred players [41]. Raid groups are often comprised of
players from the same guild—effectively, the formal structure
of a guild facilitates persistent grouping [2] and allows certain
policies to be implemented that help to manage raids in the
longer term, e.g. a ‘guild bank’ for storing loot. Two of our in-
terviewees described the current guild of their main character
as casual (raiding occasionally, perhaps 1–2 times per week),
ﬁve stated ‘medium-core’ (2–3 raids every week), and three as

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

‘hardcore’ (4 or more nights every week), though during their
WoW careers most interviewees had moved between guilds
with varying demands of raid commitment. Three informants
had held positions of authority within their guilds. Addition-
ally, all respondents had engaged in raids with their guild and
in ‘pick-up’ raid groups (PUGs). PUGs are one-off collectives
that form to complete a dungeon and then disband afterwards.
Many had experience of PUGs constructed through Blizzard’s
‘Looking for Raid’ (LFR) tool, a system that automates the
allocation of players to raids. These demographic aspects sug-
gested to us that the raid experiences we surveyed were broad
and were not isolated to either casual or hardcore players.

Procedure & Analysis
Interviewees were recruited through word of mouth and posts
on Facebook. Interviews were conducted one-to-one by the
ﬁrst author. Two interviews were face-to-face and eight were
via Skype. Interviews lasted 50–90 minutes, at the discretion
of the interviewee. Interviewees were not paid for their par-
ticipation. Interviewees were told that their responses would
be anonymised. Questions (available as auxiliary material to
this paper) covered a range of raid-related topics, including
how interviewees determined appropriate actions in the con-
text of a raid; the interface elements used to build awareness
of teammates; and how players determined whether others
were contributing properly on raids. We also asked whether
they used meters (which all respondents did) and probed their
opinions and experiences with these mechanisms. Interviews
ended with a short debrief about the purpose of the study.
All interviews were conducted and transcribed by the ﬁrst
author, allowing for early familiarisation with the dataset and
development of initial understanding. We used open and axial
coding [35] to categorise responses. The coding process was
iterative; transcripts were given two complete readings and
initial codes were evaluated and reﬁned through constant com-
parison, with internal consistency strengthened by scrutinising
the data for counter-examples. Codiﬁed concepts were then
structured into the themes that comprise our results. While
it is unclear whether we reached true theoretical saturation,
we were seeing repetition in the content of participants’ state-
ments by the end of data collection, and thus we felt that we
had sufﬁcient data to make a coherent set of claims about the
use of meters in raids.
Our analysis resolved on eight themes. We divide these themes
into three categories of concern: ﬁrst, ﬁve themes relate to how
meters support groups in assessing contributions. One theme
describes the limitations of meters for assessing contributions,
and two ﬁnal themes relate to issues that arise as a result of
publicising contributions. These themes identify both positive
and negative issues from player perspectives. In describing
our results we use quotations to illustrate particular points,
identifying speakers by participant number, gender, and age.

RESULTS
In analysing our results, we found that awareness is of real
concern in the context of raids. Interviewees repeatedly as-
serted the necessity of maintaining an overall understanding of
what is happening at any given time. One participant referred

to this as staying ‘raid aware’, a term that was repeated by
other interviewees. Raid awareness is perhaps best likened
to collaborative workspace awareness [19] in that it relates to
a very general understanding of the group’s status and their
interaction with various entities in the virtual environment. As
one interviewee summarised:

“It’s important to be aware of everyone around you—this
includes healers, tanks, and damage dealers—so you can
spot someone who may be standing in the wrong place,
or may just be in a bad place in general... you need to
focus your eyes on the centre of the screen so you’re able
to watch the boss and the ground for incoming attacks
and keep an eye out for bad positioning. This gives you
the ability to tell them to move, which will avoid wipes.”
[P2, F, 19]

Additionally, raid awareness allows players to make appro-
priate actions by observing the behaviour of others (cf. [13]).
This was elaborated by the same participant as above:

“Being aware of what everyone else is doing allows me
to see when I need to use my own abilities, whether
defensive or offensive, or to swap to a different position.
If I see the rest of my raid move to the other side of the
room, I need to move too. But if I wasn’t raid aware I
wouldn’t be paying attention to them, and thus I’d end
up probably dying from not moving.” [P2, F, 19]

Thus raid awareness is not only related to the interdependent
division of labour among players but also enables players to
adapt and react strategically to changes in the high-pressure
raid environment.

How Meters Support Groups in Evaluating Contributions
Meters were found to support raid groups in making both real-
time and retrospective inferences about contributions. Real-
time assessments were required to assess contributions in the
midst of raid tasks, whereas retrospective judgements were
used to analyse group performance and to identify opportuni-
ties for improvement.

Setting and Monitoring Targets for Performance
One role of meters was to provide players with real-time in-
formation about whether certain performance standards are
being met. This can be of critical importance during tasks
where players must achieve, and subsequently maintain, a
speciﬁc level of performance. Meters provide a resource for
gauging whether one is meeting this threshold, and whether
there are others who may need to increase their effort. This
was important to avoid failure:

“I often look at my damage meter to make sure I’m achiev-
ing the right amount of DPS, this applies to every raider
so that we can kill the boss quickly. If the right amount of
DPS is not met, then the boss can enrage after a certain
amount of time, causing a wipe.” [P2, 19, F]

The fact that meters permit social comparisons means that
players are able to determine what constitutes a legitimate
(and thus ‘fair’) contribution on-the-ﬂy, as evidenced by the
following excerpt:

669

SESSION: GAMES

we’d try to correct that and get them to look further into
their class and learn the right rotation.” [P3, 46, F]

Interestingly, presence on the damage meter can be a sign
that an individual is not making the right contribution. For
example, many raid tasks call for players to control roaming
enemies using traps or immobilising spells. This entails a drop
in damage contribution because the individual in question
must divert his or her offensive capabilities away from the
primary target. Such ‘crowd control’ tasks tend to be assigned
to speciﬁc persons before the start of the raid. If the person
in charge of such a task remains present on the meters while
additional enemies are around, raid members will be aware
that the person in question is not contributing properly:

“In this case if you weren’t doing your job then you were
high on the meter. It’s how we knew the hunter wasn’t
doing his job, when he started to shoot up the DPS meters
because he was just standing still and ﬁring on the boss,
instead of killing the [roaming enemy].” [P9, 21, M]

In this way, meters allow players to be held accountable for
both appropriate and inappropriate actions. However, and as
will be seen later in our results, these judgements can prove
faulty when players rely too heavily on the content of meters
and do not take contextual issues into account.

Enabling Equality in Contributions
Responses suggest that a certain degree of equality in con-
tributions may be desirable in raid groups. In line with our
earlier contentions, the position of each player’s coloured con-
tribution bar within the meter makes assessment of equality
relatively straightforward:

“You could see that by a bar on the DPS meter, as long
as bars are all aligned then everyone’s doing roughly
the same, of course there’s variations but I don’t really
mind... it shows everyone’s putting in a fair amount of
effort.” [P1, 23, F]

Equality in contributions appears to be relevant for two reasons.
The ﬁrst is very much related to fairness and the expectation
that all members contribute: if contributions appear similar
on the meters then group leaders need not devote attention to
underperforming individuals. As described above, deviations
from expected standards can give cause to raise questions
about performance. However, a second reason pertains to the
overall risks of raiding, in that it is better to have an equitable
distribution of effort in favour of a ‘spikier’ or more polarised
output in which a few individuals contribute signiﬁcantly more
than the rest of the group. This latter scenario is much riskier
in a WoW raid setting; if the top contributors disconnect or
are removed from the encounter, e.g. due to the death of their
character, the raid is at a higher risk of failure due to a larger
overall percentage loss of damage output. Concerns such as
these may explain why raid groups spend time training new
or underperforming players, as it is in the collective interest
for contributions to be similar and of a certain (usually high)
standard. It seems to us that meters provide raid groups with
the information required to assess both of these concerns.

“When I started I was poached from a much weaker raid
group... I had to really knuckle down and become a lot
better fast. Meters helped because I could see what others
were casting, and gauge myself against them. If I was
within the warlock group I was doing okay” [P5, 35, M]

Appraising Contributions and Identifying Underperformers
Further to this is the way meters allow groups to address con-
cerns relevant to fairness in participation. Generally this means
leveraging qualities of meters to take action against people
who appear to be underperforming because of consistently low
placement on the meter:

“If you have four people all doing roughly around the
same damage, and then two straggling really badly at the
bottom, you know it’s to do with them, it’s not to do with
the raid or the boss.” [P1, 23, F]

Participants described that teammates are sometimes ‘benched’
on the basis of meters, i.e. that underperformance gives cause
for relegation to a substitute role. However, placement on the
meters is not always enough to know why an individual is
underperforming, and this is important because it reveals how
meters are used to interrogate fairness. Player narratives reveal
two uses. First, underperformance can be a sign of free-riding,
a behaviour that is not uncommon in WoW raids [2] and is
difﬁcult to identify because avatars do not accurately convey
their user’s actual work [31]. Meters allow teams to spot this
type of free-riding:

“Everyone must pull their weight to progress through
raiding... all it takes is for one person to mess up and it’s
a wipe, so everyone must do the tactics and conform to
their role... meters give raid leaders the information to
see who is slacking or failing.” [P4, 18, M]

This quote also highlights the use of meters to see who is ‘fail-
ing’. That is, a player’s placement near the bottom of the meter
does not necessarily mean they are slacking or free-riding, but
could instead be related to ability. This is interesting because it
highlights that, while the reasons for underperformance are ini-
tially obscure, meters provide an important clue for structuring
further inquiry as to the legitimacy of individual contributions.
Interviewees described how meters help to identify opportuni-
ties for improvement, particularly for raid members in need of
guidance. Such improvement can be assumed to support the
long-term health of the group, with those towards the lower
end of the rankings encouraged to make improvements so that
their contributions come into line with other raid members:
“In the raid it is particularly so you can identify weak-
nesses. It might be that someone’s having a real problem
with what loot they’ve got, what armour... so the aim isn’t
to say, ‘oh get out of here we’ll get someone new’, it’s to
identify weaknesses and learn from them so you can do it
better next time.” [P1, 23, F]
“In rare cases it’s down to using the wrong rotation1 so

1A player’s ‘rotation’ refers to the order in which they activate the
offensive capabilities of their character. Certain rotations produce bet-
ter damage output than others, making rotation selection an important
aspect of raid behaviour.

670

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Permitting Analyses After the Fact
An interesting aspect of meter use is that observations based
on their data are not conﬁned to in-the-moment monitoring
during raids. In fact, some players suggested that, for them,
the main beneﬁt of meters lies in their use after the fact. That
is, the data that meters gather is saved and used post-hoc to per-
form deeper interrogations of contribution. According to our
interviewees, it has become common for persistent groups to
pass the contents of meters to external services such as World
of Logs for more detailed analyses of player contributions.
Four players who raided regularly with guildmates described
how they used this information:

“I don’t know if you’ve heard of World of Logs... it’s
become a big thing where you can actually go in and
you can see what abilities people were using, how much
damage those abilities were doing to the boss, if you’re
following mechanics of the ﬁght... so they could look at
the details and say, “right, you’re using this spell so many
times, you should’ve been able to use it maybe ten per
cent more”. And basically help you out saying, “right,
you need to keep an eye on this more, or you need to be
using this spell more to keep that ability up”, and things
like that.” [P6, 34, M]

This practice augments meter use by identifying opportunities
for collective improvement:

“Meters in game are based off combat logs and there’s
an analysis of the combat logs that can happen ofﬂine
as well... I mean a meter will tell you, you know, the
percentage of things they’re doing, how much damage
you’re doing from all the different spells, who the top
three people are, so are you hitting the boss, are you
hitting the adds. It’ll show you all of that stuff, and you
can go back over a ﬁght and look at it. But, World of
Logs allows you to look at much greater detail about how
all twenty ﬁve people are doing and how they’re working
together. Which is much more difﬁcult to do with things
like Recount. So yeah, I mean they wouldn’t so much look
at the meters, they’d look at different analysis of the data
the meters use, yes.” [P7, 39, M]

We reason that this analysis factors into progression, which
represents one of the main goals for many persistent raid-
ing groups [2]. Progression refers to the gradual completion
of increasingly difﬁcult game content over time; groups that
‘progress’ are considered to be successful because they are im-
proving in skill, obtaining better rewards, and are able to take
on tougher challenges within the context of the game. While
meters have some merit for real-time assessment of fairness,
an additional beneﬁt independent of their visual design relates
to retrospective analyses done to gather additional support for
claims about the efﬁcacy of player contributions. This infor-
mation may then be used to ensure players contribute properly
in the future.

Supporting the Assignment of Rewards
In describing WoW teams we noted that not all players are
guaranteed to be rewarded for their efforts [2], raising the
issue of distributive fairness as a subject of concern [26]. Two

interviewees mentioned that their groups assigned rewards by
giving players ‘points’ after successful raid encounters. These
points can be used to ‘bid’ on loot, with rewards assigned to
the highest bidder [26]. The content of meters did not usually
factor into this process, but one participant did state that his
guild used meters to resolve tied bids:

“If there were two people who bidded the same amount,
then it’d be decided by the raid leader who would use
their information through the meters.” [P4, 18, M]

An alternate approach was to make an attempt at balancing the
distribution of rewards with overall beneﬁts to the raid group.
For instance, a particular item could be a minor upgrade for
a regular player but could be a major upgrade for a weaker
member of the team. Meters helped to ensure such decisions
were taken fairly:

“In one of my guilds we used what we call a ‘loot coun-
cil’... ofﬁcers in the guild take into account people’s
current gear and their damage on the meter. If it’s a big
upgrade for the new player they will award it to them.”
[P2, 19, F]

It is, therefore, not the case that being ‘top of the meters’
equates to a greater chance of reward. One participant recalled
the problems that arose through this approach:

“A lot of arguments were started over meters, over who
could come to raids, who got what equipment. Oh, “per-
son x didnt deserve item y because they did badly”...
eventually though we moved to a system of item rewards
that gave items to people who would get the best use out
of it, rather than person who did most DPS got the best
weapon to do more DPS” [P5, 35, M]

Here we see that meters can provoke disharmony through
judgements about what appears to be ‘fair’ on the basis of a
mere ranking. Furthermore, the extent to which meters should
be used to assign rewards was called into deeper question
by two participants who recognised that people can toy with
meter content to achieve contrived outcomes:

“Loot off of who’s top of the meters is a waste of time be-
cause that person’s obviously geared to hell and doesn’t
need the loot. If it should go to anyone, it should be going
to the people at the bottom of the list. But there again,
you can cheese that by not doing any DPS. Saying, oh
yeah I need loot because I’m bottom of the DPS charts.”
[P6, 34, M]

This participant’s statement raises questions about the relia-
bility of meters for ensuring distributional fairness. Initially,
ranking on the meters appears sufﬁcient to demonstrate legiti-
mate claims, yet the participant later asserts that people can
‘game’ the meters by deliberately withholding contributions.
This hints at the potential for meters to be misused, raising
questions about their suitability as resources for assessing con-
tributions and, by extension, for making fairness judgements.
We now turn to ﬁndings that relate to these problems more
directly, considering ﬁrst the speciﬁc limitations of meters for
assessing contributions and then broader consequences that
arise as a result of making contributions available for scrutiny.

671

The Limitations of Meters for Assessing Contributions
Participants’ stories speak to several limitations of meters as
measures of collaborative contribution, focusing in particular
on the risks of using meters for real-time assessment in the
midst of raiding. Participants were especially concerned about
the limited scope of meters, in that they do not adequately
represent peripheral and supporting contributions that are not
related to damage but are nonetheless critical to the group’s
success. For example, during raids, players sometimes disap-
pear from the meters when performing crowd control (or ‘add
work’) on enemies. Statements by four participants indicate
that the failure of meters to represent this work up-front can
make it seem as if certain individuals are doing nothing when,
in reality, their contribution is critical:

“My role was, as a hunter, I was used for a lot of the add
work. Misdirecting, which means that you’re switching
off the main target to control something else and misdirect
it... it brings your DPS right down, so there’s no way
you’re going to be top of the meters.” [P3, 46, F]
“Some ﬁghts you did zero DPS but spend the entire ﬁght
banishing something all ﬁght, now folk knew this but if
they didn’t understand the ﬁght they would think you were
not doing what you’re supposed to.” [P5, 35, M]

Second, the way in which meters present aggregations of
actions can potentially misrepresent the value of contributions
because information about the quality and relevance of actions
is not immediately available. For example, a person may
be performing actions that are captured by the meter but are
ineffective for the task at hand. A metered representation
does not immediately allow players to detect such behaviour
because it provides a collapsed view of performance without
accounting for contextual details. One participant described
this phenomenon in relation to ‘area of effect’ (AOE) attacks
in WoW. These are abilities that can inﬂict signiﬁcant damage
to multiple targets at once. This type of action is, however, not
always appropriate, and is difﬁcult to detect in a meter:

“So you can do a lot of AOE, loads and loads of AOE,
and look like they’re doing a lot of damage. But actually
maybe not be attacking the boss. Now, that kind of DPS
padding makes people feel good. And you can’t tell that
easily.” [P7, 39, M]

Furthermore, meters can cause certain contributions to be
misattributed. This occurs when one group member’s actions
have knock-on effects that beneﬁt the group as a whole, but
the role of the original contribution is not recognised in meters.
For instance, some characters in WoW can bestow others
with ‘buffs’ that boost other players’ abilities. However, the
provider of the buff receives no credit for this contribution
in the damage meter, whereas the output of everyone else
is inﬂated by the strength increase. While it is important to
recognise that groups in WoW are typically aware of these
peripheral efforts, taking meters out of context could make it
appear as though one person has contributed more to the group
when, in reality, their contribution was absolutely dependent
on the obscured involvement of others. This calls into question
the accuracy of meters for reﬂecting contributions.

672

SESSION: GAMES

Lastly, the value of damage meters as measures of contribution
can vary according to contextual features of speciﬁc tasks. In
WoW, this relates to the fact that different characters are more
or less effective in different settings. For example, there are
some enemies that are more susceptible to ranged damage, and
thus players with relevant abilities are at an advantage during
these situations. In other cases, these players cannot fully
contribute because they must continually move their character
and thus cannot participate to the best of their ability:

“If you had to move a lot, casters would generally be
lower down because they’re moving so much whereas if
you’re tanking or if you’re not ranged then it’s easier, so
there’re differences depending on what the ﬁght is.” [P4,
18, M]

The point here is that, as simple aggregations of actions, the
contents of meters do not account for contextual variance in
task demands. The fact that meters fail to portray individual
disadvantages may therefore make it seem as though some
players are underperforming when they are in fact making
their best effort. One interviewee gave an example where a
group leader had berated her for seemingly poor performance.
In this case, there was a lack of common ground regarding her
character’s abilities and the risk of being ‘spiked’ (damaged)
by a raid boss:

“The ﬁrst boss in Icecrown, he did an attack that puts
you in a spike if you’re too far away... so everybody has
to run into the boss, apart from hunters because you’ve
got an area that’s a deadzone where we can’t attack, so
we have to stand outside of the deadzone, but that means
we get spiked... And we had one of our ofﬁcers get rather
antsy with me a couple of times for getting spiked and
not DPSing... it took our class leader to pull him and
say, look, learn the class, you have no idea what you’re
talking about.” [P3, 46, F]

Taken together, these issues mean that it can sometimes be
difﬁcult to get a good sense of individual performance based
on meters alone. This is primarily due to their unidimensional
scope in terms of measuring overall contribution. Moreover,
efforts can be undermined by temporary aspects of a work
situation that are not matched to a player’s abilities. These is-
sues raise questions about the efﬁcacy of meters for supporting
judgements of fairness.

Additional Consequences of Publicising Contributions
Further to these concerns about the design of meters and play-
ers’ interpretation of contributions, responses indicate that
the general phenomenon of publicising contributions has a
number of corollaries that impact harmonious collaboration.
Meters can Promote Competition over Coordination
Since damage meters rank players hierarchically in accordance
with overall contribution, players have come to see topping this
ranking as an accolade carrying a certain degree of prestige
[37]. Topping the meter implies that the individual in question
has not only made the greatest contribution but is also the
most skilled. In some cases this can be positive, with one
interviewee describing how being ‘top of the meters’ became
a motivating target for her group:

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

“Someone’s belting away a load of damage and there
might be some friendly egging on in raid chat, like, oh
look at me, see who can beat me. And then everyone else
tries harder to beat that.” [P1, 23, F]

However, this type of competition can be problematic when
individuals become overly focused on topping the meters. As
mentioned by three interviewees, this can damage team effec-
tiveness by causing individuals to neglect basic coordination:

and that made me worse in some ways.” [P1, 23, F]

Evaluation apprehension is likely true of group participation
irrespective of the work context, yet meters may amplify the ef-
fect by publicising in detail a limited perspective on an individ-
ual’s performance. Any negative behavioural outcomes may
therefore be especially problematic in group settings where
each individual must meet an acceptable level of performance,
as was the case in WoW raid groups.

“Sometimes they’ll go away with blaring DPS, doing as
much as they can to show off, and come top of the DPS
meter on everyone’s screen. But they don’t care about
the tactics for the boss, or care what their speciﬁc role
should be, they just want to show off and be top of the
DPS meter. Which should be a secondary goal, not a
main goal.” [P1, 23, F]

This type of “over-nuking” behaviour was also mentioned
by Taylor in her early discussion of meters [37]. The main
issue at hand is that meters can shift the motivational focus of
individuals away from harmonious work towards intra-group
conﬂict. The resulting tensions can be undesirable or even
dangerous for the group. In our analysis, we see an additional
corollary that we believe arises as a result of focusing too
intensely on competition; that is, meters become the yardstick
by which other players are assessed, irrespective of whether
these assessments are appropriate. Four people stated that this
leads to bullying or other abusive behaviours:

“The dps meters starting draining the fun out of things
when used as batons to beat people with about perfor-
mance.” [P5, 35, M]
“People do use it as a kind of bullying method. If they
can see what everyone’s doing. If there’s anyone that’s
slightly not as high as everyone else, they’d be doing less
damage usually, so they’d be the main targets for, “oh my
God we’ve just wiped and it’s your fault because you’re
not doing your job”. So it does draw attention to the
more vulnerable players who are trying but just aren’t
there yet.” [P1, 23, F]

Meters can Amplify Evaluation Apprehension
Evaluation apprehension refers to the fear that contributions
will be viewed negatively by other members of a group, caus-
ing individuals to withhold their efforts to avoid criticism
[10]. With regard to meters, it is possible that the broadcasting
of contributions, which is then held as a measure of ‘perfor-
mance’, may cause individuals to become nervous about the
way in which their efforts are interpreted by others. Such
an experience was recounted by one interviewee who, as a
new raid member, had been worried about performing poorly
and being evaluated in a negative light. (Raids often require
new members to undergo a trial period where performance is
analysed and a decision is made on whether the individual can
stay.) Her response hinted at an almost self-fulﬁlling prophecy,
where nerves about evaluation caused her performance to de-
teriorate below her usual standard:

“It made me feel anxious... like I’m being scrutinised. I
was worried about how people would judge my actions,

DISCUSSION
Our primary motivation for the present work was to explore
how fairness judgements might be enabled through visual-
ization of contributions to collaborative work. Taking WoW
meters as an example of how contributions might be visualized,
we sought to understand how these meters support group work,
as well as the extent to which they permit inferences about
fairness. We found that meters allow individuals to reﬂect on
their own performance, to identify underperformers, and to
monitor the status of collective efforts. Meters are also used
to perform retrospective evaluations of teammates in order to
inform future collaborative episodes. However, player narra-
tives speak to several shortcomings of meters as reﬂections
of collaborative work. In particular, meters do not provide
immediate evidence of important peripheral contributions, dis-
play little information about the quality of work, and do not
account for contextual variation between tasks. Our study also
found that the public nature of metering can encourage un-
healthy competition and induce apprehension. Here we reach
for broader lessons based on these ﬁndings.

Meters as Resources for Fairness Judgements
We have shown that meters provide collaborators with an ini-
tial basis for asking questions about fairness in their group.
That is, meters offer cues that provoke deeper investigation
by prompting people to check up on the actual behaviour of
their teammates, such as when checking underperformance.
Without meters, these coarse preliminary judgements would be
difﬁcult or need explicit clariﬁcation, which may be problem-
atic for team members during tightly coupled, time-pressured
scenarios like WoW raids [34]. Meters give groups a com-
plementary source of information about each person’s con-
tribution to the group effort, beyond that which is possible
through simple observation of an avatar’s animations or physi-
cal positioning. This emphasises that groups can beneﬁt from
an additional source of information about contributions that
would ordinarily be unavailable, an observation that aligns
with previous research on the value of visualizations for sup-
porting group processes (e.g. [1, 4, 11, 12, 29, 36]).
However, unlike previous research, our study of real-world
teams suggests that awareness visualizations can be problem-
atic when they are used as a resource for gauging contributions
in general. We have demonstrated not only that this is true
for fairness in particular, but also how the dynamics of group
interactions inﬂuence the interpretation of meters, i.e. that
people incorrectly attribute either good or bad behaviour to
the meter scores. A prominent ﬁnding was that a meter’s basic
representation can arouse discontent through quantifying only
a single type of behaviour and by failing to account for the

673

full range of contributions that participants can bring to the
collective good. Meters were found to be of dubious reliabil-
ity, with players stating that they can easily be manipulated or
‘gamed’, and offer little in terms of understanding the quality
of an individual’s work or how contextual details may have
impacted performance. These ﬁndings may not be surprising
given that meters are obviously limited, but are nonetheless
valuable because they provide an understanding of the prob-
lems that arise when people try to make complete assessments
of contribution based on limited information. This in turn
casts doubt over the value of any attempt to distil the value
of contributions into a unidimensional representation, either
for in-the-moment judgements of fairness or for retrospective
review of performance.
With this in mind, it is important to recognise that player judge-
ments of fairness draw on—but are not uniquely determined
by—transient awareness information, such as that provided by
meters. In WoW, judgements are situated with respect to play-
ers’ understanding of the game world, the contextual details of
a task, prior experiences with collaborators, and knowledge of
the demands placed on people by the particular work they are
doing. While some negative consequences may arise through
the limited scope of meters, we note that the extent to which
these impact the actual work of a group depends on a team’s
ability to utilise the awareness information effectively. As
described by our seventh participant, meters require their read-
ers “to be able to interpret what they’re saying properly, and
understand what they’re saying properly. And as with all of
these things, there are people that don’t know how to do that”.
Our study demonstrates that, while meters do not show ev-
erything relevant to a task, problems arise because people
sometimes struggle to apply their contextual understanding in
the face of the ‘objective’ data furnished by the meters. This
may be because people either fail to recognise and understand
a meter’s limitations, or because they are aware of its limita-
tions but do not account for them in practice. Failure to act in
a way that is consonant with a meter’s limitations means that,
rather than delaying interrogations of undercontribution and its
legitimacy, users may berate colleagues for underperformance
in the here-and-now. This is a problem that is not unique to
WoW—it is a danger for any context and may cause effects
similar to those we have described here to arise if a meter-like
representation were used elsewhere. Furthermore, our ﬁndings
point towards a more general issue in that over-reliance on a
representation like a meter may come to deﬁne the very way
in which contributions are assessed. That is, visualizations
like meters will inevitably undermine valuable contributions
because they encourage judgements whose territory is scoped
by the content of the visualization. People can ‘repair’ this
problem by looking beyond the meters when assessing a per-
son’s worth, but problems arise because people sometimes
fail to do this in practice, and may ﬁnd it difﬁcult because the
other inputs people have given to the team are not recorded.

Lessons for Supporting Fairness Judgements
We believe these considerations point towards the following
lessons for the design of visualizations that are intended to
support fairness judgements in a collaborative system. Most

674

SESSION: GAMES

prior work on visualizations has considered a single type of
contribution in the context of relatively constrained tasks, e.g.
contributions to group discussion [4, 11, 12, 27, 28], but our
study focused on a context in which a variety of contributions
are necessary for group success. Our ﬁndings demonstrate that,
while visualizations can support some basic inferences about
the legitimacy of contributions, it is misguided to assume that
a unidimensional measure of performance (such as a meter)
will guide full judgements of fairness where multidimensional
teams are concerned. In situations where multiple types of
contribution are relevant to a group’s work, designers should
avoid trying to support fairness judgements with visualizations
that only account for a limited range of contributions.
A different strategy could be to provide multiple awareness
mechanisms that show different types of contributions at the
same time. In collaborative writing, for example, a visualiza-
tion could show things like words-per-minute, time on task,
and number of edits as separate measures. This might then
provide better support for fairness judgements by giving a
broader lens on an individual’s net contribution to a team, per-
haps allowing people to examine the way in which individuals
have traded off different subtasks—low performance on one
metric might be offset by high performance on another. Such
a measure could be used both in real-time and retrospectively.
Alternatively, it could be possible to aggregate several contri-
butions into something like a ‘multidimensional meter’ to give
a better reﬂection of a person’s inputs. However, this raises
an additional challenge related to how a surface representa-
tion might combine subtasks that may not be equivalent. In
something like software development, projects may involve
writing, computer programming, and software design, as well
as intangible contributions associated with project manage-
ment. Comparison of these subcomponents in a meter may
lack meaning because it is hard to gauge what each is worth
relative to the next. One way to solve this might be to show
a proportional rather than aggregate representation. This is
something that can only be investigated with further work.
In describing meters, we identiﬁed two parameters relevant
to fairness: support for social comparisons, and detail about
contributions. Our study has drawn attention to additional
distinctions that have not been identiﬁed in previous work on
visualizations of group activity, but which are important for
assessing fairness. First, we have seen how a visualization can
be used for personal reﬂection versus public evaluation. Sec-
ond, our ﬁndings draw attention to the use of meters to enable
in-the-moment appraisal of individual and team performance,
versus retrospective dissection of the work of the group as
it unfolded. These two contrasts are orthogonal, and so rep-
resent four quadrants of a design space for thinking about
visualizations that can support knowledge of contributions
and, by extension, judgements of fairness.
Each of these quadrants raises its own challenges, but it might
be possible to support them simultaneously. Since fairness
can be evaluated in real-time and retrospectively, future mech-
anisms could attempt to support tripartite considerations of
fairness by drawing on information collected before, during,
and after an episode of collaborative work. This would help

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

to ensure that differential contributions are taken into account
when assessing the performance of individuals. One way to
do this might be to provide multiple perspectives on the same
data, i.e. different sources of information about the same event.
In WoW, for example, it is possible to look at a damage meter
to assess contribution, but it might also be possible to look at
a video replay of what players were doing on the raid in order
to augment one’s appreciation of a player’s efforts.
At a minimum, designers could tailor their representations to
match the ability of collaborators to attend to the information,
as well as the opportunity that they each have to discuss it.
Using WoW as the example to hand, it is difﬁcult to discuss
contributions during a raid. Although meters permit glance-
ability and lightweight social comparisons, discontent can
arise because people make inferences about fairness based on
information that was not designed as such. Thus much analy-
sis of player behaviour occurs after the fact, whether that be
through analysis of non-damage contributions or in deeper in-
formation processing through World of Logs. The discussion
that occurs around this data is important because individuals
acquire an opportunity to explain aspects of their behaviour
that could not be measured by an awareness mechanism.
There is, however, a need to be realistic about the extent to
which designers can in fact support fairness in collaborative
systems, and whether they should at all. This is because
there are situations in which it is unlikely that a visualization
will ever be able to capture all of the meaningful inputs that
people give to a group. We have seen that people can ‘repair’
deﬁciencies in a unidimensional visualization by invoking
contextual knowledge to answer questions about fairness. Yet
it is unsafe to rely on this as a compensatory phenomenon since
people can be prone to snap judgements, and may be unaware
of mitigating circumstances that affect a person’s ability to
contribute, meaning that they do not have this knowledge to
apply when appraising the efforts of others.
What this suggests is that people could be reminded about the
limitations of a visualization in advance, especially when it
is not possible to represent everything an individual has con-
tributed to a team. Based on the results of this study, designers
might actually wish to discourage people from making infer-
ences about fairness in a situation where it is only possible
to provide a unidimensional representation. This suggestion
may seem contrary to the aim of this paper, but is a legitimate
consideration given the issues we have raised about meters. It
may be better to provide visualizations only in situations in
which contributions are tightly constrained, easily quantiﬁable,
or remain closed to subjective interpretation.

Generalisation to Other Work Settings
There is an open question as to whether our ﬁndings would
apply to other collaborative work situations. We do not believe
that there is anything unique about WoW that would cause
our ﬁndings to be applicable only to this context. Instead, we
believe these issues may emerge in situations where similar
enabling conditions are present. In WoW, collaboration is
characterised by the following properties:
• Teams have a clear objective.

• Success requires a combination of different skills.
• The application of skill requires coordination in time and

space.

• Team members must pay attention to the state of one another,

as well as to themselves.

• The reward structure is clear.
• Reputation is formed over successive episodes of similar
work and has a material impact on the inclusion of an indi-
vidual in future team activities.

• Certain aspects of each person’s work can be quantiﬁed.
These are things that are true of WoW, and so we have reason
to believe that in other collaborative situations that share these
characteristics, one might expect to ﬁnd similar challenges to
those we have identiﬁed.
There are, however, some particular features of WoW that
shape the extent to which it is necessary to question another
person’s contribution, and thus also relate to the extent to
which a visualization for judging fairness is even required.
The ﬁrst of these is that in WoW raids there is some beneﬁt
to doing as much as work possible—most of the time, the
more damage players do, the faster the task is done. This
is not true of situations in which the evaluation of work is
more subjective or that do not involve a clear stopping point.
Second, WoW raids are characterised by a need to interrogate
work in-the-moment because there is an immediate risk of
failure (i.e. a ‘raid wipe’). Many other collaborative tasks do
not involve such risks, but in those that do (perhaps something
like mission-critical teamwork) having a visualization might
prove helpful to ensure that contributions are made correctly.
Finally, WoW raids involve a wide range of tasks, but some
collaborative situations are characterised by a single type of
contribution, e.g. providing ideas to a brainstorm. The task
one seeks to support is likely to deﬁne the extent to which a vi-
sualization is necessary and helpful, and whether negative side
effects might occur. One of the key parameters we identiﬁed
in meters is that they provide a certain level of detail about
contributions. However, since meters were found to encour-
age evaluation apprehension, some situations might be best
served by occluding detail about contributions. One example
is the case of brainstorming, where people are supposed to
contribute ideas without any fear of how those ideas will be
perceived. Evaluation apprehension is known to be problem-
atic in this context [10], so a visualization here could simply
show the number of ideas a person has contributed, without
displaying what those ideas are.

Limitations and Future Work
While we characterise groups in WoW as work teams, we
recognise that people in WoW enter a special environment that
is separated from their real life. In real world work groups,
consequences of group interaction can bleed over into other
aspects of life, whereas in WoW this is not the case. That said,
reputation is important in WoW and so there is still a need
to be mindful of how a player’s wider online identity can be
affected by the consequences of game group activity.

675

One issue that we were unable to investigate in detail concerns
the variable importance of damage meters between different
types of raid group. In temporary, one-off raids (known as
‘pick up groups’ or PUGs) players may be more prone to
rely on metered information than in guild settings where trust
among teammates is likely to have been established well in ad-
vance. Although our informants had participated in both types
of raid group, most of their interview comments were made
without respect to particular raid settings, making it difﬁcult
for us to tease apart the two scenarios. Future studies might
seek to investigate how the dynamics of more or less casual
work impact the use of meters for assessment of contributions.
Second, it is not clear whether some of the side effects that
we identiﬁed would also arise in other collaborative scenarios.
While we do not doubt that ﬁndings from WoW are useful
when considering other collaborative work scenarios, it may
be the case that there are qualities of gaming environments
that encourage certain behaviours over others—the issue of
promoting competition may be especially relevant to contexts
where play is prevalent. This is an issue that can only be
explored through further work.
Finally, our study had relatively few participants, and although
we are conﬁdent that our data was sufﬁcient to support a
coherent set of claims about meters, future work should look
to verify our ﬁndings. Since the time at which our data was
collected, an additional expansion has been released for WoW.
This change to the landscape of the gaming environment may
have introduced additional issues for raid groups and the use
of meters that go beyond those captured in our analysis.

CONCLUSION
The purpose of this study was to explore how it is that a collab-
orative system might support judgements of fairness. Using
meters as a case in point, we saw that a visualization can en-
able basic inferences about contributions and fairness, but the
incomplete nature of the visualization can lead to other prob-
lems that impact harmonious collaboration. Independent of
our interest in fairness, this study supports earlier suppositions
from the literature on group mirrors. Leshed et al. [29] pro-
posed that a visualization might encourage competition when
it allows someone to be identiﬁed as a ‘top contributor’, and
that there is potential for visualizations to be manipulated in
pursuit of desired outcomes. Our study conﬁrms the presence
of these behaviours in the use of meters. Furthermore, this
study contributes to the literature on visualization of teamwork
by providing an extended picture of how an awareness mecha-
nism is used to infer contributions in a non-laboratory setting.
We have drawn attention to the consequences that arise when a
limited representation is used in the context of teams and tasks
where multiple contributions are required. This work conﬁrms
Taylor’s intuitions about the way in which players interpret
meters [37] while providing a more complete description of
the issues that cloud the use of these artefacts.
Our investigation of meters indicates that, while it may be
possible to design to permit superﬁcial judgements about con-
tributions, supporting fairness is clearly a complex and multi-
dimensional design problem. Any designer seeking to enable
considerations about fairness will need to be mindful of the

676

SESSION: GAMES

potential consequences that may arise as a result of providing
awareness information about the work of others. However, it
remains to be seen whether the sorts of issues identiﬁed in
our study might arise when contribution awareness is imple-
mented in other collaborative systems. What is required are
further explorations of the design space and its four quadrants,
separating visualizations for in-the-moment appraisals from
those intended for review after-the-fact, as well as those for
personal reﬂection from those available to public scrutiny.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank the anonymous reviewers and associate chairs for
their extremely helpful comments on this work.

REFERENCES
1. Khaled Bachour, Frederic Kaplan, and Pierre

Dillenbourg. 2010. An interactive table for supporting
participation balance in face-to-face collaborative
learning. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies 3,
3 (2010), 203–213.

2. Jeffrey Bardzell, Jeffrey Nichols, Tyler Pace, and

Shaowen Bardzell. 2012. Come meet me at Ulduar:
progression raiding in world of warcraft. In Proceedings
of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work (CSCW ’12). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 603–612.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2145204.2145296

3. Shaowen Bardzell, Jeffrey Bardzell, Tyler Pace, and

Kayce Reed. 2008. Blissfully productive: grouping and
cooperation in world of warcraft instance runs. In
Proceedings of the 2008 ACM Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’08). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 357–360.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1460563.1460621

4. Tony Bergstrom and Karrie Karahalios. 2007. Seeing

more: visualizing audio cues. In Proceedings of the 11th
IFIP TC 13 International Conference on
Human-computer Interaction - Volume Part II.
Springer-Verlag, 29–42.

5. Jeremy Birnholtz and Steven Ibara. 2012. Tracking

changes in collaborative writing: edits, visibility and
group maintenance. In Proceedings of the ACM 2012
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
(CSCW ’12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 809–818.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2145204.2145325

6. Charles M Brooks and Janice L Ammons. 2003. Free

riding in group projects and the effects of timing,
frequency, and speciﬁcity of criteria in peer assessments.
Journal of Education for Business 78 (2003), 268–272.

7. Barry Brown and Marek Bell. 2004. CSCW at play:

‘There’ as a collaborative virtual environment. In
Proceedings of the 2004 ACM Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’04). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 350–359.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1031607.1031666

8. Mark Chen. 2008. Communication, Coordination, and

Camaraderie in World of Warcraft. Games and Culture 4,
1 (2008), 47–73.

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

9. Morten Deutsch. 1975. Equity, equality and need: What

determines which value will be used as the basis of
distributive justice? Journal of Social Issues 31 (1975),
137–149.

10. Michael Diehl and Wolfgang Stroebe. 1987. Productivity

loss in brainstorming groups: toward the solution of a
riddle. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 53,
3 (1987), 497–509.

11. Joan Morris DiMicco, Katherine J. Hollenbach, Anna

Pandolfo, and Walter Bender. 2007. The impact of
increased awareness while face-to-face.
Human–Computer Interaction 22, 1–2 (2007), 47–96.

12. Joan Morris DiMicco, Anna Pandolfo, and Walter Bender.

2004. Inﬂuencing group participation with a shared
display. In Proceedings of the 2004 ACM Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’04).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 614–623.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1031607.1031713

13. Paul Dourish and Victoria Bellotti. 1992. Awareness and
coordination in shared workspaces. In Proceedings of the
1992 ACM Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work (CSCW ’92). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 107–114.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/143457.143468

14. Nicolas Ducheneaut, Nicholas Yee, Eric Nickell, and

Robert J. Moore. 2006. “Alone together?”: exploring the
social dynamics of massively multiplayer online games.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’06). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 407–416.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1124772.1124834

15. Thomas Erickson and Wendy A. Kellogg. 2000. Social

translucence: an approach to designing systems that
support social processes. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum.
Interact. 7, 1 (March 2000), 59–83.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/344949.345004

16. Leon Festinger. 1954. A theory of social comparison

processes. Human Relations 7, 2 (1954), 117–140.

17. Robert Folger and Russell Cropanzano. 2001. Fairness

theory: Justice as accountability. In Advances in
Organizational Justice, J. S. Greenberg and
R. Cropanzano (Eds.). Stanford University Press,
Stanford, California, 1–55.

18. Jolene Galegher and Robert Kraut. 1990. CMC for
intellectual teamwork: a ﬁeld experiment in group
writing. In Proceedings of the 1990 ACM Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’90).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 65–78.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/99332.99343

19. Carl Gutwin and Saul Greenberg. 2002. A descriptive

framework of workspace awareness for real-time
groupware. Journal of CSCW 11, 3 (2002), 411–446.

20. Carl Gutwin, Saul Greenberg, and Mark Roseman. 1996.

Workspace awareness support with radar views. In
Conference Companion on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’96). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 210–211.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/257089.257286

21. Carl Gutwin, Reagan Penner, and Kevin Schneider. 2004.
Group awareness in distributed software development. In
Proceedings of the 2004 ACM Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’04). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 72–81.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1031607.1031621

22. Carl Gutwin, Mark Roseman, and Saul Greenberg. 1996.

A usability study of awareness widgets in a shared
workspace groupware system. In Proceedings of the 1996
ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work (CSCW ’96). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 258–267.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/240080.240298

23. Guido Hertel, Henk Aarts, and Marcel Zeelenberg. 2002.
What do you think is ‘fair’? Effects of ingroup norms and
outcome control on fairness judgments. European
Journal of Social Psychology 32 (2002), 327–341.

24. Guido Hertel, Carsten Deter, and Udo Konradt. 2003.

Motivation gains in computer-supported groups. Journal
of Applied Social Psychology 33, 10 (2003), 2080–2105.

25. Scott E. Hudson and Ian Smith. 1996. Techniques for

addressing fundamental privacy and disruption tradeoffs
in awareness support systems. In Proceedings of the 1996
ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work (CSCW ’96). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 248–257.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/240080.240295

26. Chyng-Yang Jang. 2007. Managing Fairness: Reward
Distribution in a Self-organized Online Game Player
Community. Springer.

27. Jeroen Janssen, Gijsbert Erkens, Gellof Kanselaar, and

Jos Jaspers. 2007. Visualization of participation: Does it
contribute to successful computer-supported collaborative
learning? Computers & Education 49, 4 (2007),
1037–1065.

28. Gilly Leshed, Jeffrey T. Hancock, Dan Cosley, Poppy L.

McLeod, and Geri Gay. 2007. Feedback for guiding
reﬂection on teamwork practices. In Proceedings of the
2007 International ACM Conference on Supporting
Group Work (GROUP ’07). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
217–220.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1316624.1316655

29. Gilly Leshed, Diego Perez, Jeffrey T. Hancock, Dan

Cosley, Jeremy Birnholtz, Soyoung Lee, Poppy L.
McLeod, and Geri Gay. 2009. Visualizing real-time
language-based feedback on teamwork behavior in
computer-mediated groups. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’09). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 537–546.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1518701.1518784

30. Gerald S. Leventhal. 1980. What should be done with
equity theory? In Social exchange, K. J. Gergen, M. S.
Greenberg, and R. W. Willis (Eds.). Springer, 27–55.

31. Robert J. Moore, Nicolas Ducheneaut, and Eric Nickell.

2007a. Doing virtually nothing: Awareness and
accountability in massively multiplayer online worlds.
Journal of CSCW 16 (2007), 265–305.

677

32. Robert J. Moore, E. Cabell Hankinson Gathman, Nicolas
Ducheneaut, and Eric Nickell. 2007b. Coordinating joint
activity in avatar-mediated interaction. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’07). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 21–30.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1240624.1240628

33. Bonnie Nardi and Justin Harris. 2006. Strangers and

friends: collaborative play in world of warcraft. In
Proceedings of the 2006 20th Anniversary Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’06).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 149–158.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1180875.1180898

34. Lindsay Reynolds, Jeremy Birnholtz, and Allen Lee.

2012. The Effect of Communication Channel and Visual
Awareness Display on Coordination in Online Tasks. In
Proceedings of the 2012 iConference (iConference ’12).
ACM Press, New York, NY, USA, 120–128.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2132176.2132192

35. Anselm Strauss and Juliet M. Corbin. 1998. Basics of

Qualitative Research. Sage.

36. Sara Streng, Karsten Stegmann, Heinrich Hussmann, and
Frank Fischer. 2009. Metaphor or Diagram?: Comparing
Different Representations for Group Mirrors. In
Proceedings of the 21st Annual Conference of the
Australian Computer-Human Interaction Special Interest
Group: Design: Open 24/7 (OZCHI ’09). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 249–256.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1738826.1738866

SESSION: GAMES

37. T. L. Taylor. 2006. Does WoW change everything? How

a PvP Server, Multinational Player Base, and
Surveillance Mod Scene Caused Me Pause. Games and
Culture 1, 4 (2006), 318–337.

38. Tom R Tyler. 2006. Psychological perspectives on

legitimacy and legitimation. Annual Review of
Psychology 57 (2006), 375–400.

39. Fernanda B. Vi´egas, Martin Wattenberg, and Kushal

Dave. 2004. Studying cooperation and conﬂict between
authors with history ﬂow visualizations. In Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI ’04). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 575–582.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/985692.985765

40. Dakuo Wang, Judith S. Olson, Jingwen Zhang, Trung

Nguyen, and Gary M. Olson. 2015. DocuViz: Visualizing
Collaborative Writing. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’15). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
1865–1874.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2702123.2702517

41. Dmitri Williams, Nicolas Ducheneaut, Li Xiong,

Yuanyuan Zhang, Nick Yee, and Eric Nickell. 2006. From
tree house to barracks: The social life of guilds in world
of warcraft. Games and Culture 1 (2006), 338–361.

42. Nick Yee. 2006. The labor of fun: How video games blur

the boundaries of work and play. Games and Culture 1
(2006), 68–71.

678

