CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

To Reply or To Reply All: Understanding Replying 

Behavior in Group Email Communication 

Sukeshini A. Grandhi 

Eastern Connecticut State University 

Willimantic, CT, USA 
grandhis@easternct.edu 

Lyndsey K. Lanagan-Leitzel 

Eastern Connecticut State University 

Willimantic, CT, USA 

lanaganleitzell@easternct.edu 

ABSTRACT 
“Reply”  and  “Reply  All”  buttons  in  email  provide  the 
convenience  of  a  quick  reply  to  those  included  in  the 
email. Yet  this  very  convenience  can  be  troublesome  to 
both  the  individual  and  the  group  involved  if  receivers 
intentionally or unintentionally hit one button instead of the 
other. In this paper we explore how replying decisions are 
made  and  what  contributes  to  erroneous  use  of  Reply  All 
through an experimental study (N=109) and a survey study 
(N=112). Data from the experiment suggest that errors are 
not influenced by how the reply button suite is arranged but 
rather by the explicitness of the desired response action and 
how multiple recipients are displayed. Qualitative data from 
the survey suggest that while people are cognizant of Reply 
All  misuse,  lack  of  universally  agreed  upon  criteria  for 
appropriate  Reply/Reply  All  choice  leads  to  errors.  We 
discuss the implications of these insights for email interface 
design.  
Author Keywords 
Email, Reply, Reply All, interface design, buttons, message 
content,  multiple 
computer  mediated 
communication, overload, listserv, mailing list 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.4.3  [Communication  applications]:    H.5.3.  [Information 
Interfaces and Presentations] 
INTRODUCTION 
Email  is  one  of  the  primary  and  most  popular  modes  of 
communication in both personal and organizational settings 
[2,7,32].  The  reply  button  suite  in  an  email  interface  that 
includes  “Reply”,  “Reply  All”  and  “Forward”  provides 
receivers a quick and convenient way to respond to emails. 
However this very convenience can turn to a serious social 
or corporate blunder at the worst or annoyance at the least if 
one  uses 
intentionally  or 
unintentionally.  A  recent  study  showed  that  data  mining 

feature/button 

the  wrong 

addresses, 

Permission to  make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be  honored. 
Abstracting with  credit  is  permitted. To copy  otherwise, or republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.  
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA   
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00   
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819981 

560

in  responding 

tools such as VoloMetrix, adopted by various organizations 
for understanding worker productivity, show that 15% of a 
typical  office  worker's  day  is  spent  on  e-mail,  5%  of 
received  e-mails  result  from  Reply  All,  and  this  costs 
millions  of  dollars  in  terms  of  worker  productivity  [23]. 
Anecdotes  illustrating  negative  effects  of  inappropriate  or 
erroneous  Reply  All  emails  are  so  rife  in  everyday  email 
communication that the popular press often publishes many 
guidelines  and  rules  outlining 
the  appropriate  email 
to  emails  [21,24,25].  Many 
etiquette 
commercial  email  programs  have 
introduced  design 
features  to  disable,  hide,  and  warn  users  when  using  the 
Reply  All  button  [12,14].  In  spite  of  this  seemingly 
widespread  awareness  and  design  efforts  to  reduce  Reply 
All  misuse  it  is  not  clear  why  these  errors  continue  to  be 
prevalent in everyday email communication.  
In  this  paper  we  present  two  studies  (experimental  study 
and  survey  study)  that  explore  why  inappropriate  use  of 
Reply  buttons  occurs  in  the  first  place  and  what  factors 
influence  the  choice  of  a  Reply  vs.  Reply  All  in  emails 
addressed  to  two  or  more  recipients.  In  this  work  we 
consider  a  mistake  in  using  Reply  and  Reply  All  to  have 
occurred if either of the following happens: 1) unintentional 
slip  –  this  happens  when  a  user  intends  to  click  Reply 
button but mistakenly clicks the Reply All button and vice 
versa  2)  noncompliance  with  response  directive  –  this 
happens  when  the  sender  explicitly  requests  a  Reply  or  a 
Reply  All  but  the  user  does  not  follow  the  directive;  this 
may  be 
lack  of 
awareness  of  the  directive.  In  the  experimental  study,  we 
explore  the  influence  of  several  factors:  1)  how  the  reply 
button  suite  is  designed  or  arranged  (reply  button  suite 
interface),  2)  the  availability  of  sender’s  solicited  reply 
style in the email content (response directive), and 3) how 
multiple  recipients  are  displayed  in  the  header  (multiple 
email addresses vs. a single email list address).  
Our findings from the above two studies show that people 
are  very  cognizant  of  using  and  abusing  the  Reply  All 
feature  and  in  fact  tend  to  err  towards  Reply  even  when 
asked  to  Reply  All.  The  experimental  study  showed  that 
this  was  greater  when  a  single  email  list  address  is 
displayed  rather  than  multiple  addresses.  Thus  when 
multiple  email  addresses  are  displayed,  peopled  tended  to 
err  towards  Reply  All.  People  also  tended  to  take  the 
longest  time  to  respond  when  no  explicit  directive  was 

intentional  or  unintentional  due 

to 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

given  and  the  shortest  time  to  respond  when  asked  to 
“Reply”. The explanation for these experimental results was 
found  from  the  free  text  responses  of  the  survey  study  on 
people’s  perceptions  and  expectations  of  how  replying 
decisions are made and expected to be made. We found that 
being aware of potentially overburdening others with Reply 
All, people deliberated before making a response decision, 
explaining the response time variation. Furthermore, lack of 
common  definitions  of  group  size,  group  relevance  and 
message relevance to the recipients seem to cause mistakes 
in using Reply or Reply All. We discuss these findings and 
their implications for the design of email interfaces that can 
aid in reducing misdirected emails.  
BACKGROUND 
While  we  recognize  that  the  previous  literature  on  email 
design, use, and its effects is substantial, for the purpose of 
the research questions explored in this paper, we focus our 
review largely on the themes of email overload and email 
management, as Reply All contributes to this overload and 
can be influenced by one’s response management strategy. 
It  should  be  noted  that  there  are  two  definitions  of  email 
overload in the literature, one referring to excessive email 
messaging and the other referring to the wide range of tasks 
for  which  email  is  used  beyond  basic  communication  as 
discussed briefly below. 
Email use and overload 
Early  studies  focused  on  how  people  use  email  in 
organizational  and  social  contexts  [18,32].  Seen  as  a 
“habitat” where people often dwell [9], and perform a wide 
range of activities [32], today email continues to be the top 
activity of adults online apart from searching the web. It is 
reported  that  92%  of  online  adults  use  email  with  61% 
using it on a typical day [21].  
Equally  relevant  today  is  the  idea  of  email  overload,  long 
recognized as a problem by Denning in 1982 [7] due to the 
barrage of irrelevant or junk email received. Over the years 
several studies have looked at the negative effects of email 
overload  where  higher  volumes  of  email  have  been 
associated with stress and reduced productivity [1,6,19].  
Unlike  Denning’s  conceptualization  of  email  overload, 
researchers  have  also  looked  at  overload  in  terms  of  the 
multitude  of  ways  in  which  email  is  used  beyond  being  a 
medium  of  communication  for  activities  such  as  time 
management  and  task  management  [2,32].  Other  user 
activities conceptualized surrounding email are 1) keeping 
up with “the flow” of incoming messages as they arrive, 2) 
triaging of emails accumulated when user is away, 3) using 
emails  as  reminders  to  manage  tasks  that  needed  to  get 
done, 4) archiving, and 5) retrieving [25, 27]. 
In  the  research  presented  in  this  paper  we  view  email 
overload  in  terms  of  both  the  quantity  and  relevance  of 
messages that is also a result of people’s response behavior 
in the “flow” and “triaging” of incoming messages.  

561

is  needed 

Email Management 
As  email  overload  affects  time  and  task  management, 
understanding how one manages incoming email can shed 
light  on  email  response  behavior.  Mackay  [18]  found  that 
people tended to be “overwhelmed”, “on the edge” or “ok” 
when  handling  email  and  acted  as  either  prioritizers  or 
archivers. Prioritizers tended to limit time spent on emails 
while archivers tended to view all messages to ensure they 
didn't miss anything important.  Seminal work by Whittaker 
and  Sidner  [32]  showed  that  people  tend  to  be  frequent 
filers,  spring  cleaners,  and  no  filers  in  how  they  handled 
email  in  their  inboxes;  this  was  found  to  be  true  even  10 
years later in 2006 [11]. While these studies provide a good 
understanding of how people handle email with respect to 
organization  and  storage,  more  work 
to 
understand how this affects replying and response behavior.    
The research in this paper examines two aspects of response 
behavior: choice of Reply and Reply All and the amount of 
time  it  takes  to  do  so.    Some  researchers  have  examined 
whether  people  choose  to  respond  to  emails  in  general 
(irrespective  of  Reply  and  Reply  All)  and  others  have 
focused on response time [7,27]. Tyler and Tang [27] found 
that people typically responded to emails more quickly if it 
came  from  people  within  their  workgroup,  as  well  as  to 
messages in a continuing thread/conversation. Dabbish et al 
[7] found that only 36% of emails received were perceived 
as requiring a response and responses were 18% less likely 
for  emails  with  more  than  one  recipient  and  20%  more 
likely  for  emails  with  single  recipient.  While  this  study 
focuses on likelihood of response, it does not differentiate 
between  responses  that  are  Reply  vs.  Reply  All,  which  is 
the focus of this paper. 
Strategies  and  Tools  to  Handle  and  Curb  Email 
Overload 
Focusing  on  the  “excessive  email”  definition  of  email 
overload,  many 
proof-of-concept 
technologies  have  been  developed  to  help  deal  with  email 
overload including curbing the inappropriate use of email.  
Some help highlight email as being important and/or create 
meaningful  summaries  based  on  mining  of  email  content 
[4,13],  while  others  help  visualize  meaningful  interaction 
histories and threads [29,31]. 
Of  particular  relevance  for  the  research  presented  in  this 
paper  are  the  tools  and  strategies  developed  to  reduce  the 
occurrence of misdirected or inappropriate sending of email 
that  can  add  to  overload  and  negative  repercussions. 
Popular  press  sites  focusing  on 
the 
workplace often dictate that proper email etiquette requires 
“having a clear direct subject line”, “thinking twice before 
hitting  Reply  All”,  “deleting  all  email  addresses  and  then 
inserting addresses as needed when replying  to an email”, 
and “resisting sending email, instead picking up the phone” 
[5,26].  Google’s  founders  suggest  switching  all  those  not 
relevant  in  an  email  thread  to  BCC  and  mentioning  this 
switch  explicitly  in  the  body  of  the  email  when  Replying 

technology  and 

commercial 

and 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

these 

All  [24].  While  all  the  strategies  discussed  above  have 
value if meticulously followed, this still leaves the burden 
of  figuring  out  who  or  what  is  relevant  to  reply  on  the 
recipient,  and  that  may  or  may  not  be  the  same  across  all 
recipients. Jackson et al [15] found that the quality of email 
messages received can be improved by training senders on 
factors such as getting them to explicitly ask themselves if 
the email/reply was necessary.  
Specifically  with  respect  to  curbing  the  inappropriate  or 
erroneous  use  of  Reply  All  feature,  many  email  programs 
have  implemented  various  design  features  such  as  “Undo 
Send” in Gmail, [22] or “Recall” message in Outlook that 
delays  the  email  from  being  sent  (to  other  Outlook  users) 
for a few minutes/seconds so as to give the sender a little 
time  to  change  his/her  mind  [14].  But  if  the  recipient  has 
already  read  the  email  or  if  the  sender  does  not  realize 
his/her mistake immediately, the window of opportunity to 
meaningfully  use 
features  disappears  quickly. 
Microsoft’s Outlook program also provides a plug-in option 
called NoReplyAll that allows senders to prevent recipients 
from  using  Reply  All.  Reply 
to  All  Monitor 
(www.sperrysoftware.com) alerts users of their action when 
they click the Reply All button. Gmail conceals the Reply 
All  and  Forward  buttons  under  a  drop  down  menu  of  the 
Reply  button  with  the  aim  of  minimizing  the  accidental 
clicking of Reply All and also allows one to “mute” or be 
removed from an ongoing email thread [16]. 
Many  companies  (such  as  Wells  Fargo  and  Nielsen)  have 
also  adopted  extreme  measures  of  “the  “gentleman’s 
agreement” to not use Reply All, or abolished the use of the 
feature  by  making  the  Reply  All  button  inactive  with  the 
option to be reactivated as needed [23].  None of the above 
design  features  or  management  strategies  help 
in  a 
meaningful manner to curb inappropriate use of Reply All 
as  they  either  take  away  the  convenience  of  having  a 
“Reply All” button or provide only a limited opportunity to 
fix the problem before it becomes irrevocable.    
RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
In  this  paper  we  aim  to  understand  why  people  use  the 
Reply All feature in emails involving 2 or more recipients. 
Specifically  we  are  interested  in  understanding  the  role  of 
factors embedded in the email interface and people’s mental 
models  in  using  the  feature.  In  particular  we  explore  the 
following research questions: 
1.  How  does 

interface 
design/arrangement influence the use of the Reply All 
feature? 

reply  button 

suite 

the 

3.  How does the display of the recipients (multiple email 
addresses vs. a single email list address) influence the 
use of the Reply All feature? 

4.  What are people’s perceptions, norms and expectations 

regarding the use of the Reply All feature? 

2.  How  does 

the  response  directive  of 
influence the use of the Reply All feature? 

the  sender 

and 

from 

various 

academic 

We  explored  the  above  research  questions  through  an 
experimental study as well as a survey study. 
STUDY 1: EXPERIMENTAL STUDY 
To  explore  how  the  interface  design  of  the  reply  button 
suite, response directive and display of recipients influence 
the use of the Reply All feature in emails, we conducted a 
reaction  time  and  accuracy  experiment  on  a  desktop 
computer with an external mouse attached. 
Method 
Participants 
A  total  of  109  participants  (76  female)  consisting  of 
students (67) and faculty/staff (42) from a small liberal arts 
state  university  were  recruited  for  the  study.  Participants 
came 
administrative 
departments and ranged in age from 18-70 years.  
Procedure 
All  participants  completed  an  experiment  where  they  read 
108 simulated emails (trials) and clicked on Reply or Reply 
All for each one. We used a variety of email content themes 
to  address various organizational communication contexts. 
A  total  of  18  emails  were  provided  with  the  following 
contexts:  1)  requesting  availability  for  a  meeting,  2) 
requesting  volunteers  to  review  a  report,  3)  requesting 
volunteers for a committee, 4) requesting participation in a 
benefit  walk,  5)  requesting  carpooling  to  an  event,  and  6) 
requesting a decision on including certain information in a 
report.  Specific  committee,  event,  and  report  names  were 
changed  but  were  matched  for  the  number  of  letters.  The 
email  text  for  each  trial  was  presented  within  a  simulated 
email  client  format  –  where  static  images  containing  the 
button layout, address fields, and email text were displayed 
at  the  center  of  the  computer  screen.  The  interface  was 
intentionally left simple and sparse to avoid confusion (see 
Figure 1).  

Figure 1. Sample Email Interface. 

 

562

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

After informed consent, participants began the study with a 
brief  computerized  pre-experiment 
survey  assessing 
participant  status  (faculty,  staff,  student),  work  status  (full 
or  part  time),  frequency  of  email  use,  and  feelings  of 
overload.  They  were  then  instructed  to  imagine  that  they 
were  working  for  an  organization  and  receiving  emails  at 
their work address, some of them from an email list within 
the  organization.  They  were  told  to  read  the  emails 
thoroughly  and  determine  as  quickly  as  possible  whether 
they wished to Reply or Reply All and click the computer 
mouse on the associated button. The computer recorded the 
x,y  coordinate  of  the  location  of  the  mouse  click  and 
identified  whether  Reply  or  Reply  All  was  selected 
(accuracy) as well as the time it took the participant to click 
the  mouse  (response 
time).  Participants  were  shown 
individual  images  of  all  provided  buttons  –  Reply,  Reply 
All, Forward, Trash, and a drop-down Reply menu (in one 
interface) – at the beginning of the study, and the function 
of each button was explained. Clicks on the “Forward” and 
“Trash”  buttons  were  not  recorded  for  this  study  and 
participants  did  not  have  to  type  a  reply  to  the  email. 
Following the study, participants completed a paper survey 
soliciting information about past accidental Reply All use. 
We measured the email response time as well as accuracy 
across 
the 
(unknown 
participants) presented in a counterbalanced order:  
Reply  button  suite 
that 
accidental  Reply  All  choices  could  happen  because  of  the 
close  proximity  of  the  Reply  and  Reply  All  buttons.  We 
thus tested three different arrangements of the reply button 
suite as shown in Figures 2-4. While Figure 2 (Reply and 
Reply All buttons next to each other) and Figure 4 (Reply 
All button hidden but accessible through a drop down menu 
denoted  by  an  arrow)  are  standard  layouts  seen  in  many 
email  clients  (such  as  Outlook,  Yahoo,  Gmail),  Figure  3 
represents  our  proposed  layout  of  separating  the  two 
buttons  with  a  “Trash”  and  “Forward”  button  in  between. 
Thirty six (36) trials of each condition were presented.  

interface:  We  hypothesized 

to 

the 

following  conditions 

 

Figure 2. Reply and Reply All 

Next to Each Other. 

 

Figure 3. Reply and Reply All 

Far Apart. 

 

 

Figure 4. Reply All in 
Drop-Down Menu. 

Response directive: We hypothesized that lack of clarity in 
the required reply action could lead to people being unsure 
of  whether  to  Reply  or  Reply  All  and  hence  cause  errors. 

563

Thus we composed three types of email messages: 1) 1/3 of 
the trials were some variant of “Tell Me” messages where 
Reply only to sender was solicited in the email content, 2) 
1/3 of trials were some variant of “Tell Us” messages where 
Reply  All  was  solicited,  and  3)  1/3  of  messages  were 
“Neutral” messages where there was no cue on whether to 
respond to only the sender or all recipients. While there was 
no “correct” response to messages in the neutral condition, 
we treated this as a control to gauge an individual’s natural 
tendency toward Reply or Reply All.  Messages in all three 
conditions were matched for number of characters. Figure 1 
shows  a  sample  message.  Thirty-six  (36)  trials  of  each 
condition were presented. 

Visibility  of  individual  recipient  email  addresses:  We 
hypothesized that if multiple email addresses are displayed 
in the “To” field, one may be less inclined to use the Reply 
All feature instead of the Reply feature because the user can 
actually see the number of recipients his/her response will 
reach. We thus compared two types of displays: 1) an email 
mailing list address where the actual number of recipients is 
masked  by  a  reflector  <team@workplace.com>,  and  2) 
fully  laid  out  email  addresses  of  11  recipients,  which  we 
felt  would  give  a  sense  of  the  large  number  of  people 
involved. Each condition was presented in 54 of the trials.  

Measures 
Response  Time  and  Accuracy:  We  measured  the  email 
response time as well as accuracy across all conditions. The 
computer determined which button a participant clicked and 
the amount of time it took to click. In the drop-down menu 
with  Reply  All  responses  (Figure  4)  that  involved  two 
clicks, the computer recorded both click times and treated 
the first as the response time. As the measure of click time 
was our only measure of how long it took to decide which 
button  to  click,  we  set  the  cursor  to  always  begin  at  the 
middle  of  the  screen  to  ensure  that  the  response  times 
would not vary based on whether one already had the cursor 
on  Reply  or  Reply  All.  Response  time  was  measured  in 
seconds on all trials while accuracy was measured only in 
the “Tell Me” and “Tell Us” directive conditions (72 of the 
108  trials);  clicking  Reply  to  “Tell  Me”  and  Reply  All  to 
“Tell Us” respectively were considered to be accurate.  In 
the  neutral  directive  conditions  (36  of  the  108  trials), 
propensity  toward  Reply  All  was  separately  assessed.  The 
participants were not explicitly told about this manipulation 
or any manipulation, nor were they given feedback during 
the experiment. 
Results 
Accuracy 
We gathered data on the choice of Reply or Reply All for 
each  trial  and  analyzed  them  using  a  repeated-measures 
ANOVA. Of 72 responses gathered using only Tell Me and 
Tell  Us  trials, a  total  of  65.74%  were  accurate  (clicking 
Reply was correct for Tell Me directive and clicking Reply 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

interesting 

2 = 0.192).  

2 = 0.400).  

All was correct for Tell Us directive). While a main effect 
for  accuracy  was  observed  with  respect  to  the  directive 
used,  no  main  effects  were  observed  for  the  email  Reply 
button suite interface layout and number of email addresses 
displayed.  Participants  were  significantly  more  accurate  at 
Tell Me (i.e., clicking Reply; 79.38%) than they were at Tell 
Us (i.e., clicking Reply All; 52.09%) (F(1,108) = 71.969, p 
< .001, ηp
We  also  discovered  an 
interaction  effect 
between Response Directive and Visibility of multiple email 
addresses. In Tell Me trials, accuracy was higher (83.44%) 
if  the  email  included  a  single  email  list  address  than 
multiple  individual  addresses  (75.33%).  In  Tell  Us  trials, 
accuracy was higher (57.75%) if the email was addressed to 
several  individual  emails  than  to  a  single  list  address 
(46.43%, F(1,108) = 25.651, p < .001, ηp
Propensity for Reply All in the Neutral trials 
In  the  neutral  trials  participants  clicked  Reply  (68.17%) 
more than Reply All (31.83%). They were also less likely to 
Reply  All  to  an  email  with  a  single  list  address  (25.23%) 
than  to  an  email  addressed  to  multiple  individual  email 
2  = 
addresses  (38.43%,  F(1,108)  =  41.500,  p  <  .001,  ηp
0.278).  
Response Time 
Response  times  on  all  trials  were  also  analyzed  with  a 
repeated-measures ANOVA. The average response time for 
each  participant  ranged  from  2.2  –  8.8  seconds,  with  an 
overall average of 4.4 seconds and a standard deviation of 
1.3  seconds.  Main  effects  were  observed  with  respect  to 
response  time  for  response  directive  and  number  of 
addresses shown, while no main effects were observed for 
Reply  button  suite  interface  layout.  In  the  Tell  Me  emails 
participants responded in on average 4.258 seconds, 0.205 
seconds faster than Tell Us emails and 0.278 seconds faster 
2  = 
than  Neutral  emails  (F(2,216)  =  8.569,  p  <  .001,  ηp
0.074).  In  emails  to  an  email  list  address  participants 
responded  in  on  average  4.357  seconds,  0.123  seconds 
faster than multiple-address emails (F(1,108) = 5.226, p = 
.024, ηp
STUDY 2: SURVEY STUDY 
In order to understand the rationale and reasoning used in 
making Reply vs. Reply All decisions in emails addressed 
to 2 or more people, we conducted an online survey.  
Method 
Participants 
A  total  of  112  people  completed  the  survey  from  14 
different  countries.  Participants  (40%  female)  came  from 
varied  professions  such  as  administration,  computing, 
education, engineering, healthcare and research where 98% 
had  earned  at  least  a  baccalaureate  degree,  89%  were 
employed  full  time  and  4%  were  unemployed.  Thirty-one 
percent were 21-30 years old, 35% were 31-40 years, 13% 
were 41-50 years, 13% were 51-60 years and 8% were 61 
years and over.  

2 = 0.046). 

Procedure 
An online survey was distributed on social media as well as 
to  the  faculty  and  staff  mailing  list  of  a  small  liberal  arts 
state university for people to complete and forward to other 
contacts.  Apart  from  general  background  information  and 
email use, open-ended questions were asked to understand 
beliefs and attitudes regarding replying to emails addressed 
to  2  or  more  individuals  with  respect  to  the  following 
themes:  
•  As  a  recipient,  how  would  they  respond  to  emails 
addressed  to  more  than  2  people?  (Use  Reply/  Use 
Reply All/ Never Respond / It depends. Explain) 

•  As a recipient, how would they like other recipients to 
respond  to  emails  addressed  to  more  than  2  people? 
(Use  Reply/  Use  Reply  All/  Never  Respond/  It 
depends. Explain) 

•  As  a  sender,  how  would  they  like  the  recipients  to 
respond  to  emails  addressed  to  more  than  2  people? 
(Use  Reply/  Use  Reply  All/  Never  Respond/  It 
depends. Explain) 

•  Have they ever unintentionally clicked the "Reply All" 
button instead of the intended "Reply" button to emails 
addressed  to  more  than  2  people?  (Yes/  No/  Can’t 
Recall).  

the  participants  said  “yes” 

Results 
The quantitative survey data were analyzed for quantitative 
summaries  and  the  text  responses  to  the  open  ended 
questions  were  analyzed  using  the  interpretive  principles 
outlined  in  [10,20],  revealing  several  themes  that  are 
illustrated through representative quotes (responses) below. 
Quantitative summaries 
Of the 112 completed surveys, 97% of the participants said 
they  use  email  5  or  more  days  a  week.  29%  of  the 
participants felt they were overloaded about receiving email 
while 60% felt neutral and 11% did not feel overloaded at 
all.  45%  of 
to  having 
unintentionally  clicked  the  Reply  All  button,  while  35% 
said “no” and 20% said they couldn't recall. As a recipient 
97% of the participants said they received emails addressed 
to more than 2 people very often (77%), sometimes (22%) 
and rarely/never (1%). As a sender 54% of the participants 
said they send emails addressed to more than 2 people very 
often (77%), sometimes (39%) and rarely/never (6%). 
Perceptions and Behavior as a Recipient 
We  asked  participants  to  respond  to  the  open-ended 
question explaining their rationale or choice to use Reply or 
Reply All when responding to an email addressed to more 
than  2  people.  Analysis  of  the  64  responses  received 
revealed that the decision to Reply or Reply All was often 
an active process of cost and benefit analysis of the value of 
their response to the other recipients. Participants’ response 
actions  fell  into  the  following  two  categories:  1)  Default 
Reply  All  (to  all  recipients)  with  some  exceptions  or  2) 
Active  cost  and  benefit  evaluation  that  resulted  in  either 

564

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Reply (to the sender only), or Reply All (to all recipients) or 
Reply to a subset of the recipients.  
Reply All as a default: Participants cited several reasons to 
explain  why  they  believed  that  Reply  All  should  be  the 
default  to  an  email  involving  2  or  more  recipients.  Some 
believed  that  if  the  original  sender  included  more  than  2 
people  in  the  email  then  it  was  not  their  responsibility  to 
exclude them.  
“If the sender decides to have more than 2 receivers, then I 
think it is best to reply to all”. P17 
Participants also assumed that the sender must have had a 
good reason to include more than 2 people. 
“I usually reply all because I consider that if the people in 
the conversation or copied are there for a reason, usually 
all  of  them  need  to  know  or  the  person  sending  the  email 
thought  they  did.  We  work  with  large  teams  and  people 
often need to know even if they never respond.” P9 
Participants  felt  strongly  about  not  removing  original 
recipients from the list so as not to exclude those originally 
included. 
“Mostly  I  use  reply  all,  since  even  if  the  response  isn't 
directed at everyone, they all need to know what the current 
status  of  the  conversation  is.    It's  frustrating  when  people 
take  things  off-line  and  then  bring  them  back  to  the  main 
thread  when  everyone  hasn't  been  informed.  This  wastes 
time and causes confusion.” P45 
For  several  other  participants  the  default  Reply  All  action 
was  motivated  by  the  norms  on  how  one  should  respond 
within their groups. 
“Sometimes  it  is  accepted/encouraged  explicitly  that  we 
should reply to all. If this is the case, I will reply to all” P55 
Many  participants  explained  that  even  if  Reply  All  was 
their default action, they made exceptions by replying only 
to the sender if their response was to convey themes such as 
criticism,  pointing  out  mistakes  or  clarification.  The 
following quotes were typical of such an outlook. 
“Multiple people on the email typically means its a group 
discussion so its Reply All most of the times, unless I want 
to point out something or provide an instruction to someone 
specific” P11 
“Default  is  to  reply  to  all,  unless  the  matter  is:  -  trivial 
(forgotten  attachment,  the  other  recipients  know  as  well, 
and only sender need to know), - sensitive in the sense that 
my reply reveal a mistake on senders behalf.” P49 
Cost  and  Benefit  Evaluation:  In  contrast  to  adopting  a 
default  Reply  All  strategy,  many  participants  engaged  in 
actively  considering  the  value  of  their  reply  to  the  other 
recipients. Participants used words such as “selective” and 
“relevance” to describe their evaluation process.  

Many participants based the relevance of their Reply All to 
email  based  on  group  affiliation,  organizational  structure, 
and collaborative tasks with the recipients. 
“If  the  email  is  comprised  of  internal  people,  then  it's 
usually  a  reply  all.  If  the  email  contains  a  client,  then  it 
varies  wildly  based  upon  the  information  that  needs  to  be 
sent” P28 
“My  work  requires  a  group  of  people  collaborating  via 
email so in most cases I tend to reply all.” P10 
Apart from a binary decision to either Reply or Reply All, 
participants  also  actively  considered  if  a  subset  of  the 
recipients should be replied to. 
“In  some  cases,  if  I  need  to  work  closely  with  one  or  a 
subset  of  the  group  in  greater  detail,  I  tend  to  take  the 
conversation offline from the original thread and then once 
we reach a point where an update to the original thread I 
would  revert  back  to  it  (just  to  reduce  some  noise  to  the 
others in the group).” P10 
Participants  in  deciding  whether  to  Reply  or  Reply  All 
often considered group size. When using the group size as 
an indicator, if the group size was perceived to be large they 
did not Reply All. However the “large” size was a function 
of a personal perception of a “large” number as illustrated 
by the following two participants.  
“It depends how many initial recipients there were. In my 
lab,  we  often  get  an  email  to  20ish  recipients.  So  in  this 
case I wouldn't ever really reply to all. Really these emails I 
rarely reply to though. If it's just something project related 
between a few of us I do sometimes use reply all”.  P7 
“I use 'Reply All' if I want to give information to everyone 
AND if the list is small enough to read everyone's name in 
about 3 seconds. Otherwise, use 'Reply'”. P103 
Perceptions and Desired Behavior from other Recipients 
We  explored  how  people  thought  other  recipients  should 
behave  in  response  to  the  emails  addressed  to  more  than 
two  individuals.  Our  questions  differentiated  between  two 
roles: 1) as a fellow recipient and 2) as a sender. 
As  a  fellow  Recipient,  participants  were  asked  how  they 
would  like  their  fellow  recipients  to  respond  to  an  email 
addressed  to  more  than  2  individuals.  Analysis  of  the  68 
responses  received  to  the  opened  ended  question  revealed 
that as a fellow recipient, participants’ expectations fell into 
two  categories:  1)  Receive  a  Reply  All  by  default  and  2) 
Receive a Reply All only if warranted. 
Expecting  Reply  All  by  default:    Participants  who  desired 
to be included in all replies to the original email by default 
cited  several  reasons  for  this  expectation.  While  some 
believed  that  the  original  sender  must  have  had  good 
reasons for having several individuals included in an email, 
others thought it was a simple way to ensure everyone was 
on  the  same  page  without  burdening  the  sender  to 
redistribute information as noted by P51. 

565

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

“That everyone gets the same information, because it's less 
work than having to ask, what another person has written” 
One participant went further to say that she desired a Reply 
All even if she did not act the same: “Hypocritical, I know, 
that I always want to be kept in the loop. No matter if it's 
not immediately relevant to me.” P75 
Expecting a Reply All only if warranted: A majority of the 
participants expected other recipients to use their discretion 
in  using  Reply  or  Reply  All  in  order  to  reduce  email 
overload.  While  some  participants  did  not  give  explicit 
factors  to  be  considered  in  using  one’s  discretion,  they 
alluded to the reply being somehow relevant or beneficial to 
them  or  the  rest  of  the  recipients.  Others  operationalized 
what “relevance” meant to them. The following quote was 
very typical of a sentiment that conveyed the importance of 
relevance to them. 
“If  the  answer  doesn't  affect  me,  but  only  the  sender,  I'd 
prefer that the response be only to the sender. Otherwise I 
feel overloaded.” P23 
Many participants operationalized “relevance” of Reply All 
messages  in  terms  of  personal  messages,  discussions,  and 
decision chains. Personal messages to sender were seen as 
non-relevant while emails requiring discussion or decisions 
were seen as relevant. 
“'Reply All' if there is a debate or some information I need, 
so that the sender doesn't have to resend some information” 
P103 
“Depends whether I'm in the decision-chain.”  P106 
As  a  Sender  of  the  emails  addressed  to  more  than  2 
individuals,  participants  were  asked  to  explain  how  they 
would  like  the  recipients  to  act.  Analysis  of  the  49 
responses  revealed  that  similar to their role as  a recipient, 
participants in their role as a sender fell into the category of 
either  expecting  a  default  Reply  All  or  the  category  of 
expecting a Reply All only if deemed appropriate. 
Participants who believed that a Reply All response should 
be  the  default  considered  their  intention  to  involve  all 
recipients in the first place as a sender was well motivated 
and hence no changes were required.  
“If the addressees do not reply to all, then this information 
is  not  spread  to  all,  which  was  my  intention.  All  people 
should be informed and stay informed”.  P17 
“I  usually  only  send  emails  addressing  multiple  people 
when  I  don't  mind  them  all  seeing  each  others  reply  and 
sometimes  actually  prefer  that  they  all  see  each  others' 
replies” P38 
Many participants juxtaposed explicit scenarios when they 
expected or did not expect Reply All as a response. Reply 
All was typically expected when emails involved activities 
such  as  planning,  coordination,  and  discussions  while  a 

these  discussion-oriented 

Reply  was  expected  with  announcements  and  information 
dissemination.  
“If i'm polling for information, then a simple reply is fine. 
But if I'm trying to organize something, then a reply all is 
expected” P84 
“If  it  is  a  situation  where  we  need  to  actively  collaborate 
then  reply  all  makes  sense.  If  I  am  sending  to  multiple 
people at once as a substitute for sending the same message 
to many individuals then reply all doesn't make sense.” P95 
Even  within 
topics,  some 
participants felt a Reply All was needed only if it brought 
new value to the conversation. 
“If people have unique perspectives different from mine, I 
would hope they would share with everyone. But if they are 
just agreeing with me, then please just Reply to me only.” 
P35 
Participants often mentioned how as a sender of an email to 
multiple addressees, they explicitly requested for a Reply or 
a Reply All action from them.  
“I'll often comment on which type of response I prefer and 
I'll often call out to people in the body [of the] email why I 
included them in the conversation.” P9 
DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS FOR DESIGN  
The  findings  from  the  experimental  study  as  well  as  the 
survey  study  provide  significant  insight  into  people’s 
perceptions, expectations and behavior with respect to using 
Reply  and  Reply  All  features  in  response  to  emails 
addressed  to  more  than  two  individuals.  Data  from  the 
experimental  study  highlighted  how  factors  such  as 
message  directive  and  display  of  addresses  influence 
people’s Reply or Reply All choice more so than the design 
of  the  interface,  and  the  survey  study  revealed  people’s 
norms  and  expectations  of  Reply  All  responses  to  these 
sorts of emails.  
Complexity of the Reply vs. Reply All Decision 
First  and  foremost  both  the  experimental  data  as  well  as 
self-reported  survey  data  indicate  that  erroneous  use  of 
Reply  features  is  prevalent  among  email  users.  The 
experimental  data  show  that  these  errors  (Replying  when 
asked  to  Reply  All  and  Replying  to  All  when  asked  to 
Reply) may not necessarily be solely due to the proximity 
of  the  Reply  and  Reply  All  button  in  the  design  layout 
leading to accidental “slips”. Instead both experimental data 
and  survey  data  suggest  misdirected  emails  are  driven 
primarily by how one perceives what an appropriate action 
should  be.  Experimental  data  showed  that  people  make 
significantly more mistakes when the response directive is 
Reply All. That is,  people were much more likely to only 
Reply  even  in  the  Tell  Us  trials  where  a  Reply  All  was 
desired. Insight on this behavior is seen in the survey data 
where  participants  illustrated  how  they  are  very  aware  of 
the  inconvenience  and  overload  of  receiving  and  sending 
Reply  All  emails  and  as  a  result  may  be  erring  on  the 

566

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

cautious  Reply  side  rather  than  the  Reply  All  side. 
Furthermore this active deliberation on whether to Reply or 
Reply All so as to not respond inappropriately to multiple 
people also explains why people were taking longer times 
to  respond  to  emails  with  the  Reply  All  directive  and 
neutral directive in the experiment. 
The  interaction  effect  of  the  response  directive  and  the 
display  of  individual  email  addressees  on  accuracy  in  the 
experimental  data  reveals  yet  another  insight  into  how 
errors are made in replying decisions. It was seen that when 
the response directive was to Reply, people were less likely 
to do so when individual email addresses were shown and 
in  contrast,  when  the  response  directive  was  to  Reply  All 
they were less likely to do so with email lists. Furthermore 
it was seen that people took longer to respond to emails that 
displayed  multiple  addressees.  These  findings  once  again 
suggest that people are very conscientious of not Replying 
to All in email lists but also suggest that they tend to Reply 
All  when  individual  emails  are  shown  albeit  after  more 
deliberation.  An  explanation  for  this  can  be  seen  in  the 
survey  data  where  participants  said  they  were  likely  to 
Reply All if the email was not addressed to a large group, 
and that if the sender originally included a set of addressees 
it  was  appropriate  to  keep  them  all  in  the  loop.  Thus  an 
explicit  display  of  individual  email  addresses  could  be 
viewed  by  some  people  as  an  indication  of  the  relevant 
members to whom they should Reply All even though the 
directive clearly asked for a Reply.  
The  results  from  both  studies  highlight  the  confusion  and 
errors  caused  by  varying  and  conflicting  perceptions  and 
expectations  of  what  is  the  right  response  to  emails 
addressed  to  more  than  2  people.  While  some  believed  it 
was  only  right  to  include  all  recipients,  others  focused  on 
how relevant their response was to others. The survey data 
provided 
into  how  “relevance”  was 
operationalized  by  different  participants  (e.g.  group  size, 
group  affiliation).  However  the  varying  perspectives  on 
relevance  also  seem  to  result  in  a  mismatch  between  the 
desired  behavior  from  the  recipients  and  their  actual 
behavior.  Similar  tensions  in  whether  one  should  post 
replies  to  email  lists  were  seen  in  a  study  of  community 
mailing  lists  where  participants  were  found  to  have  no 
consensus on whether replies should even appear on the list 
[33].  This  suggests 
to 
establishing  common  ground  between 
senders  and 
recipients  may  be  needed.  One  is  to  consider  the  several 
design  features  that  can  help  people  in  making  more 
accurate response choices, while the other is to establish a 
culture  of  explicit  norms  and  expectations  within  a 
community or users in general.  Previous research [15] has 
shown  that  training  can  help  people  send  effective  and 
efficient emails, and this is also seen in the spew of “work 
email” advice in organizational articles. There is definitely 
value in education, training and awareness; without this we 
can  expect  greater  frustrations  from  inappropriate  use. 
However  previous  research  [27]  also  recognizes  that  the 

two-prong  approach 

that  a 

richer 

insight 

burden  of  response  is  on  the  recipient  as  seen  in  the 
findings  of  our  work.  Furthermore  previous  research  has 
also  found  that  sending  email  is  preferable  to  receiving 
email  [3]  and  that  people  may  respond  to  a  message 
because it is easier to do so and that it is not driven solely 
by  the  perceived  importance  of  a  message,  but  rather  on 
other message characteristics such as information requests, 
the  social  nature  of  message  content  and  sender 
characteristics  [7].  This  suggests  that  one  may  be  less 
inclined  to  put  thought  into  whom  the  reply  should  go  to 
due  to  the  burden  of  the  complex  cost  benefit  evaluation 
process it involves. This calls for design of email interfaces 
that reduce this burden for users as discussed below.   
Implications for Design and Practice 
Together the findings from the two studies provide several 
implications for design of email interfaces.  
The focus of current design of email interfaces has been on 
error  prevention,  namely  minimizing  accidental  use  of  the 
Reply All button as seen in interfaces where the access to 
Reply All is hidden and requires an extra step (such as in a 
drop down menu in Gmail) or enabling the disable feature 
of  Reply  All  feature  (NoReplyAll  plug-in  in  Outlook). 
While  some  existing  designs  focus  on  recovery  such  as 
delayed  the  sending  of  an  email  so  as  to  help  the  sender 
“recall” or undo the send action after the error is realized, 
this does not help users who do not realize the “mistake” in 
the first place. Thus the focus of interface design should be 
in  empowering  users  to  make  informed  and  appropriate 
choices 
features  should  make 
transparent what the repercussion of a Reply All action will 
be,  and  this  will  aid  people  in  reflecting  on  their  decision 
process. Features such as warning messages or an explicit 
display of the number of people who will receive the email 
can help users see the context in which the email is being 
sent.  However  caution  has  to  be  executed  in  how  these 
transparency features are used. Standard warning messages 
such  as  “are  you  sure  you  want  to  send  this  email  to  15 
people” will be less effective than “Are you sure you want 
this email to go to 5 more people than what the sender has 
requested” or “This email includes 2 others that are not part 
of  the  team”.  Previous  research  has  found  that  displaying 
recipient  pictures  can  help  reduce  the  occurrences  of 
misdirected emails [17], and our findings support the need 
for  such  visualization  and  features  that  increase  the 
transparency  and  awareness  of  who  the  recipients  are  and 
what their role is in the context of the email. 
That people make errors in Reply and Reply All decisions 
even when the sender provides explicit response directives 
in  the  email  content  highlights  the  importance  of  high 
visibility  of  response  directives  in  the  interface  design.  It 
also  highlights  the  lack  of  features  that  help  establish  a 
common  ground  between  senders  and  recipients  in  the 
email  interface  designs.  Previous  research  has  shown  that 
visual indicators of task and personal utility could aid users 
in deciding which messages to read [30]. In a similar way 

replying.  Design 

in 

567

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

to 

two  or  more 

providing explicit cues of directives can help users decide 
which emails to respond to and how. For example, design 
features  should  provide  senders  meaningful  and  effective 
ways of displaying explicit directives such as Please Reply 
or Reply All or Reply to a Subset or Do Not Reply (FYI, 
for your information).  
CONCLUSION 
In this research we set out to understand users’ reasons and 
motivations  for  using  Reply  All  vs.  Reply  in  emails 
addressed 
individuals.  Our  results 
highlighted  how  this  decision  making  process  is  complex, 
where the perceptions and expectations of the criteria used 
vary  across  people  leading  to  replying  choices  that  lack 
consensus.  We  discussed  several  design  implications  for 
aiding a user in making this decision meaningfully. Future 
work  requires  design  and  evaluation  of  various  email 
interface elements that not only aid in the decision-making 
process  but  also  explicitly  help  reduce  the  burden  of  this 
decision-making  process.  Collectively  understanding  user 
perceptions  and  expectations  along  with  user  behavior  in 
this  research  not  only  provides  valuable  insights  for  the 
design  of  email  interfaces  but  also  holds  promise  of 
reducing inappropriate and erroneous use of Reply All and 
minimizing frustrations of email overload in general.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This  research  was  partially  funded  by  two  separate  local 
grants from Connecticut State University System. We thank 
all participants for their time devoted to this research. 
REFERENCES 
1.  Stephen R. Barley, Debra E. Meyerson, and Stine 
Grodal. 2011. E-mail As a Source and Symbol of 
Stress. Organization Science 22, 4, 887–906. 
http://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1100.0573  

2.  Victoria Bellotti, Nicolas Ducheneaut, Mark Howard, 

Ian Smith, and Rebecca E. Grinter. 2005. Quality 
Versus Quantity: E-Mail-centric Task Management and 
Its Relation with Overload. Hum.-Comput. Interact. 20, 
1, 89–138. 
http://doi.org/10.1207/s15327051hci2001&2_4  

3.  Victoria Bellotti, Nicolas Ducheneaut, Mark Howard, 

and Ian Smith. 2003. Taking Email to Task: The 
Design and Evaluation of a Task Management 
Centered Email Tool. Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
ACM, 345–352. http://doi.org/10.1145/642611.642672  

4.  Gary Boone. 1998. Concept Features in Re:Agent, an 

Intelligent Email Agent. Proceedings of the Second 
International Conference on Autonomous Agents, 
ACM, 141–148. http://doi.org/10.1145/280765.280791  
5.  Alex Cavoulacos. Finally! The 23 Unwritten Rules Of 

Email. Forbes. Retrieved May 20, 2015 from 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/dailymuse/2013/08/19/fin
ally-the-23-unwritten-rules-of-email/  

6.  Laura A. Dabbish and Robert E. Kraut. 2006. Email 

Overload at Work: An Analysis of Factors Associated 
with Email Strain. Proceedings of the 2006 20th 
Anniversary Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work, ACM, 431–440. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1180875.1180941  

7.  Laura A. Dabbish, Robert E. Kraut, Susan Fussell, and 

Sara Kiesler. 2005. Understanding Email Use: 
Predicting Action on a Message. Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, ACM, 691–700. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1054972.1055068  

8.  Peter J. Denning. 1982. ACM President’s Letter: 
Electronic Junk. Commun. ACM 25, 3, 163–165. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/358453.358454  

9.  Nicolas Ducheneaut and Victoria Bellotti. 2001. E-mail 

As Habitat: An Exploration of Embedded Personal 
Information Management. interactions 8, 5, 30–38. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/382899.383305  

10.  Robert M. Emerson, Rachel I. Fretz, and Linda L. 

Shaw. 1995. Writing ethnographic fieldnotes. 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago. 

11.  Danyel Fisher, A. J. Brush, Eric Gleave, and Marc A. 
Smith. 2006. Revisiting Whittaker & Sidner’s “Email 
Overload” Ten Years Later. Proceedings of the 2006 
20th Anniversary Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work, ACM, 309–312. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1180875.1180922  

12.  Whitson Gordan. Top 10 Gmail Labs and Features You 

Should Enable. Lifehacker. Retrieved May 20, 2015 
from http://lifehacker.com/5721986/top-10-gmail-labs-
you-should-enable  

13.  Suhayya Abu-Hakima, Connie Mcfarland, and John 

Meech. 2001. An agent-based system for email 
highlighting. ACM Press, 224–225. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/375735.376292  

14.  Ulrika Hedlund. How to recall an email – and why you 
shouldn’t do it! Business Productivity. Retrieved May 
20, 2015 from 
http://www.businessproductivity.com/how-to-recall-
an-email-and-why-you-shouldnt-do-it/  

15.  Thomas W. Jackson, Anthony Burgess, and Janet 
Edwards. 2006. A Simple Approach to Improving 
Email Communication. Commun. ACM 49, 6, 107–109. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1132469.1132493  

16.  Karyne Levyn. If You’re Trapped In A Reply-All 

Email Chain From Hell, Here’s Gmail’s Simple 
Solution. Business Insider. Retrieved May 20, 2015 
from http://www.businessinsider.com/mute-email-
chains-in-gmail-2014-4  

17.  Eric Lieberman and Robert C. Miller. 2007. Facemail: 

Showing Faces of Recipients to Prevent Misdirected 
Email. Proceedings of the 3rd Symposium on Usable 

568

258. Retrieved May 20, 2015 from 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1241889.1241902  
28.  Daniella Gina Venolia, Laura Dabbish, JJ Cadiz, and 

Anoop Gupta. 2001. Supporting email workflow. 
Microsoft Research. Retrieved from 
http://research.microsoft.com/pubs/69881/tr-2001-
88.pdf  

29.  Fernanda B. Viégas, Scott Golder, and Judith Donath. 

2006. Visualizing Email Content: Portraying 
Relationships from Conversational Histories. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, 979–988. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1124772.1124919  

30.  Jaclyn Wainer, Laura Dabbish, and Robert Kraut. 

2011. Should I Open This Email?: Inbox-level Cues, 
Curiosity and Attention to Email. Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, ACM, 3439–3448. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979456 

31.  Steve Whittaker, Quentin Jones, Bonnie Nardi, et al. 
2004. ContactMap: Organizing Communication in a 
Social Desktop. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 
11, 4, 445–471. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1035575.1035580  

32.  Steve Whittaker and Candace Sidner. 1996. Email 

Overload: Exploring Personal Information 
Management of Email. Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
ACM, 276–283. http://doi.org/10.1145/238386.238530 

33.  Amy X. Zhang, Mark S. Ackerman, and David R. 

Karger. 2015. Mailing Lists: Why Are They Still Here, 
What’s Wrong With Them, and How Can We Fix 
Them? Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
ACM, 4009–4018. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702194  

 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Privacy and Security, ACM, 122–131. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1280680.1280696  

18.  Wendy E. Mackay. 1988. Diversity in the Use of 

Electronic Mail: A Preliminary Inquiry. ACM Trans. 
Inf. Syst. 6, 4, 380–397. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/58566.58567  

19.  Gloria Mark, Stephen Voida, and Armand Cardello. 

2012. “A Pace Not Dictated by Electrons”: An 
Empirical Study of Work Without Email. Proceedings 
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, ACM, 555–564. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2207754  

20.  Michael G. Pratt. 2008. Fitting Oval Pegs Into Round 

Holes Tensions in Evaluating and Publishing 
Qualitative Research in Top-Tier North American 
Journals. Organizational Research Methods 11, 3, 
481–509. http://doi.org/10.1177/1094428107303349  
21.  Kristen Purcell. Search and email still top the list of 

most popular online activities. Pew Research Center’s 
Internet & American Life Project. Retrieved May 20, 
2015 from 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2011/08/09/search-and-
email-still-top-the-list-of-most-popular-online-
activities/  

22.  Melia Robinson. Here’s How To Undo A Sent Email 
In Gmail. Business Insider. Retrieved May 20, 2015 
from http://www.businessinsider.com/how-to-undo-a-
sent-email-in-gmail-2013-12  

23.  Mike Rosenwald. Eradicating “Reply 

All.”BloombergView. Retrieved May 20, 2015 from 
http://www.bloomberg.com/bw/articles/2012-11-
21/eradicating-reply-all 

24.  Eric Schmidt, Jonathan Rosenberg, and Quora. 2015. 9 
Rules For Emailing From Google Exec Eric Schmidt. 
Time. Retrieved May 20, 2015 from 
http://time.com/3425368/google-email-rules/  

25.  Nelson Siu, Lee Iverson, and Anthony Tang. 2006. 

Going with the Flow: Email Awareness and Task 
Management. Proceedings of the 2006 20th 
Anniversary Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work, ACM, 441–450. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1180875.1180942  

26.  Jacquelyn Smith. 14 email-etiquette rules every 

professional should know. Business Insider. Retrieved 
May 20, 2015 from 
http://www.businessinsider.com/email-etiquette-rules-
every-professional-should-know-2015-4  

27.  Joshua R. Tyler and John C. Tang. 2003. When Can I 

Expect an Email Response? A Study of Rhythms in 
Email Usage. Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on 
European Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 239–

569

