CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Persistent Sharing of Fitness App Status on Twitter ∗

Kunwoo Park

KAIST

South Korea

kw.park@kaist.ac.kr

Meeyoung Cha

KAIST

South Korea

meeyoungcha@kaist.ac.kr

Ingmar Weber

QCRI
Qatar

iweber@qf.org.qa

Chul Lee

MyFitnessPal
United States

clee@myﬁtnesspal.com

ABSTRACT
As the world becomes more digitized and interconnected, in-
formation that was once considered to be private such as one’s
health status is now being shared publicly. To understand this
new phenomenon better, it is crucial to study what types of
health information are being shared on social media and why,
as well as by whom. In this paper, we study the traits of users
who share their personal health and ﬁtness related informa-
tion on social media by analyzing ﬁtness status updates that
MyFitnessPal users have shared via Twitter. We investigate
how certain features like user proﬁle, ﬁtness activity, and ﬁt-
ness network in social media can potentially impact the long-
term engagement of ﬁtness app users. We also discuss impli-
cations of our ﬁndings to achieve a better retention of these
users and to promote more sharing of their status updates.

Author Keywords
Fitness engagement; social sharing;

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.3. Information Interfaces and Presentation: Group and
Organization Interfaces; J.3. Life and Medial Sciences:
Health

INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, one’s health status can be easily collected and
shared on social media with the prevalence of mobile and
wearable devices along with the improvement of their track-
ing technology [10]. Popular health and ﬁtness apps such as
Endomondo1 and Fitbit2 can now help people keep tracking
∗The majority of the work was done while the ﬁrst author was at
Qatar Computing Research Institute
1http://www.endomondo.com
2http://www.ﬁtbit.com

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW’16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA
c(cid:13)2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819921

184

of what they eat, when they exercise, and how well they sleep.
These new technologies have facilitated trends like the Quan-
tiﬁed Self movement, which refers to a group of people who
diligently record and monitor different aspects of their daily
life [1].
Fitness apps provide a wide range of different functionali-
ties such as notiﬁcation, badging, competition, and commu-
nity support to achieve a better user retention and engage-
ment of their users [22]. One such functionality that has been
widely adopted is so-called social sharing, which lets ﬁtness
app users share and broadcast their ﬁtness activity through
their social networks. Social sharing is believed to be an ef-
fective way of boosting overall user engagement especially
when users can get a valuable feedback on their ﬁtness ac-
tivity by sharing their own personal health and ﬁtness status
updates through Social Awareness Streams (SAS) on popular
platforms like Twitter or Facebook.
While previous studies have examined why users would share
personal health status updates via Twitter or Facebook and
how such sharing may incur both positive and negative ef-
fects, not much is known about who would continue to be
engaged with such social sharing activity for the long-run.
We believe that it is important to understand characteristics
of such long-run (or persistent) social sharing since it might
actually prolong the engagement of ﬁtness app users with
physical activity. Therefore, the main question that we in-
tend to ask in this paper is what are characteristics of users
who share health and ﬁtness-related activity on social me-
dia outlets over an extended period of time? Investigating
which features are correlated with a persistent sharing of per-
sonal health and ﬁtness status updates on SAS can provide
a valuable insight for ﬁtness app designers to come up with
some features that can help achieve the better retention of
their users.
This paper presents an analysis carried out over an exten-
sive amount of Twitter data generated from one of the most
popular ﬁtness apps, MyFitnessPal (MFP for short). MFP
users can easily opt-in to automatically share their health and
ﬁtness status updates via Twitter (whom we simply call as
social opt-in users) as illustrated in Figure 1. These auto-
generated stream of posts comprises various types of mes-

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

sages like exercise logs, weight loss updates, and diary up-
dates. We analyze 4.7 million tweets posted by 3,169 MFP
users to study which factors are important for the long-term
sharing of their ﬁtness status updates.

Figure 1. Illustration of Social Sharing on Twitter.

Our analysis also provides a valuable opportunity to examine
how a wide range of information like Twitter proﬁle infor-
mation (e.g., followers, following, bio, etc), ﬁtness activity
information (e.g., exercise or weight loss records), or ﬁtness
network information (e.g., favorites on ﬁtness related tweets,
friends network based on ﬁtness interests, etc) can actually
affect the persistent engagement of ﬁtness app users. This
research further investigates whether certain features can ac-
tually predict their long-term engagement.
Our ﬁndings can be summarized as follows:
1. Persistent users tend to use Twitter in a more health-

oriented way.

2. Persistent users and short-lived users differ in the types of
messages that they share via Twitter. More precisely, shar-
ing of physical activity via Twitter is positively correlated
with their long-term engagement.

3. Persistent users and short-lived users differ in the types of
networks they form in social media. More precisely, own-
ing a network of friends who are interested in ﬁtness related
topics is positively correlated with their long-term engage-
ment.

4. Popularity on Twitter (or frequently receiving favorites on
one’s tweets) is negatively correlated with the long-term
engagement of ﬁtness app users.

We believe that our ﬁndings are important to better under-
stand the interplay between ﬁtness apps and social media. We
discuss possible implications of these ﬁndings as well as their
limitations for the rest of the paper.

RELATED WORK
We review previous research related to health and ﬁtness with
a special emphasis on the sharing of health status updates in
Social Awareness Streams (SAS).

Technological Advances in Health and Fitness
As information and communication technologies evolve, on-
line tools are increasingly employed to track diet and exercise
records that are found to be in such forms like blog postings,
forum postings, and weight management applications. Sev-
eral studies have been conducted to efﬁciently design support
tools for weight loss and diet planning. One study aimed to
predict the overall success of weight loss by using content
from weight loss blogs and found that certain linguistic fea-
tures had correlation with weight loss [3]. Other study used
publicly available MFP food diary data to study which types
of foods are most often associated with weight loss or weight

185

gain [25]. Researchers have also examined the effectiveness
of using support tools during a diet; the role of forums data
during the course of a diet was studied by investigating web
search logs of nearly 2,000 users [21]. Dieters progressively
narrow their searches to support the progress of their diet on
online forums. This study illustrates the overall importance of
dieting forums for the maintenance of dieting actions. Other
set of researchers found that community interactions are key
drivers to make sure that somebody continues to be commit-
ted to a diet [18].
Other researchers investigated different types of social inter-
actions that occur through diet forums and concluded that so-
cial conversations would help people ﬁnd similar buddies to
address their concerns and get feedback [11]. This means
that social factors on diet forums are meaningful to better
understand the mechanism for diet. Other study found that
users do not only consume information via online forums,
but also via social support (e.g., encouragement and motiva-
tion) [12]. Other study showed that social networks play an
important role for user’s engagement in health forums. It is
found that user-created groups were socially more active than
site-deﬁned groups as these tend to foster more persistent en-
gagement of users in health forums [24].
Based on these ﬁndings, the research community has also
been contributing to a better design of effective tools to help
people stick with their diet plans to eventually achieve weight
loss. A study on a diet portal called Total Wellbeing Diet
investigated which factors were associated with the user re-
tention on its website [8]. It was also found that the usage
level during the ﬁrst week of trial and the number of friends
that user has were important factors for her continuous com-
mitment to a diet.

Sharing Health Status Updates in SAS
It is increasingly common for people to share their health and
ﬁtness status updates using Social Awareness Stream (SAS)
platforms. Researchers have conducted various studies to un-
derstand why users share their health status updates via social
network and how their sharing behavior affects their future
usage. These studies have demonstrated the importance of
user’s social network during the course of a diet with the ul-
timate goal of achieving weight loss.
Some researchers investigated the overall ability of existing
social media outlets for health interventions by deploying a
Facebook app [16]. They discovered that people tend to ad-
here to their apps, and are aware of others’ privacy concerns
because they do not want to spam others’ newsfeed. Other re-
searchers investigated why and how people share health infor-
mation online, by interviewing those who engage with both
online health communities and Facebook [17]. Participants
in these interviews shared their personal health status updates
in the pursuit of more emotional support, accountability, mo-
tivation, advice, etc. Participants also mentioned that they
wanted to manage their projected image to their friends as
somebody healthy.
Interesting enough, some negative ef-
fects were also reported. Privacy concerns kept some partici-
pants from uploading their health status updates to Facebook,

mfp runner @mfp_runner · 26m
burned 334 calories doing 38 minutes of Running 
#myfitnesspal

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

which would prevent them from receiving all necessary so-
cial support. This study suggests the importance of having
a group of supportive, but insensitive to privacy concerns,
friends who will keep sharing their ﬁtness status updates in
SAS.
A study explored how people would utilize Twitter to
share information related to health-promoting physical activ-
ity [13]. Relying on Twitter’s Streaming API and by ﬁltering
exercise-related keywords such as “elliptical” and “muscle-
strengthening”, researchers analyzed content from certain
tweets to show what and how these were generated. Simi-
larly, other researchers conducted n-gram and qualitative dis-
course analyses by using public data across different social
media outlets [2].
Some researchers also looked into personal health and ﬁt-
ness activities on Twitter [23]. Through a qualitative anal-
ysis on health-related tweets, these identiﬁed different type
of content people had shared on Twitter: Plans and Goals,
Achieved, and Acts Avoided. They also interviewed 12 par-
ticipants to understand their true motivation of sharing up-
dates related to personal health-related activity. Participants
reported accountability in sharing health progress reports to
their audience. Unlike previous research works that have
found certain reluctance in sharing health status on Face-
book [17], participants in this particular study were naturally
more open to sharing such information publicly. Other re-
searchers investigated which features would help to get more
responses on personal Twitter messages, and discovered that
user-generated content retrieved way more responses (i.e., fa-
vorite and retweet) than automatically generated ones [7].
All above studies have found that the effect of social shar-
ing could vary depending on the type of media (e.g., Twitter,
Facebook) and social network. These studies, using a quali-
tative approach, make important ﬁndings about why people
share their own personal health information, what type of
content gets shared, and how these people are positively or
negatively affected by their sharing on SAS. These studies
did not investigate whether such positive and negative effects
were connected to persistent social sharing, which is critical
for ﬁtness business in general. We aim to predict persistent
users based on user proﬁle, usage and quality of network.
RQ. What are the main characteristics of users who share
ﬁtness app status updates on social media over a long time
period compared to those short-lived users?

DATASET AND METHODOLOGY
This section describes MFP and its main features, as well as
the methodology for gathering and extracting health and ﬁt-
ness status from tweets.

MyFitnessPal
MFP is a free health and ﬁtness app that helps people set and
achieve personalized health goals through tracking nutrition
and physical activity.
In 2014, MFP was the most down-
loaded app in the Google Play Store within the category of
health and ﬁtness.3 The MFP app helps users track exercise
3http://tcrn.ch/1CAph7I

Figure 2. Screenshots of MFP application

records, dietary habits, and weight loss to get “off autopi-
lot” and get insights that help them make smarter choices
and create healthier habits. Upon setting a personal ﬁtness
goal, users can visually inspect their ﬁtness and weight loss
progress. In Figure 2, we show screenshots of MFP that illus-
trate how a user of MFP can manage food diaries and track
her weight-loss progress using the app. MFP operates its own
social network, blogging platform, news feeds, and user fo-
rums. MFP also provides an auto-sharing option for certain
social media apps like Twitter or Facebook. We refer such
auto-sharing option as social opt-in in this paper: any user of
MFP can opt-in to post status updates, broadcast weight loss,
exercise logging or announce the completion of her daily di-
ary through Facebook or to automatically auto-post activity
logs and user-generated messages through Twitter using the
#myﬁtnesspal hashtag.

Twitter Dataset
For our analysis, we gathered a large collection of tweets con-
taining the #myﬁtnesspal hashtag, which we will refer to as
“MFP tweets” for the rest of the paper. We utilized the Dec-
ahose service from GNIP, which provides 10% of all public
tweets, sampled uniformly at random. During a two-month
period from April to June in 2014, we retrieved all MFP
tweets, corresponding to 6,047 unique users. In addition to
the Decahose data, in June 2014, we identiﬁed 1,447 addi-
tional MFP users who had posted at least one MFP tweet
by using the Twitter Streaming API. Six months later, we
crawled up to 3,200 public tweets of these users (that include
#myﬁtnesspal tweets as well as general tweets) and all of their
following/follower links. Note that we conduct such addi-
tional data collection since data collected through Decahose
and Streaming API was only limited to sampled tweets. After

186

(a) Food diary

(b) Weight loss progress

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Tweet Example
Burned 349 calories doing 30 minutes of running #myﬁtnesspal

Type
Exercise
Weight loss Lost 5 lbs since her last weigh-in! MFP-USER lost 10 lbs so far. #myﬁtnesspal
Diary
Blog
Usage

Completed her food and exercise diary for 5/05/2014 #myﬁtnesspal
Posted a new blog post SHORT-URL #myﬁtnesspal
MFP-USER has logged in for 295 days in a row! #myﬁtnesspal
Table 1. Observed types for auto-generated MFP tweets and mean fraction of each type across user

Mean Fraction
0.422
0.228
0.338
0.008
0.003

excluding users who did not post any tweet over the recent
three months to ensure users are active on Twitter, the ﬁnal
data set comprises 10,443,988 tweets, 3,188,763 outbound
links (following) and 2,766,024 inbound links (followers) of
7,494 users of MFP.
We limit our observation to a subset of English speaking
users (to ensure consistency in the choice of cohort) who own
no more than 10,000 followers (to ensure that those micro-
celebrities or evangelists who exhibit distinct behaviors are
disregarded) [20]. Furthermore, we limit our analysis to users
for whom we could obtain at least 180 days of activity since
their very ﬁrst MFP tweets. Finally, we constrain the analysis
to those users who have tweeted at least a month prior to their
ﬁrst MFP tweet (to ensure what we capture is the very ﬁrst
MFP tweet). This step is necessary because Twitter only al-
lows access to the most recent 3,200 tweets, which can cover
a variable time span. These steps leave us with 3,169 users,
and their 4,794,071 tweets. For a tweet to be considered an
MFP tweet in this paper, we also required the “source” meta-
data to indicate that it was generated by MFP, in addition to
the presence of the #myﬁtnesspal hashtag.
The MFP app generates several types of structured messages
in tweets (Table 1). Messages are forwarded to Twitter im-
mediately after an MFP message is generated for every social
opt-in user. More speciﬁcally, health status updates to SAS
include exercise records, weight loss, entries to a ﬁtness diary,
addition to on-site community blog, and continuous usage for
several consecutive days on MFP. For instance, a tweet ex-
ample in Table 1 reveals the duration and calories burned for
a given workout session, and another example shows a user
accessed MFP for certain consecutive days. Regular expres-
sions are utilized to extract useful information from this data,
including the MFP user names and the amount of calories
burned.4

CHARACTERISTICS OF SOCIAL OPT-IN USERS
This section presents characteristics of social opt-in users,
which give insight into understanding the long-term engage-
ment of users.

Deﬁnition on Social Opt-in User
In order to ﬁnd indicative features of long-term engagement
in social sharing, we deﬁne a binary variable µ to represent
the persistence of social opt-in. We set the ﬁrst 90 days since
the very ﬁrst MFP tweet as an “observation window” and pre-
dict which users continue to share health status on SAS up to
4For example, to identify workout tweets containing the amount
burned and the workout length, the following expression is uti-
lized: ((\d*,?\d+(\.\+)?)\s(calorie|kilojoule)s?.*(\d+)\smin(ute)?s.*)|
((\d+)\smin(ute)?s?.*\s(\*,?\d+(\.\d+)?)\s(calorie|kilojoule)s?.*)

the last 90 days of data, which we call a “target window”. Fig-
ure 3 depicts the prediction task, where we set µ=1, if a user
posts at least one MFP tweet during the target window and
refer such user persistent, otherwise we refer a user dormant
as these users no longer continued to post MFP messages on
Twitter and set µ=0. From this deﬁnition, we retrieved 2,589
persistent users (µ=1) and 581 dormant users (µ=0), respec-
tively. Note that we used a 3 month period in 2014 to identify
MFP users on Twitter. Any user who posted a MFP tweet
during the crawl period was labeled as social opt-in users.
However, the very ﬁrst MFP tweet of these users could date
far back in time, leading to different starting times.

Figure 3. Pictorial description of user persistence (µ)

A user can be labeled “dormant” for the following reasons.
Firstly, a user may no longer use MFP, which is a common
case of customer churn. Secondly, a user may have been inac-
tive temporarily, although she may return to the app in a near
future. Thirdly, a user may have disabled the auto sharing op-
tion while still engaging in the app. All of these cases will
result in ‘dormant’ according to Figure 3. Since we cannot
easily distinguish one case from another only from observ-
ing Twitter logs, the prediction task focuses on user engage-
ment in the sharing activity but not on retention of the ﬁtness
app itself. A measure of persistent social sharing is important
nonetheless, because persistent sharing means one is success-
fully retained to the app.

Characteristics of Social Opt-in Users
Whether persistent or dormant, social opt-in users had 334
friends on average (i.e., those who follows a user) and 208
followers, with medians of 175 friends and 84 followers, re-
spectively. Unlike follower count that is similar to the global
average, friends count is prominently higher than the reported
average of 102.5 This could be because the Decahose access
5http://www.beevolve.com/twitter-statistics

187

MFP tweet general tweet

Observation window

90 days

Target window

90 days

1st MFP tweet

a) Persistent user (   = 1)

µ

crawl time

Observation window

90 days

Target window

90 days

1st MFP tweet

(b) Dormant user (   = 0)

µ

crawl time

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

(a) Histogram of MFP tweets

(b) Number of active users per week

Figure 4. Different amount of engagements of social opt-in users. (a) present histogram of MFP tweets on ﬁrst 90 days, and (b) displays active user ratio
over ﬁrst 12 weeks.

reaches a sample of tweets, but not users, and hence active
users can be overrepresented. Alternatively it could simply
be due to changes over time since the reference statistics was
compiled.
Users showed a wide range of engagement levels with MFP.
Figure 4(a) displays the histogram of MFP tweets in the ob-
servation window (i.e., the ﬁrst 90 days of MFP sharing).
The most proliﬁc user posted 194 MFP tweets (i.e., 2.2 MFP
tweets per day), whereas 27% of users posted no more than
10 MFP tweets over the same duration. Figure 4(b) shows
the fraction of active users as a function of time, where ac-
tive user base decreases week by week. Note that those who
later become dormant show a rapid drop rate as one might
expect. Interestingly up to a quarter of dormant users still re-
main active after week 12. This means retention rate of social
sharing users is much higher than for a typical mobile applica-
tion. Such tendency of slow churn may be a key characteristic
of social opt-in users, as they might feel social accountabil-
ity and responsibility for their previously publicized commit-
ment, and try to share health update several more times before
they quit.

Twitter Usage of Social Opt-in Users
Subsequent to the general characteristics of social opt-in
users, we also investigate the set of topics these users engage
in on Twitter. Because Twitter is an interest-based social net-
work (i.e., people explicitly follow streams of other people
that interest them), one’s interest on certain topics will inﬂu-
ence how one builds their social network. Below we describe
two approaches to analyze the topical interests of users.
We ﬁrstly analyze hashtag usage, which can represent topi-
cal interest of users. In order to capture how diverse one’s
hashtags are, we compare both the Shannon’s entropy and
the number of hashtags between persistent user and dormant
user. To test for statistical signiﬁcance, we utilize the Mann-
Whitney U test which does not require normality assumption.
Not only dormant users tend to employ a larger number of
hashtags than persistent users (34.54 and 36.95, p<0.05), but
also their entropy in topic diversity is higher (1.88 and 2.06,
p<0.05). This ﬁnding suggests that persistent users are more
focused and narrow in their topical interests of Twitter.

Next we checked how persistent and dormant users post
health-related tweets except for MFP tweets. To investigate
it,we relied on crowdsourcing. We created a job on Crowd-
Flower6 and provided crowd workers with the screen name,
account name, self-description, and ﬁve randomly chosen
tweets for each user to be labeled. To ensure the test is non-
trivial, we only used non-MFP tweets for tagging. Workers
were asked the following question: Is this Twitter user in-
terested in health? Each question was answered by at least
three human coders, aggregated via majority voting. The tag-
ging task yielded moderate agreement rates of 0.577 based
on the Fleiss’s Kappa value.
In case the hired coders did
not reach an agreement, the authors manually inspected the
user to be labeled and chose the correct answer. We ﬁnd that
1,368 users out of 3,170 users to have noticeable interest in
health. We test whether persistent users have a larger number
of users who are interested in health by conducting proportion
test with continuity correction. As a result, we ﬁnd persistent
users are more likely to express interest in health on Twitter
than dormant users (0.441 and 0.337, p<0.05).
The above ﬁndings collectively suggest that having a focus
on health topics on Twitter could be an indicator of persistent
engagement in ﬁtness applications through social sharing.

PREDICTION OF PERSISTENT ENGAGEMENT
We aim to distinguish persistent and dormant users by em-
ploying various features from Twitter and MFP. The predic-
tion task is to classify users and determine which set of users,
based on the ﬁrst 90-day logs of MFP (i.e., observation win-
dow), will continue to share health status based on the most
recent 90-day logs (i.e., target window).

Basic Setting
The data contained 2,589 persistent users (µ=1) and 581 dor-
mant users (µ=0).
In order to construct a balanced set for
the prediction task, we up-sampled from the dormant users
and constructed a 5,178 user set allowing repetition. This
step enforces a 50-50 prior probability for both µ=1 and µ=0,
which makes the classiﬁcation model meaningful. Without a
balanced set, a model would overly be in favor of persistent
users. While we do not claim that the real prior probabilities
6http://www.crowdflower.com/

188

0.04

Median:18, μ=0

Median:27, μ=1

0.03

 
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

0.02

0.01

 μ= 1 (Persistent)
 μ= 0 (Dormant)

0.00

0

50

100

150

200

1.0

0.8

0.6

o
i
t
a
r
 
r
e
s
u
 
e
v
i
t
c
A

0.4

   μ=1 (Persistent)
   μ=0 (Dormant)

W1 W2 W3 W4 W5 W6 W7 W8 W9 W10 W11 W12

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Coef SE

p-value

Type

Twitter
Proﬁle

Fitness
Activity

Fitness
Network

Predictor
(intercept)
tweet_count
following
followers
favorite
retweet
exercise
blog
usage
weightloss
diary
calorie_mean
extime_mean
lost_weight
autoscaled
mfp_adopt_date
mfp_favorite
mfp_retweet
mfp_reciprocal
ﬁtness_reciprocal

Model χ2

0.074
0.030
0.047
0.051
0.488
0.852
0.037
0.031
0.043
0.033
0.036
0.026
0.033
0.032
0.029
0.003
0.313
0.955
0.027
0.415

-0.099
-0.048
-0.072
0.107
-1.982
-0.919
0.276
-0.061
0.083
0.007
0.071
-0.036
0.055
0.008
-0.044
0.008
-0.419
2.106
0.066
1.056
265.37

Mean value
µ=0

µ=1

Description

180.2
337.5
208.2
0.052
0.022
12.51
0.234
0.055
4.701
12.43
1458.6
1.751
16.57
0.286
21.31
0.046
0.004
0.343
0.034

163.2 Number of general tweets
332.6 Number of friends on Twitter
208.1 Number of followers on Twitter
0.031 Fraction of general tweets favorited
0.016 Fraction of general tweets retweeted
18.72 Number of workout tweets
0.193 Number of blog update tweets
0.163 Number of “consecutive usage” tweets
5.336 Number of weightloss tweets
16.89 Number of diary update tweets
649.0 Mean of the burned calories
2.040 Mean of the workout length
18.16 Total amount of lost weight
0.260 Fraction of auto-scaled over weightloss tweets
23.88 Months from ﬁrst MFP tweet to last tweet
0.028 Fraction of MFP tweets favorited
0.004 Fraction of MFP tweets retweeted
0.440 Number of reciprocal friends using MFP
0.048 Fraction of reciprocal friends who have

ﬁtness terms on their Twitter bio

***

***

**

*
*
*
***

*:p<0.05, **:p<0.01, ***:p<0.001
Table 2. Fitted values of standardized logistic regression model for predicting persistent social opt-in user. We observed three months from the initial
MFP usage to get features.

are 50-50, the re-weighing step controls the sample size and
helps us identify important factors of persistent engagement.
We now describe the prediction features. Twitter data contain
a wide range of features that represent user traits and ﬁtness
activities. The ﬁrst set of features, which are called Twitter
Proﬁle category in Table 2, describe the general character-
istics of users that are independent of MFP. These features
include the number of total days one was active on Twitter as
well as the number of followers and friends one has. In count-
ing tweet_count, favorite, and retweet, we only consider non-
MFP tweets (i.e., excluding MFP’s auto-generated tweets).
The second set of features, grouped as the Fitness Activity
category, represents the user’s activities of MFP portrayed on
Twitter. On top of the date when one ﬁrst shared an MFP
tweet (mfp_adopt_date), they refer to tweets generated by the
MFP application of the types shown in Table 1. From tweets
of the appropriate type we also extracted the mean amount of
calories burned by that user and the amount of exercise time,
total lost weight, as well as the fraction of weight loss tweets
logged via smart scales, if any exists.7
The last set of features, grouped in the Fitness Network cat-
egory, represents one’s social network related to ﬁtness and
social support activities a user received from that network on
Twitter. The features in this category include the fraction of
MFP tweets that are retweeted or favorited. We also examine

7MFP provides functions to automatically post the weights of users
through various commercial WiFi enabled body scales such as the
Withings Smart Body Analyzer.

the effects of MFP network by measuring the number of re-
ciprocal8 friends who also use MFP. In order to identify peers
who are interested in ﬁtness in general (without necessarily
sharing ﬁtness-related tweets), we consider reciprocal friends
who explicitly mention ‘health’ or ‘ﬁtness’ in their Twitter bio
and call this feature ﬁtness_reciprocal. This simple approach
can capture whether one is interested in health with high pre-
cision. We ensure that these friends are not media sources
by excluding those who have more than 10,000 followers by
applying the same standard to decide target users.

Indicator of Persistent Social Sharing
In order to determine which features are indicative of persis-
tent social sharing, we utilized standardized logistic regres-
sion algorithm and infer the relationship between variables.
Table 2 displays the results across three feature categories
(i.e., Twitter Proﬁle, Fitness Activity, and Fitness Network).
The table presents the coefﬁcient, standard error, statistical
signiﬁcance of each predictor in the logistic regression model.
The table also shows the mean value of each variable for per-
sistent and dormant users, as well as the chi-square value of
the model that represents the discriminative power of predic-
tion. We make four key observations.
First, several features in the Fitness Activities category are
positively associated with persistent users. Exercise was the
only statistically signiﬁcant feature, while others (including
even weight loss) did not show any meaningful relationship.
This observation implies that regularly tracking and sharing
8The “friendship” links on Twitter are, by default, uni-directional
and may not be reciprocated.

189

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

exercise (rather than posting other forms of updates like di-
aries) is important for persistent engagement.
Second, we investigate whether any characteristic of social
media usage (i.e., Twitter Proﬁle category) is related to per-
sistent users. Users who have a larger fraction of favor-
ited tweets tend to be dormant, which may be that frequent
favorites on general tweets make certain users more self-
conscious and aware of their audience on Twitter. This ﬁnd-
ing is related to a previous work that noted perceived audience
can affect sharing of personal health behavior [17, 23].
Third,
the fraction of reciprocal friends on ﬁtness and
MFP (i.e., ﬁtness_reciprocal, mfp_reciprocal) have positive
effects on persistent user. In contrast, receiving favorites on
MFP tweets (i.e., mfp_favorite) did not have any impact on
persistent usage. Having an appropriate audience (i.e., having
reciprocal friends on ﬁtness and MFP) could be more impor-
tant than getting explicit support to maintain sharing ﬁtness
activities. mfp_retweet is also found to be signiﬁcant, but it
displays the opposite effect with the inﬂuence of individual
variable. We observed the sign of the effect reverses after
including the fraction of retweeted tweets (retweet) as a fea-
ture. Hence, the directionality of the effect of mfp_retweet is
potentially due to linearity effects and should be interpreted
with caution.
Fourth, we observe people who start to share MFP tweets ear-
lier than others (i.e., early adopters) are more likely to con-
tinue sharing as seen from the mfp_adopt_date feature. This
indicates that early adopters of MFP may have distinct char-
acteristics compared to general users.
Subsequent to ﬁndings on features indicative of persistent
social sharing, we investigated the importance of individual
variables in the prediction task. The logistic regression model
in Table 2 can explain which predictor is associated with the
target variable after controlling any effects of the remaining
variables. However, statistical signiﬁcance of a predictor does
not guarantee the predictive power for a given target variable.
Therefore, we additionally utilized the Random Forest model,
an ensemble method constructing a number of decision trees
and measured variable importance for predicting the persis-
tence in social sharing.
In order to quantify the predictive
power of individual feature, we calculated the mean decrease
in Shannon’s entropy of each variable. The entropy measures
node impurity, thus a larger decrease of the value indicates
that the variable plays an important role in the partitioning
data.
Figure 5 displays the variable importance across all 19 fea-
tures. The ﬁgure shows that several features in the Twitter
Proﬁle category (followers, following, tweet_count) have the
highest discriminative power, against those features in the Fit-
ness Activity and Fitness Network categories. Among them,
interestingly, features based on the general Twitter usage (fol-
lowers, following, tweet_count) yield high predictive power
for persistent social sharing. This implies that persistent users
may have characteristic traits in the general usage of Twitter
itself that could distinguish themselves from dormant users.
In fact, Table 2 shows that persistent users tend to post fewer

Figure 5. Variable importance measured by the Shannon’s entropy for
predicting persistent social sharing.

tweets (163.2 vs. 180.2) and follow fewer accounts (332.6 vs.
337.5). However, highly ranked features in the Twitter Pro-
ﬁle category are not statistically signiﬁcant in Table 2, which
implies that the differences are basically due to the effects of
signiﬁcant variables in Fitness Activity and Fitness Network.
Another ﬁnding we make is that several features in the Fitness
Activity category are discriminative for persistent social shar-
ing, which reinforces our previous ﬁnding that sharing ﬁtness
activities frequently on social media is a strong indicator of
persistent engagement.

Evidence of Seeking Information
The result of Table 2 highlights the importance of a ﬁtness-
related network in persistent sharing of health status. In order
to investigate the underlying relationship of Twitter network
on persistent social sharing, we now focus on other features
that are descriptive in nature such as one’s followings list
(also called friend list). The followings list determines the
tweets from whom a user would like to receive feeds from
and is used for various recommendations within Twitter. As
mentioned in [7], people can share their personal health status
on SAS to get informational support from existing network.
We believe seeking information can be represented by the list
of following users, so we would like to test whether such fol-
lowing relationship on Twitter have any predictive power on
long-term social sharing of ﬁtness applications.
Does following a particular account and receiving that ac-
count’s feeds increase (or decrease) the probability of long-
term engagement? Table 3 shows the list of top-10 discrim-
inative accounts sorted by the chi-squared value for persis-
tent and dormant users, respectively. The Prob column shows
the conditional probability of persistent social sharing when
a user follows the given account on Twitter, for a 50-50 bal-
anced sample. The table also shows the number of users who
follow such accounts out of 3,170 MFP users in the column
denoted Freq.
Persistent users (µ=1) were far more likely to follow ac-
counts related to ﬁtness and diet such as AboutCalorie, Fit-
nessNHappier, and AHealthyBody. These accounts appeared
frequently among the persistent users’ lists. On the other
hand, dormant users (µ=0) exhibited a diverse set of inter-
ests, where many of them were related to entertainment—

190

250

200

150

100

 

y
p
r
o
t
n
E
e
s
a
e
r
c
e
D
n
a
e
M

 

50

0

Twitter Profile
Fitness Activity
Fitness Network

blog

exercise
mfp_reciprocal
mfp_adopt_date
mfp_retweet
usage
lost_weight
mfp_favorite
calorie_mean
diary
weightloss
extime_mean
retweet
fitness_reciprocal
tweet_count
followers
following
favorite
autoscaled

Features

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Increase prob. for µ=0
Account
SimonCowell
Ginofantastico
JKCorden
HulkHogan
BetteMidler
Celebjuice
Vangsness

Increase prob. for µ=1
Account
AboutCalorie
DaveRamsey
FitterNHappier
HowManyCaloriee
AHealtyBody
IAMJHUD
JoyceMeyer
TheRealMikeEpps
evernote
JoeManganiello
Table 3. Screen names of Twitter accounts that are discriminative of
persistent and dormant user, and their probability for µ=1 and the fre-
quency of incoming links per account.

Prob Freq
206
142
125
89
142
147
213
87 WorkoutHumor
68
66

Prob Freq
183
56
129
57
72
60
52
52
52
65

.36
.30
.37
.33
.35
.34
.34
.34
.34
.35

.81
.77
.79
.83
.73
.72
.66
.79
.83
.83

michkeegan
IamStevenT

such as television shows, music, and movies. It is interesting
to observe that certain celebrities such as IAMJHUD (Jeniffer
Huddson) and TheRealMikeEpps (Mike Epps) were favored
by persistent users, although in general television shows were
favored by dormant users.

Is Fitness Activity More Important than Fitness Network?
Features related to both Fitness Activity and Fitness Network
were important for persistent sharing, yet those in the Fitness
Activity category had higher predictive power. Is Fitness Ac-
tivity then more important that Fitness Network for persis-
tence? If so, how important is Fitness Activity for persistent
users compared to Fitness Network? In order to answer these
questions, we examine the relationship between the Fitness
Activity and Fitness Network.
Table 4 displays the proportion of persistent users across two
of the signiﬁcant axes: exercise-related MFP tweets and pres-
ence of a ﬁtness support network. We consider a user belongs
to a ‘high’ exercise group if one posted more exercise MFP
tweets than the median value across all users. Otherwise we
consider a user to be in a ‘low’ exercise group. In addition,
the presence of Fitness Network is considered to be ‘high’ if
a user falls into the upper median of either mfp_reciprocal or
ﬁtness_reciprocal, which are two predictive features of per-
sistent sharing. Otherwise, we consider a user has ‘low’ pres-
ence of Fitness Network.

Exercise-related MFP tweet
Low

High

All
1120
1469
2589

Fitness
Network

Low 499 (38.2%)
High
624 (46.8%)
All

1123

621 (56.4%)
845 (58.7%)

1466

Table 4. Number of persistent users across exercise on MFP and pres-
ence of Fitness Network. Percentages within parenthesis indicate frac-
tion of persistent user over total social opt-in user per each group.

Table 4 shows the results where each quadrant shows the raw
and the proportion of persistent users who belong to that area.
Between the amount of exercise MFP tweets and the presence
of ﬁtness network, posting a higher number of exercise tweets
is more powerful to discriminate persistent users as we found
in Figure 5. The presence of a ﬁtness network generally in-
creases the probability of persistent usage. However, ﬁtness

191

users tend to be dormant if they had posted fewer number
of exercise tweet even when they possess a sizable ﬁtness
network.
In a similar vein, social opt-in users tend to be
persistent with absence of ﬁtness network but with a higher
number of exercises.
In the group of 621 users in Table 4
who posted many exercise tweets and owned a small ﬁtness
network, we observe that 22 persistent users had zero-sized
ﬁtness networks, and 15 of them further do not post any gen-
eral tweets. They may not need support of ﬁtness network on
Twitter. We hypothesize that some MFP users utilize social
sharing for archiving purpose, which requires further investi-
gations in future work.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
It is well known that many users of ﬁtness apps discontinue
with their usage after a few weeks of trial, which is com-
monly known as a user retention problem. This relatively
low retention rate of health and ﬁtness app users has drawn
the attention of research community [14]. Promoting social
sharing of users has been considered to be one of many im-
portant strategies to boost their long-term engagement level.
Several researchers have studied different sharing behavior
of health and ﬁtness-related activity on social media outlets.
Some studies analyzed the type of content and motivations
for sharing health-related activity on social media outlets [17,
23] while others conducted a qualitative analysis of the ways
that people think about with whom and how to share differ-
ent types of information as they pursue social goals related
to their personal health, including emotional support, moti-
vation, accountability, and advice [16, 17]. One important
issue that has been neglected within the research community,
though, is the question of what are characteristics of users
who share health and ﬁtness-related activity on social media
outlets over a long period of time compared to those short-
lived users? We believe that it is important to properly ad-
dress this question especially when it is unknown how the
overall effectiveness of social sharing of health-related activ-
ity is related to the future engagement level of ﬁtness apps.
In this paper, through a quantitative analysis of 3,169 Twitter
users, we have found some partial answers to this question.
Below we summarize our ﬁndings on persistent social sharing
of health and ﬁtness-related activity and their implications.
1. Persistent users are more likely to use Twitter in a
health-oriented way: We observe that dormant users tend to
be interested in a more diverse set of topics while persistent
users tend to be interested in a more narrow set of topics that
are usually related to ﬁtness or health. Thus, we speculate
whether this variety of interest topics that is normally shown
by dormant users could inhibit these from gaining appropri-
ate audiences interested in health and ﬁtness status updates.
We believe that this is particularly true with Twitter as it is an
information-based social network and the topical diversity of
user’s Twitter feed can have a certain impact on the richness
of her network in Twitter. Possessing a ﬁtness-related social
network has been shown to be effective for getting positive
effects [16, 17], hence a topical diversity of their audience
might prohibit ﬁtness app users to share their health status,
leading them to be dormant. Our work, though, cannot pro-
vide a deﬁnitive conclusion on such causal relationships since

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

we did not test the direct effect of having diverse interests on
the formation of a ﬁtness related network and impact on user’s
emotions. Future work can further delve into a better under-
standing of how expressing diverse interests on Twitter would
affect persistent sharing of health and ﬁtness status.
2. Sharing exercise related tweets is positively correlated
with the long-term engagement: We observe that persis-
tent and dormant users differ in the type of content that they
share on social media. More speciﬁcally, content related
to different physical exercises is found to be prevalent in
tweets shared by persistent users. Several studies have found
that physical exercise is important to maintain one’s health-
iness [6], and the most recent one found that exercising can
even affect one’s mental health (e.g., anxiety, depression) [5].
Our ﬁnding corroborates the importance of exercising regu-
larly and those who do tend to show a long-term engagement
with ﬁtness apps.
3. Having a mutual friendship with those users who share
health and ﬁtness related content on social media or heav-
ily using MFP is positively correlated with persistent so-
cial sharing: The importance of a “ﬁtness network” for per-
sistent social sharing is a key takeaway of this paper. We
observe the importance of one’s social network to persist
with sharing of her health and ﬁtness status updates. While
the explicit support of favorites one receives on tweets re-
lated to health and ﬁtness activity was not necessarily linked
to persistent social sharing, the fraction of MFP reciprocal
friends (mfp_reciprocal) and ﬁtness friends on Twitter (ﬁt-
ness_reciprocal) were found to be indicative of persistent
social sharing. These ﬁndings imply that sustaining a sup-
port ﬁtness network of reasonable size becomes important for
long-term engagement, rather than just receiving explicit re-
sponses from peers in their social network. Having a network
of health interests may help users enjoy social support, which
was found to be a key driver for a long-term engagement of
users to ﬁtness activities [4] and in health forums [24].
4. Frequently receiving favorites on tweets is negatively
correlated with long-term social sharing: One interesting
ﬁnding is that users who have a larger fraction of favorited
tweets related to health and ﬁtness tend to be dormant. Since
dormant users can result from several reasons, there can be
many explanations of this particular ﬁnding. One possible
explanation is that considering the delicacy of sharing health
and ﬁtness status via social-media outlets, receiving favorites
too frequently will make her conscious of her audience on
Twitter. Future work could potentially analyze how those
popular social media users feel when they receive favorites
on their tweets, and how this would affect their long-term en-
gagement.

Towards a Better Design of Fitness Apps
Our ﬁndings lead to a couple of guidelines that could be use-
ful during the design of ﬁtness apps with the goal of motivat-
ing ﬁtness app users better.

1) Introduction of a rewarding program
Our ﬁnding on the positive correlation between physical ex-
ercise and social sharing persistence highlights the potential

improvement of user engagement for ﬁtness apps by intro-
ducing an incentive-reward program. In other words, ﬁtness
apps could devise a reward or badge-based gamiﬁcation fea-
tures that can motivate their users better, where some highly
correlative user activities shown in Table 2 might get extra
incentives by offering special badges to those users who con-
tinuously engage with these activities [9]. Alternatively, those
behaviors that bring beneﬁt to the whole ﬁtness eco-system
may be rewarded with strong incentives [19]. For instance,
posting a speciﬁc number of physical exercise related tweets,
which is shown to have the highest predictive power in Ta-
ble 2, should be incentivized. By encouraging their users to
engage more with the most predictive features, ﬁtness apps
may potentially enjoy a higher user retention rate while em-
powering their users to be more effective with health and
ﬁtness goals. The true effectiveness of using badges as a
incentive-rewarding program albeit needs to be tested in prac-
tice especially when it is reported that offering badges might
lead to some negative effects [15].

2) Connecting peers over ﬁtness application
Our study shows that persistent users tend to own a strong
health and ﬁtness-oriented Twitter network. Persistent users
not only have reciprocal friends who are active in ﬁtness
and MFP users, but also tend to follow ﬁtness-related pop-
ular accounts and seek information. Grounded by the ﬁnd-
ings, ﬁtness apps could potentially adopt certain features that
would help users connect better with ﬁtness-related Twitter
accounts. Since “Informational Support” is a primary goal
of peer-support network as shown in [7], the nature of Twit-
ter could easily meet this goal by recommending Twitter ac-
counts that can act as useful sources of health and ﬁtness re-
lated information. We do not know yet the temporal order of
long-term engagement and ﬁtness-related network construc-
tion. Persistent users are more likely to have strong health and
ﬁtness network, but it is also possible that these users built up
the supportive group by actively engaging with MFP. To over-
come this limitation, future work could investigate this trend
by analyzing overall dynamics of following links on Twitter
or by conducting in-depth interviews of persistent users.

Limitations
Our work has certain limitations. First there is potential sam-
pling bias. Since the Decahose and is a tweet-based sam-
ple, our data are biased toward selecting users who tweet fre-
quently. While this is a common limitation for studies em-
ploying data APIs, we also mention that it is non-trivial to
deﬁne what is a “good” uniform user sample on Twitter and
the industry standard of “monthly active users”, as deﬁned
through log in events, cannot even be observed by outsiders.
Second is the lack of strong temporal data linkage. Several
features such as those in the Proﬁle category were indepen-
dent of the observation window in Figure 3, since the Twitter
proﬁle is captured from the snapshot of crawling time. There-
fore, we cannot be certain of the temporal order of effects of
the social network (e.g., mfp_reciprocal, ﬁtness_reciprocal).
Persistent social opt-in users might have ﬁtness-related au-
diences because they have engaged in ﬁtness activities for a

192

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

long time, rather than the audience leading to long-term us-
age. In future work, we hope to better understand this tempo-
ral order through repeated data collection and user interviews.

Conclusion and Future Work
This paper presented a quantitative study of a popular ﬁt-
ness application, MyFitnessPal and investigated the patterns
of sharing personal health status on Twitter. We examined
which features of the Twitter proﬁle, the ﬁtness activities, and
the ﬁtness network are related with persistent social sharing
and found that a wide set of features from one’s ﬁtness activ-
ities and ﬁtness network have positive correlations.
We observed an interesting signal related to persistent social
sharing, in that the date when a user ﬁrst shared a MFP tweet
on Twitter (i.e. mfp_adopt_date) was a signiﬁcant indicator of
persistent sharing. Early adopters may have distinct person-
ality related to engagement. Alternatively, starting to engage
in an application earlier than others may make them loyal to
engage in the app for a long time. We believe that this is
worth to investigate in the future, which could give insights
to application providers.
We also noticed exceptional Twitter usage patterns related to
sharing health status. Certain users did not have any general
tweets. That is, those users utilized Twitter only for MFP.
While these users can be simply less active on Twitter, it is
probable that these users created a separate Twitter account
exclusively to broadcast their MFP tweets. We found 97 users
who have only MFP tweets, even though the fraction of per-
sistent users are not signiﬁcant (79 out of 97). An exciting
future direction would be to investigate why those users have
dedicated accounts for a ﬁtness app, and how it affects persis-
tent engagement.
Social opt-in users of the MFP application showed a high re-
tention rate; 2,589 out of 3,169 users remained active persis-
tently, which means that they were successfully retained to
the app. We do not claim social sharing necessarily increases
the probability of retention, because we did not test any di-
rect effects of social sharing under controlled experiments on
randomized samples. Nevertheless, an extremely high reten-
tion rate seen from persistent users may be related in part to
the positive effects of social sharing. Similar ﬁnding has been
shown by one research group, where integrating a health ap-
plication within a social network like Facebook increased the
retention rate [16]. It is also possible that only more commit-
ted users choose to opt-in to social sharing in the ﬁrst place.
In future works, characteristics of social opt-in users and the
effects of social sharing on user retention of the ﬁtness appli-
cation could be investigated via controlled experiments and
observational studies with randomized conditions on ﬁtness
application.
Beyond investigation of persistent social sharing on Twitter,
a natural extension of this work would be to analyze char-
acteristics of persistent social sharing on other social media.
Facebook can be a good candidate for looking into persistent
sharing of health status, because it is the leading social ser-
vice where over billions of people engaged. Although some
negative effects are reported when sharing a health status on

193

Facebook [17], it would be interesting to know the character-
istics of usage and network patterns of Facebook users who
share personal ﬁtness status in the long run. Instagram can
be another good place to look into. This service is an image-
based social network, so the users may show different usage
and network patterns compared to general online social net-
work such as Twitter and Facebook. It would be interesting
to know why users share images related to ﬁtness and health
statues, and how usage and network patterns are related to
persistency in social sharing.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We want to thank the anonymous reviewers for their ex-
tremely useful comments and suggestions on this paper. This
work was partly supported by the BK21 Plus Postgradu-
ate Organization for Content Science of Korea and Insti-
tute for Information & communications Technology Promo-
tion (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIP)
(R0184-15-1037, Development of Data Mining Core Tech-
nologies for Real-time Intelligent Information Recommenda-
tion in Smart Spaces).

REFERENCES
1. E. Choe, N.B. Lee, B. Lee, W. Pratt, and J.A. Kientz.
2014. Understanding quantiﬁed-selfers’ practices in
collecting and exploring personal data. In Proc. of the
CHI. 1143–1152.

2. W.S. Chou, A. Prestin, and S. Kunath. 2014. Obesity in
social media: a mixed methods analysis. Translational
Behavioral Medicine (2014), 1–10.

3. C.K. Chung, C. Jones, A. Liu, and J.W. Pennebaker.
2008. Predicting Success and Failure in Weight Loss
Blogs through Natural Language Use.. In Proc. of the
ICWSM.

4. S. Consolvo, K. Everitt, I. Smith, and J.A. Landay. 2006.

Design requirements for technologies that encourage
physical activity. In Proc. of the CHI. 457–466.

5. V.L. Dos Reis and A. Culotta. 2015. Using Matched

Samples to Estimate the Effects of Exercise on Mental
Health via Twitter. In Proc. of the AAAI Conference on
Artiﬁcal Intelligence. 182–188.

6. K. Elfhag and S. Rössner. 2005. Who succeeds in

maintaining weight loss? A conceptual review of factors
associated with weight loss maintenance and weight
regain. Obesity Reviews 6, 1 (2005), 67–85.

7. D.A. Epstein, B.H. Jacobson, E. Bales, D.W. McDonald,

and S.A. Munson. 2015. From “nobody cares” to “way
to go!”: A Design Framework for Social Sharing in
Personal Informatics. In Proc. of the CSCW. 1622–1636.

8. J. Freyne, I. Saunders, E. Brindal, S. Berkovsky, and G.

Smith. 2012. Factors associated with persistent
participation in an online diet intervention. In Proc. of
the CHI Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. 2375–2380.

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

support diet and weight loss. In Proc. of the CHI
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. 3829–3834.

22. M. Swan. 2009. Emerging patient-driven health care

models: an examination of health social networks,
consumer personalized medicine and quantiﬁed
self-tracking. International Journal of Environmental
Research and Public Health 6, 2 (2009), 492–525.

23. R. Teodoro and M. Naaman. 2013. Fitter with Twitter:
Understanding Personal Health and Fitness Activity in
Social Media.. In Proc. of the ICWSM.

24. V.G.V. Vydiswaran, Y. Liu, K. Zheng, D.A. Hanauer,

and Q. Mei. 2014. User-Created Groups in Health
Forums: What Makes Them Special?. In Proc. of the
ICWSM.

25. I. Weber and P. Achananuparp. 2016. Insights From

Machine-Learned Diet Success Prediction. In Proc. of
the Social Media Mining for Public Health Monitoring
and Surveillance, to appear.

9. T. Fritz, E.M. Huang, G.C. Murphy, and T.

Zimmermann. 2014. Persuasive technology in the real
world: a study of long-term use of activity sensing
devices for ﬁtness. In Proc. of the CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 487–496.

10. J.H. Frost and M.P. Massagli. 2008. Social Uses of

Personal Health Information Within PatientsLikeMe, an
Online Patient Community: What Can Happen When
Patients Have Access to One Another’s Data. Journal of
Medical Internet Research 10, 3 (2008), e15.

11. F. Gao and m.c. schraefel. 2011. Social interaction

around diet applications: An initial study. In Proc. of the
PervasiveHealth. 262–265.

12. K.O. Hwang, J.M. Etchegaray, C.N. Sciamanna, E.V.

Bernstam, and E.J. Thomas. 2014. Structural social
support predicts functional social support in an online
weight loss programme. Health Expectations 17, 3
(2014), 345–352.

13. L. Kendall, A. Hartzler, P. Klasnja, and W. Pratt. 2011.
Descriptive analysis of physical activity conversations
on Twitter. In Proc. of the CHI Extended Abstracts on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1555–1560.
14. E. Leslie, A.L. Marshall, N. Owen, and A. Bauman.
2005. Engagement and retention of participants in a
physical activity website. Preventive Medicine 40, 1
(2005), 54–59.

15. S.A. Munson and S. Consolvo. 2012. Exploring

goal-setting, rewards, self-monitoring, and sharing to
motivate physical activity. In Proc. of the
PervasiveHealth. 25–32.

16. S.A. Munson, D. Lauterbach, M.W. Newman, and P.

Resnick. 2010. Happier together: integrating a wellness
application into a social network site. In Proc. of the
Persuasive Technology. Springer, 27–39.

17. M.W. Newman, D. Lauterbach, S.A. Munson, P.

Resnick, and M.E. Morris. 2011. It’s not that i don’t
have problems, i’m just not putting them on facebook:
challenges and opportunities in using online social
networks for health. In Proc. of the CSCW. 341–350.

18. J.O. Prochaska and W.F. Velicer. 1997. The

transtheoretical model of health behavior change.
American Journal of Health Promotion 12, 1 (1997),
38–48.

19. S. Robertson, M. Vojnovic, and I. Weber. 2009.

Rethinking the ESP game. In Proc. of the CHI Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
3937–3942.

20. D.M. Romero and J.M. Kleinberg. 2010. The Directed

Closure Process in Hybrid Social-Information
Networks, with an Analysis of Link Formation on
Twitter. In Proc. of the ICWSM.

21. m.c. schraefel, R.W. White, P. André, and D. Tan. 2009.

Investigating Web search strategies and forum use to

194

