CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Reality  and  Perception  of  Copyright  Terms  of  Service  for  

Online  Content  Creation  

University of Colorado Boulder 

University of Michigan 

Georgia Institute of Technology 

Casey Fiesler 

Boulder, CO 

casey.fiesler@colorado.edu 

Cliff Lampe  

Ann Arbor, MI 
cacl@umich.edu 

Amy S. Bruckman 

Atlanta, GA 

asb@cc.gatech.edu 

in  unpredictable  ways,  and 

ABSTRACT  
From  amateur  creativity  to  social  media  status  updates, 
nearly  every  Internet  user  is  also  a  content  creator—but 
who  owns  that  content?  Policy,  including  intellectual 
property  rights,  is  a  necessary  but  often  invisible  part  of 
online content sharing and social computing environments. 
We analyzed the copyright licenses contained in the Terms 
of  Service  of  30  different  websites  where  users  contribute 
content,  then  conducted  a  survey  to  match  perceptions  of 
copyright  terms  to  the  reality.  We  found  that  licensing 
terms  vary 
that  user 
expectations and opinions differ by license and by type of 
website.  Moreover,  the  most  undesirable  terms,  such  as 
right to modify, appear more frequently than users expect. 
We  argue  that  users  care  about  how  their  content  can  be 
used  yet  lack  critical  information.  Site  designers  should 
take  user  needs  and  community  norms  into  account  in 
creating and explaining copyright policies. 
Author  Keywords  
copyright;  intellectual  property;  law;  mechanical  turk; 
online communities; policy; social media; survey; terms of 
service; user-generated content 
ACM  Classification  Keywords  
K.4.1  [Computers  and  Society]:  Public  Policy  Issues  --- 
Intellectual property rights 
INTRODUCTION  
How much control do Internet users have over the content 
they  post  online?  Researchers  often  consider  this  question 
in  terms  of  privacy  (e.g.,  [13,33]).  However,  also  hidden 
within  websites’ 
terms  and  conditions  are  copyright 
licenses 
information  about 
ownership of user-created content. For example, YouTube 
requires  that  users  provide  them  a  “worldwide,  non-
exclusive,  royalty-free,  sublicenseable  and  transferable 
license  to  use,  reproduce,  distribute,  prepare  derivative 

that  provide 

important 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or  classroom  use  is  granted  without  fee  provided  that  copies  are  not  made  or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and 
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned 
by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. 
To  copy  otherwise,  or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists, 
requires  prior  specific  permission  and/or  a  fee.  Request  permissions  from 
Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW ‘16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA Copyright is held 
by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819931 
 

1450

limitation 

including  without 

works  of,  display,  and  perform  the  Content  in  connection 
with  the  Service  and  YouTube's  (and  its  successors'  and 
affiliates')  business, 
for 
promoting and redistributing part or all of the Service (and 
derivative works thereof) in any media formats and through 
any media channels.”1  
Considering  that  reading  only  the  privacy  policy  of  every 
site  visited  would  take  the  average  Internet  user  over  200 
hours per year, it is not surprising that many do not take the 
time  to  read  often  complicated  terms  and  conditions 
[16,26]. Though the readability of online privacy terms has 
been  identified  as  a  usability  and  accessibility  problem 
[16,21], intellectual property rights like those conveyed in 
the YouTube licensing clause are also increasingly relevant. 
Whereas  privacy  policies  cover  how  a  site  can  use  user-
provided  information  and  data,  copyright  terms  cover  the 
ownership  of  the  original  content  that  users  provide. 
Copyright  vests  at  the  time  of  creation,  which  means  that 
Internet  users  own  their  blog  posts,  photographs,  and 
perhaps  even  tweets.2  Therefore,  they  must  give  websites 
permission to display or use their work. These permissions 
are  typically  covered  in  Terms  of  Service  (TOS),  which 
similar  to  privacy  policies,  are  likely  not  frequently  read. 
As  a  result,  many  may  not  realize  what  rights  in  their 
content  they  grant  or  how  their  work  can  be  used.  The 
purpose of this paper is to determine the significance of this 
problem  by  examining  the  reality  and  user  perceptions  of 
copyright terms for content creation websites. 
In  recent  years  a  number  of  high-profile  cases  have 
demonstrated  that  though  people  are  often  unaware  of 
copyright  terms  for  the  sites  they  use,  they  do  care  about 
them  when  it  is  brought  to  their  attention.  In  2009,  an 
“online swell of suspicion” followed changes in Facebook’s 
copyright license, leading a number of high-profile users to 
delete  their  accounts  [34].  In  2015,  an  email  in  which  a 
Facebook  representative 
incorrectly  stated  Facebook’s 
copyright  terms  went  viral,  soliciting  concern  and  outrage 
from  photographers.3  Similarly,  in  2012,  Instagram  users 

1 https://www.youtube.com/static?template=terms (as of April 16, 2015) 
2 There is some question about whether tweets are copyrightable, and legal 
scholars  generally  agree  that  some  are  and  some  aren’t,  depending  on 
factors like length, originality, and content [27]. This same standard would 
apply to other types of content like social media status updates. 
3  http://stopstealingphotos.com/facebook-representative-states-uploaded-
content/ (posted May 12, 2015) 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

in  creative  communities 

pushed  back  over  a  provision  in  the  photo-sharing  site’s 
TOS  that  allowed  use  of  photographs  “in  connection  with 
paid  or  sponsored  content”  [22].  In  the  summer  of  2014, 
media attention around published research findings caused 
many  people  to  realize  that  the  TOS  for  websites  like 
Facebook  and  OKCupid  might  allow  use  of  their  data  for 
research [30]. All of these situations resulted in comments 
on  news  articles  made  by  users  vowing  to  no  longer  post 
their content on these websites. 
Prior  research  also  supports  that  people  care  about  how 
their  content  is  used.  Copyright  is  a  frequent  topic  of 
conversation 
[7],  content 
ownership  is  one  of  the  major  concerns  that  users  have 
about  Facebook  [36],  and  people  react  negatively  to 
scenarios  such  as  a  site  selling  their  content  to  another 
company,  regardless  of  what  they  agreed  to  in  TOS  [25]. 
We  also  know  from  research  about  privacy  that  when 
information is presented to the user, it might misalign with 
expectations  [19]  or  cause  changes  in  behavior  [35]. 
Despite  conceptual  differences  between  copyright  and 
privacy,  there  are  similar  underlying  issues  regarding 
ownership and control. 
This policy layer is a necessary yet often invisible part of 
content  sharing  and  social  computing  environments  like 
those  included  in  this  work.  Policy  can  be  as  powerful  a 
design  agent  as 
technology,  so  understanding  user 
impressions  of  policy  is  essential  to  the  growth  of  these 
environments. However, its role is often considered only as 
an afterthought or when it becomes a problem [14]. As both 
users and the research community pay increasing attention 
to ownership and control online, intellectual property rights 
are a domain deserving of further attention. 
We began this research with a set of unanswered questions: 
Do  people  read  intellectual  property  terms  for  sites  where 
they post content? If (as we might guess) they do not, does 
it matter? Do they think that any licensing term presented to 
them  is  fine,  or  would  they  find  some  to  be  unfair?  What 
are people’s intuitions about what they are agreeing to, and 
how well do those intuitions match the reality? Moreover, 
ignorance  over  how  content  can  be  used  could  be 
particularly  problematic  if  terms  are  not  consistent  across 
websites.  If  someone  understands  Facebook’s  copyright 
policy, does this mean that they now know how YouTube 
or LinkedIn can use their content as well? Are these terms 
boilerplate, or do they vary by site? 
We  first  analyzed  the  copyright  license  and  rights-related 
provisions  for  30  different  websites  focused  on  user-
contributed  content.  We  determined  what  common 
provisions  exist  and  in  what  frequencies,  as  well  as 
readability measures for each TOS. With this information in 
hand,  we  created  a  survey  to  discern  users’  expectations 
about what these terms are for the sites they use, as well as 
what  they  think  they  should  be.  We  surveyed  410 
Mechanical Turk users and found that accuracy (how well 
they are able to correctly identify the copyright terms for a 

license  agreements  (EULAs)  are  similar 

website), expectations (what terms they think a website has) 
and opinions (whether they think the site should have those 
terms) vary by licensing term and by type of website. We 
found that people do care about how their content is used, 
and  moreover,  some  of  the  most  undesirable  uses  are  far 
more  common  than  they  expect.  In  other  words,  there  is 
information not being conveyed properly to users, and it is 
information that matters. 
RELATED  WORK  
Within  the  computing  community,  research  concerning 
website policies has largely focused on issues of readability 
and web accessibility. Though information accessibility is a 
major theme within HCI, established tenets of good design 
tend  to  be  glaringly  absent  from  consideration  in  crafting 
terms and conditions on websites [21].  
The present study focuses on TOS, but privacy policies and 
end-user 
in 
presentation.  They  also  cover  similar  but  substantively 
different content. Privacy policies disclose the ways that a 
website or technology can gather, use, or disclose a user’s 
data  and  information.  Though  some  EULAs  also  include 
copyright terms,4 these contract the relationship between a 
user and a piece of software rather than a website. Though 
there is little existing research related specifically to TOS or 
copyright  terms,  privacy  policies  and  to  a  lesser  extent 
EULAs  have  received  a  fair  amount  of  attention  in  the 
context of usability and accessibility. 
This  past  work  has  shown  a  surprisingly  high  level  of 
complexity  within  different 
types  of  click-through 
conditions  found  on  the  web  [8,16,21,23,26].  Perhaps  due 
to 
to  have  been 
conditioned not to read them. One study showed less than 
1%  of  consumers  accessing  EULAs,  and  those  who  did 
spent a median time of 29 seconds there, far less than the 
time required to read them [1]. In another, less than 2% of 
users  reported  reading  EULAs  thoroughly  with  about  two 
thirds  saying  that  they  did  not  read  them  at  all  [9].  Yet 
another  study  showed  that  most  users  take  less  than  8 
seconds to click through a consent dialog [2].  
High  readability  scores  suggest  that  users  would  not 
understand  these  policies  even  if  they  read  them  [16]. 
Reidenberg  et  al.  asked  comprehension  questions  about 
privacy policies to non-expert users, knowledgeable users, 
and privacy experts [29]. Discrepancies between non-expert 
users  and  experts  (and  even  among  experts)  led  them  to 
conclude 
that  websites  are  not  conveying  privacy 
information  in  a  way  that  a  reasonable  person  could 
understand.  Similarly,  Good  et  al.  found  a  “strong 

this  complexity,  users  also  seem 

                                                             
4 Though copyright related to user content is not relevant for most pieces 
of  software,  there  is  one  domain  in  particular  in  which  EULAs  and 
intellectual  property  have  received  attention:  online  games  and  virtual 
worlds. Like user-generated content websites, users are able to contribute 
content  to  games  like  World  of  Warcraft  and  virtual  worlds  like  Second 
Life, and EULAs govern ownership in that content [12]. 

1451

disconnect”  between  actual  EULA  content  and  user 
expectations. They suggested that the design of EULA and 
TOS  makes  them  inaccessible to  users—features like “too 
long,”  “small  font,”  and  “legal  mumbo  jumbo”  [8].  In  a 
later study they showed that if users slowed down and spent 
more  time  reading  notices,  they  experienced  less  regret 
about their decision to agree to terms [9]. 
Beyond  the  way  they  are  presented,  the  content  of  terms 
and  conditions  can  also  be  problematic.  Researchers  have 
examined  privacy  policies  in  detail  to  analyze  their 
relationship  to  actual  government  regulations.  Content 
analyses  of  the  policies  of  library  vendors,  healthcare 
providers,  and  universities  have  shown  that  provisions  are 
not always in line with regulations or expectations [4,5,23]. 
One study of privacy information for mobile apps showed 
that  some  data  uses  surprised  and  discomfited  users  [19], 
and  another  that  understanding  privacy  information  can 
actually change users’ decisions about website use [35]. 
Some  researchers  have  taken  steps  toward  solving  this 
usability  issue  by  making  terms  and  conditions  more 
accessible—for  example,  Kelley’s  privacy  nutrition  labels 
[18].  Luger  suggested  more  transparency  as  beneficial, 
providing  a  visualization  for  the  readability  of  terms  that 
users come across on the web [21]. Lin et al. also suggested 
that  some  privacy  concerns  can  be  alleviated  by  properly 
informing users of the reasons for certain terms [19]. Kay 
and Terry introduced textured agreements, a visual redesign 
of  EULAs  that  had  some  positive  effect  on  the  software 
agreement process for users [17]. 
Though  most  of  this  prior  work  has  focused  on  privacy 
policies  and  EULAs,  many  of  the  same  ideas  apply  to  all 
online  terms  and  conditions.  Extending  this  research  to 
copyright is appropriate, because copyright is traditionally a 
confusing policy area even outside of the problem of policy 
readability.  Prior 
revealed  patterns  of 
misunderstandings  about  how  copyright  law  applies  to 
online  content,  particularly  since  subjective  concepts  such 
as  fair  use  are  relevant  in  this  context  [6,7].  Similarly, 
studies  of  social  media  use  have  shown  striking 
misunderstandings  of  rights  in  one’s  own  content—for 
example,  that  any  content  posted  online  automatically 
becomes public domain [24]. Marshall and Shipman’s study 
of Facebook showed that there are often large discrepancies 
between perceived rights and the reality of ownership terms 
a user agrees to upon using the site [25]. For these reasons, 
copyright 
to  CSCW  systems. 
Jackson et al. puts forth copyright as one of the policy areas 
with  complex  relationships  to  CSCW  design  and  practice 
[14]. 
In  extending  previous  policy  usability  work  from  privacy 
and  HCI  to  copyright,  we  are  also  able  to  examine 
important  issues  of  control  and  ownership  in  online 
environments.  In  doing  so,  we  first  confirm  that  TOS  are 
just  as  rarely  read  and  difficult  to  understand  as  privacy 
policies. Next, by looking at expectations and opinions, we 

is  particularly  relevant 

research  has 

1452

SESSION: MULTIMEDIA CREATION AND REMIXING

that 

found 

consider  why  this  accessibility  problem  matters  in  the 
context of people creating and sharing content online. 
TERMS  OF  SERVICE  ANALYSIS  
Methods  
Previous  work  has 
in  online  creative 
communities,  issues  of  copyright  are  complicated  by 
appropriation  and  remix  [6,7,32].  In  creating  a  sample  of 
sites to analyze, we used both remix communities (websites 
where content builds upon existing content, such as music 
mash-ups or remix videos) as well as other user-generated 
content  (UGC)  and  social  networking  sites  to  ensure  that 
we covered a variety of different types of content creation. 
Following  our  prior  work  examining  the  role  of  copyright 
in these types of online communities [7], we sampled sites 
along similar categories of media type: writing, music, art, 
and  video.  To  maintain  a  systematic  method  of  choosing 
websites to analyze, we used Alexa search engine rankings 
(as  described  in  more  detail  in  [7])  to  find  the  highest 
ranked five websites for each category that focused on user-
contributed  content.  We  also  included  the  most  popular 
social  networking  and  user-generated  content  websites  as 
provided by a website that also bases its algorithm on Alexa 
rankings.5 This sample therefore covers the most common 
UGC and social networking sites, as well as a mix of other 
creative content sharing. 
With 6 categories, this resulted in 30 websites in our final 
dataset  (see  Table  1).  We  retrieved  the  TOS  for  each 
website. In addition to analyzing the text, we also gathered 
word count and reading level information. These documents 
were  collected  and  analyzed  for  readability  in  June  2013, 
and we also checked the copyright licensing terms for any 
changes in July 2014 after the survey data was collected. 
For  this  study,  we  focused  on  just  copyright  licensing 
terms—i.e.,  what  rights  the  user  grants  in  their work.  The 
typical format of these terms is, “You grant this website an 
A, B, and C license to X, Y, and Z.” The first author is a 
law  school  graduate  and  copyright  expert,  and  determined 
which  sections  of  the  terms  were  relevant.  The  format  of 
these licensing terms is consistent, and identifying them in 
the  text  is  an  objective  task.  However,  multiple  coders 
worked on coding the content. 
Without knowing exactly what types of licenses would be 
present, we updated our coding scheme as we went through 
the  set  of  documents  and  re-coded  previous  ones.  In 
addition to coding licenses and rights, we coded for whether 
the site included plain language explanations. Some of the 
websites did not have any copyright terms. A comparison of 
independent coding with a second coder achieved an 89% 
inter-rater reliability using Cohen’s Kappa [20]. 

                                                             
 5 
http://www.ebizmba.com/articles/web-2.0-websites  (as of June 2013) 
 

http://www.ebizmba.com/articles/social-networking-websites, 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Website 

Craigslist 

Sound Cloud 

Daily Motion 

Ebaum’s World 

Asianfanfics.com 

Twitter 
Flickr 

Overclocked Remix 

Warcraft Movies 
Fanfiction.net 

ccMixter 
MySpace 
YouTube 
Club Create 

Media  Words 
7961 
Music 
Video 
1837 
3661 
Writing 
Writing 
5823 
5006 
UGC 
3223 
Video 
2693 
Music 
5486 
Social 
3764 
Video 
5811 
Music 
1170 
Music 
3486 
Social 
5763 
UGC 
4659 
Video 
Social 
7294 
4031 
Art 
2613 
UGC 
Video 
1677 
2591 
Art 
2300 
Art 
Social 
4477 
2219 
UGC 
9142 
Writing 
985 
Harrypotterfanfiction.net  Writing 
1691 
Social 
Art 
2368 
3005 
1189 
 

Twisting the Hellmouth  Writing 

Elfwood 
Facebook 
Pinterest 

Vidders.net 
Fanart Central 

LinkedIn 
DeviantArt 

Google+ 
Y-Gallery 

Archive of Our Own 

Art 
Music 

The Otaku 

Remix 64 

IMDB 

P 

I 

C 

A 

B 

D 

 

 

 

 

 

T/S 

M/T 

P 

P 

P 

P 

P 

P 

NE  WW 

     

     

P  P  P 

         

P  P  P  P  P  P  P 

F-K 
RF 
19.8  P  P  P 
19 
P  P  P 
18.3  P  P  P 
18 
P  P  P 
17.6    P    P  P  P  P        P 
17.6  P    P        P        P 
17.3                       
16.9  P  P  P    P    P        P 
16.6  P  P  P    P    P        P 
16.3  P  P  P  P               
15.4  P  P    P  P    P         
15.3  P  P  P    P    P        P 
15.2  P  P          P        P 
15.1  P  P  P  P  P  P  P      P  P 
15 
P  P  P  P  P  P  P    P    P 
14.7  P    P        P  P      P 
14.2  P  P  P  P  P  P  P        P 
14.2                       
13.2  P  P          P        P 
13 
P  P  P        P        P 
12.9  P  P  P    P             
12.5  P  P  P        P        P 
12.1  P  P  P        P        P 
11.9                       
11.5    P        P  P        P 
10.6                       
9 
                    P 
8.4 

                     

                 
Table 1: Websites with media type, word count, Flesch-Kincaid score, and indication of presence of 11 common licensing terms as of 

July 2014 (abbreviations noted beginning on the following page). Sorted by highest to lowest Flesch-Kincaid score.  

 

   

             
Results  
Readability  
For each of the 30 TOS in our dataset, we determined word 
count  and  Flesch-Kincaid  Grade  Level  Score  using 
statistics  automatically  generated  by  Microsoft  Word  (see 
Table  1).  This  is  a  common  readability  measure  that  has 

been  employed  in  similar  studies  for  privacy  policies 
[4,11,16].  Only  one  site  on  our  list  (Remix64,  a  music 
remix community) did not have any TOS. 
The 
average  Flesch-Kincaid  Grade  Level  Score 
(representing a U.S. educational grade level) was a college 
sophomore reading level of 14.8, ranging from 8.4 to 19.8. 

1453

for  by 

the  additional 

This puts the readability of these documents roughly on par 
with those of privacy policies, which multiple studies have 
found to be in the 14-15 range [11,16]. The average scores 
for video sites (17.7) and for music sites (17.2) does skew 
higher than the other media types, which could possibly be 
accounted 
legal  complexities 
associated with sound. Just as reading privacy policies for 
all  the  websites  one  visits  might  take  years,  at  an  average 
adult reading speed of 250 words per minute, the TOS for 
these 30 sites would take almost 8 hours to read.  
Copyright  Terms  
When a user submits content to one of these websites, they 
are typically licensing that work for use by the site—at the 
very least, the site must be permitted to display the work, or 
others  would  not  be  able  to  see  it.  The  sites  also  license 
content  rather  than  requiring  a  transfer  of  copyright.  A 
partial exception is Club Create, a music remix platform in 
which  users  remix  provided  samples  on  the  site,  and  the 
website maintains ownership in some types of that content. 
Sixteen  of  the  sites  explicitly  state  that  the  user  retains 
copyright (or ownership) in the work. 
Typically the license is stated in a string of legalese in the 
TOS,  similar  to  the  YouTube  clause  we  quoted  in  the 
introduction.  The  majority  of  these  sites  include  specific 
license and use rights provisions. Only one did not include 
a TOS, and another four did not have any information about 
licensing  terms.  One  website,  ccMixter,  requires  users  to 
license 
their  work  under  Creative  Commons.  These 
websites are grayed out in Table 1. 
It should be noted that the absence of a license such as right 
to  display  does  not  mean  that  the  site  does  not  have  the 
right  to  display  a  user’s  submitted  content.  An  implied 
copyright license can be created by law in the absence of an 
official agreement. However, for this study we focused on 
the licenses as specifically stated—those that we know the 
user grants by agreeing to a TOS. 
In  our  dataset,  we  saw  the  following  types  of  licenses: 
revocable,  irrevocable,  assignable,  limited,  nonexclusive, 
paid,  perpetual,  royalty-free,  sublicensable,  transferable, 
unrestricted, and worldwide. The most common are also the 
most  unsurprising  and  necessary.  Nonexclusive 
(20 
instances)  means  that  the  user  is  free  to  use  the  same 
content  however  else  they  like,  including  licensing  it  to 
others. Royalty-free (17 instances) means that the website is 
not required to pay the user for their work. Worldwide (20 
instances) means the license is effective all over the world.  
License types are typically followed by an enumeration of 
specific  uses  the  website  can  make  of  the  work.  For 
example, when posting on Craigslist the user is giving the 
website  a  license  “to  copy,  perform,  display,  distribute, 
prepare derivative works from any content that you post.”6 
We developed the following codes to cover these different 
                                                             
6 https://www.craigslist.org/about/terms.of.use (as of April 16, 2015) 

1454

SESSION: MULTIMEDIA CREATION AND REMIXING

rights: 

compile, 

backup, 

display, 

transmit, 

translate,  enforce, 

usage 
reproduce, 
perform,  modify,  adapt,  transform,  index,  improve,  edit, 
distribute, 
analyze, 
advertising/promotion,  commentary,  commercial  use,  in 
connection  with  site  business,  use  by  other  parties,  use  of 
name/likeness, and unspecified use. 
Again,  the  most  common  codes  were  also  the  least 
surprising.  To  reproduce  (17  instances),  distribute  (18 
instances),  and  display  (20  instances)  are  technically 
necessary in order to have the work appear on the website. 
There  are  also  a  large  number  of  sites  that  require  being 
able to change submitted work—19 instances of a right to 
modify, adapt, or transform. At times this may only mean 
something like formatting, and at others, as in the case of 
Craigslist,  the  user  gives  the  site  the  right  to  make  and 
distribute derivative works. Table 1 shows which websites 
in our data set have the most common rights and licenses. 
Only five sites included plain language explanation of these 
copyright  provisions.  Pinterest’s  TOS  includes:  “More 
simply  put,  if  you  post  your  content  on  Pinterest,  it  still 
belongs to you but we can show it to people and others can 
re-pin it.”7 Even this level of explanation is rare. 
The number of codes (copyright provisions) did not fall into 
a  pattern  with  respect  to  media  type  or  popularity  of  the 
site. The site with the most number of codes (26), the small 
fan  fiction  website  AsianFanFics,  contains  provisions  for 
the site to essentially do whatever they like with whatever is 
posted there without any notice or attribution to the creator. 
USER  PERCEPTIONS  SURVEY  
Methods  
Following our TOS analysis, we examined the relationship 
between  the  reality  (the  actual  content  of  TOS)  and  user 
expectations  and  opinions.  Are  users  aware  of  how  their 
work can be used, and how do they feel about those uses? 
We  hypothesized  that  few  have  read  TOS.  Based  on  our 
finding  of  difficult  readability,  we  also  predicted  low 
accuracy in identifying terms. We also hypothesized, based 
on  knowledge  of  norms  about  copyright  in  creative 
communities  [6],  that  participants  would  feel  differently 
about  some  terms  over  others  (e.g.,  less  favorable  about 
terms involving commercialization and modification).  
For  the  survey,  we  chose  11  of  the  most  common  terms, 
leaving out those that were too overlapping or non-specific. 
Our final set of terms that we questioned users about were: 
•   Non-exclusive license (NE): The user can also post/use 

this content elsewhere. 

•   Worldwide  license  (WW):  The  license  does  not  have 

any geographic restrictions as to where it is valid. 

•   Royalty-free license (RF): The website does not have to 

pay the user royalties for their content. 

                                                             
7 https://about.pinterest.com/en/terms-service (as of April 16, 2015) 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

•   Perpetual license (P): The license does not expire.  
•   Transferrable/sublicensable license (T/S): The website 
is permitted to transfer this license or license the content 
to another party. 

•   Irrevocable  license  (I):  The  user  cannot  terminate  the 

license once agreed to. 

•   Right to modify or transform (M/T): The website can 
modify  the  user’s  content  (which  could  range  from 
formatting changes to derivative works). 

•   Right  to  create  backups  (B):  The  website  can  make 

copies of the content for the purpose of backups. 

•   Right to use commercially (C): The website can make 
commercial  use  of  the  content,  including  selling  or 
profiting from. 

•   Right to use in advertising (A): The website can use the 

content in advertisements. 

•   Right  to  display  (D):  The  website  can  display  the 
content (a necessary attribute to show the content on the 
site itself). 

that  use  “agree/disagree” 

We asked about these license terms in plain language. For 
example,  the  question  for  non-exclusive  license  read:  “If 
you  publish  content  on  [website],  can  you  publish  that 
content somewhere else?” We asked participants to give us 
their  intuition;  therefore  the  only  possible  answers  were 
“yes”  and  “no”—their  expectation  (or  intuition)  for  the 
term.  In  addition  to  this  factual  answer,  we  asked  their 
opinion of the term. Statements like “If you publish content 
on  [website],  you  should  be  able  to  publish  that  content 
somewhere else” were followed by possible responses on a 
5-point  Likert  scale,  from  “strongly  agree”  to  “strongly 
disagree.”  Scales 
response 
categories  have  a  tendency  to  create  an  acquiescence  bias 
amongst respondents [31], but for our purposes these scales 
were optimal for efficiently asking questions across a range 
of  sites  and  dimensions.  The  survey  also 
included 
demographic  questions,  and  asked  participants  about 
copyright  training  and  whether  they  had  read  the  TOS  of 
each website for which they answered questions. 
The survey contained a list of the 30 sites listed in Table 1 
and  asked  participants  to  check  which  sites  they  had  used 
(denoting  whether  they  had  only  read  them  or  had  shared 
content). To ensure that the survey would take comparable 
time for each participant, rather than asking about the TOS 
for every website they indicated, the survey provided a set 
of questions for each of three of the websites they indicated, 
chosen 
randomly.  Though  our  sample  of  websites 
purposefully  skewed  towards  creative  communities  that 
value 
answered 
questions  based  on  the  websites  they  use,  our  data  set  is 
proportional to the popularity of the websites (see Table 2). 

appropriation,  because  participants 

1455

our 

plain 

implemented 

(who 

corroborated 

recruitment  such  as 

the  survey  online  and 

We  pilot  tested  the  survey  on  a  group  of  10  individuals 
recruited  from  our  personal  social  networks,  including  2 
attorneys 
language 
explanations).  After  this  pilot  testing  we  tweaked  the 
wording of some of the questions to avoid ambiguity. We 
then 
recruited 
participants  through  Amazon’s  Mechanical  Turk  (Mturk) 
crowdsourcing 
service.  This  method  offers  greater 
scalability at a lower cost and a wider demographic net than 
localized 
through  a  university. 
Participants  on  Mturk  have  performed  comparably  to 
laboratory subjects in traditional experiments [28], and the 
demographics of Mturk users can be more demographically 
diverse than Internet samples [3]. 
One known limitation of Mturk is that participants are less 
likely  to  pay  attention  to  experimental  materials  [10]. 
However,  this  can  be  somewhat  mitigated  by  the  use  of 
“attention  checks”  or  screening  questions 
to  gauge 
attention. We included a simple, invisible attention check in 
our  survey.  The  list  of  websites  that  participants  could 
choose  from  included  a  31st  option:  Mechanical  Turk. 
Since anyone taking the survey was an Mturk user, if they 
did  not  check  that  box,  they  were  told  that  they  were  not 
eligible  to  take  the  survey.  Only  14  users  were  bumped 
from the survey in this way, suggesting that the majority of 
Mturk  users  were  at  least  paying  enough  attention  to  read 
the  list  of  sites  and  respond  accurately  about  their  use. 
Having  shown  from  our  pilot  study  that  the  survey 
generally  took  less  than  5  minutes  to  complete,  we  paid 
Mturk participants 50 cents per survey, to ensure a rate of at 
least $6/hour. 
We deployed our survey as an Mturk task in May 2014, and 
410 workers completed it. Because the Mturk population is 
primarily  split  between  the  United  States  and  India  (and 
therefore  does  not  allow  for  a  true  global  sample),  we 
limited our participants to U.S. citizens to avoid this binary. 
This is a limitation to our study. Though these results likely 
cannot  be  generalized  to  a  global  population,  previous 
research has also found that conversations about copyright 
online tend to focus on U.S. law [7]. 
All  Mturk  workers  are  18  or  older,  and  we  had  no  other 
requirements  for  participation.  Our  participants  were  57% 
male, 75% white, and represented every U.S. state. The age 
range was 18-82 with a mean of 31. Regarding education, 
39% had a college degree, and another 36% had attended at 
least some college. We also asked about the kind of creative 
work  they  post  online.  61%  had  created  some  type  of 
creative work in the media of writing, music, video, or art. 
Only  9%  of  our  participants  reported  having  had  formal 
copyright education or training. 
Findings  
From  our  410  participants,  each  of  the  30  websites  was 
reported as used by anywhere between 14 (Club Create) to 
391  (YouTube)  participants.  However,  each  participant 
completed questions for only 3 (randomized) websites that 

they  chose.  Regardless,  every  one  of  the  30  websites 
studied  had  at  least  one  participant  surveyed  for  that  site. 
There  were  a  total  of  1225  sets  of  questions  answered. 
Table 2 shows these numbers per site. 
For each one of these 1225 sets of questions, we asked the 
participant  whether  they  had  read  the  TOS  for  that 
particular  website—11%  said  yes.  Though  this  number  is 
still low, we suspect it is also inflated due to self-reporting 
bias.  Additionally,  those  who  contributed  to  a  site  are 
slightly more likely to have read the TOS than lurkers (14% 
compared to 10%, p < 0.05). 

Website 

Selected  Surveys 

 
Table 2: How many participants selected (reported having used) each 
website and how many filled out surveys on each website, ordered by 
how represented they are in our survey data  

1456

Facebook 
Wikipedia 
Pinterest 
Craigslist 
MySpace 
YouTube 
LinkedIn 
IMDB 
Twitter 
Google+ 
Flickr 

Media 
Type 
Social 
UGC 
UGC 
UGC 
Social 
Video 
Social 
UGC 
Social 
Social 
UGC 
Art 
Video 
Video 
Music 
Writing 
Harrypotterfanfiction.net  Writing 
Video 
Archive of Our Own  Writing 
Asianfanfics.com 
Writing 

DeviantArt 
Daily Motion 
Ebaum’s World 
Sound Cloud 
Fanfiction.net 

Warcraft Movies 

 

Elfwood 

Overclocked Remix 

The Otaku 
ccMixter 
Remix 64 
Y-Gallery 

Fanart Central 

Art 
Music 
Art 
Music 
Music 
Art 
Art 

Twisting the Hellmouth  Writing 
Music 
Video 

Club Create 
Vidders.net 

390 
378 
336 
373 
315 
391 
284 
323 
269 
282 
233 
217 
172 
164 
157 
88 
25 
29 
26 
20 
 
18 
29 
27 
15 
15 
16 
15 
16 
14 
15 

124 
120 
111 
106 
97 
96 
76 
75 
66 
63 
58 
56 
44 
33 
31 
20 
8 
6 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
3 
3 
3 
2 
2 
1 
1 

SESSION: MULTIMEDIA CREATION AND REMIXING

Accuracy  
One  research  question  we  set  out  to  answer  was  how 
aligned participants’ expectations for the terms of websites 
were  with  the  reality  of  those  terms.  For  each  set  of 
questions,  we  can  calculate  an  accuracy  score  for  how 
many of their answers matched the terms of that website. 
One  complexity  is  that  not  every  term  included  in  the 
survey was relevant for every website. This is because the 
absence of a term does not necessarily imply its negation. 
For  example,  “royalty-free,”  one  of  the  more  common 
licenses, means that users are not paid monetary royalties. 
Facebook requires a royalty-free license, so when we asked 
participants “Does Facebook pay you for your content?” the 
correct  answer  was  “no.”  In  contrast,  Google+  does  not 
specify a royalty-free license. However, this does not mean 
that Google+ does pay users for their content. Though for 
some  terms  this  negation  may  be  true  (for  example,  the 
absence  of  an  irrevocable  license  suggests  that  it  is 
revocable),  we  could  not  assume  that  this  was  the  case. 
Therefore, accuracy here is how well a participant was able 
to correctly identify terms appearing on a site. Accordingly, 
the six sites without copyright terms do not have accuracy 
scores and were not included in these calculations. 
Looking  across  every  question  as  an  individual  data  point 
(with an N of 6822 questions about terms that existed out of 
a  total  12250  asked)  our  participants  had  an  accuracy  of 
69%.  Aggregating  the  data  by  individual  participant,  the 
mean accuracy is 67% with a median of 70%, ranging from 
0 to 100. By website, the mean is 66%, ranging from 45% 
(AsianFanFics) to 85% (Archive of Our Own). 

Licensing Term  
Display 
Non-Exclusive 
Royalty-Free 
Worldwide 
Backup 
Advertising 
Perpetual 
Commercialize 
Irrevocable 
Modify/Transform 
Transferrable 

Sites  % Accurate  N  
954 
20 
875 
20 
17 
796 
1026 
20 
3 
124 
37 
2 
299 
7 
3 
86 
755 
7 
1056 
19 
12 
814 

93.4 
88.3 
87.4 
84.5 
78.2 
73.0 
65.6 
57.0 
46.6 
42.2 
38.2 

 
Table  3:  Accuracy  by  licensing  term,  as  well  as  the  number  of  sites 
with  that  term  (i.e.,  how  common  the  term  is).  N  is  the  number  of 
responses used to calculate accuracy. 
 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

We  can  also  analyze  the  average  accuracy  per  licensing 
term, which provides much greater variance. Table 3 shows 
the accuracy on all questions asked about that term. The N 
is much lower for uncommon licensing terms, such as right 
to  use  in  advertising,  because  this  only  reflects  responses 
for websites on which these terms appeared. 
The results in Table 3 show which copyright terms misalign 
with  user  expectations.  With  93%  accuracy,  the  right  to 
display  is  an  intuitive  one.  None  of  these  websites  could 
show content to other users if they did not have the right to 
display it. The high accuracy score shows that users have an 
intuition  for  common  sense  terms.  However,  other  terms 
such as transferrable (can the website transfer your license 
to  someone  else?),  irrevocable  (can  you  take  back  the 
license once you grant it?), and right to modify (can the site 
change your work?) are much less intuitive. A low accuracy 
score  indicates  that  users  frequently  indicated  that  a  term 
was not there when it was—i.e., unexpected. 
The  variance  here  also  explains  why  accuracy  scores  by 
website  are  potentially  not  very  meaningful.  Because 
different  websites  include  different  licensing  terms,  some 
may include terms that are more confusing than others. The 
lowest  accuracy  score  comes  from  AsianFanFics,  which 
also has the highest number of licensing terms of any of the 
sites. Therefore, it is difficult to speculate that this is due to 
factors such as the readability, when the TOS also contains 
more  of  the  “confusing”  terms.  Our  data  shows  no 
significant  correlation  between  accuracy  and  either  word 
count  of  TOS  (Spearman  R=  0.195)  or  Flesch-Kincaid 
score (-0.235). However, this is not surprising considering 
the low number of respondents reporting having read TOS. 
Interestingly, whether or not the participant reported having 
read  the  TOS  also  did  not  appear  to  impact  accuracy. 
Though  mean  accuracy  for  TOS  readers  (69%)  was 
somewhat  higher  than  for  non-TOS  readers  (66%),  this 
difference did not rise to the level of significance (p=0.09). 
We  also  measured  no  differences  based  on  whether  the 
participant reported copyright training (p=0.24) or whether 
they were a contributor or a lurker (p=0.16). 
In sum, 69% accuracy suggests that perhaps Internet users 
do have decent intuition about many of the licensing terms 
that they agree to, but there is a great deal of variance by 
licensing  term.  Those  with  low  accuracy  that  appear 
frequently,  such  as  right  to  modify,  present  the  biggest 
potential problem for users. 
Expectations  and  Opinions  
Our participants indicated what they thought the reality was 
for  each  licensing  term  as  well  as  what  they  thought  it 
should be. Regardless of whether or not they were correct, 
this  gives  us  a  sense  for  user  expectations  and  opinions 
about each term. With a binary yes-or-no answer (0 for no 
and 1 for yes), the expectation score for each term tells us 
what proportion of participants thought that licensing term 
existed. An opinion score comes from a Likert scale (with 1 

being strongly disagree, and 5 strongly agree), indicating in 
aggregate how much participants thought it should exist for 
that website. There is a positive correlation between these 
scores  (see  Figure  1).  The  licensing  terms  users  think  the 
sites  have  generally  match  what  they  think  they  should 
have; this suggests that to some extent users trust the sites 
they use to have reasonable policies.  

 
Figure 1: Positive correlation between opinion and expectation scores 
–  opinion  on  a  1  to  5  Likert  scale  and  expectation  on  a  0  to  1  scale 
representing proportion of yes and no answers.  

 
Figure  2:  Correlation  between  expectation  score  (on  a  0  to  1  scale 
representing proportion of yes and no answers) and reality (number of 
sites represented) for each licensing term  
However, expectation does not necessarily match the reality 
of  sites’  licenses;  transfer  and  modify  terms,  for  example, 
are very common. Using the number of sites in our sample 
that  do  have  a  certain  term  as  a  proxy  for  reality,  the 
relationship between expectation (how often users expect a 
term to be present) and reality (how often a term is present) 
is by contrast not linear at all (see Figure 2). In other words, 
there are a number of terms that are often present that users 
would find surprising. 
Just as there were no differences between contributors and 
lurkers  on  accuracy,  neither  were  there  any  significant 
differences  on  expectation  or  opinion  measures  when  we 
analyzed participants separately based on whether they had 

1457

contributed content to the site or not. This holds true for the 
results discussed in the next section as well. 
Differences  in  Website  Types  
Prior work has suggested that content creators of different 
types of content (for example, art versus writing) may have 
different  attitudes  towards  copyright  [6].  Therefore,  we 
expected that we might see differences in opinion based on 
the  type  of  website  participants  were  questioned  about: 
music,  writing,  video,  visual  art,  social  media,  and  other 
user-generated content.  
For each of these types of websites, we compared responses 
for  that  type  (see  Table  1  for  a  listing  of  type  for  each 
website)  versus  other  responses,  using  t-tests  to  compare 
means. We examined both expectation and opinion. We did 
not  see  striking  differences,  particularly  given 
the 
granularity  of  Likert  scores  (and  ours  are  aggregate  rather 
than  single-item  measures),  though  there  were  some  non-
random  patterns.  It  should  be  noted  as  well  that  our 
statistical  tests  were  assuming  unequal  variances,  since 
there were unequal sample sizes—for example, 426 social 
media  responses  to  799  non-social-media  responses  (see 
Table 2).  
In writing communities, which are primarily fandom-based 
(i.e., fan fiction sites), we see somewhat less expectation for 
websites  to  have  modify  (24%  for  writing  versus  44% 
overall, p < 0.05) and commercial terms (46% for writing 
versus 64% overall, p < 0.05). This tracks to social norms in 
these  communities  around  remixing  permissions  and 
noncommercialization [6]. On music and video sites, there 
is  a  small  but  significant  difference  for  royalty-free 
licenses;  participants  favor  these  licenses  somewhat  less 
(2.58 for music and 2.46 for video versus 3.22 overall, p < 
0.01), suggesting that they might be more amenable to users 
being paid for their work. Though we cannot make strong 
claims  about  these  small  differences,  it  may  be  some 
reflection of differing values in these communities. 
In  Marshall  and  Shipman’s  study  of  ownership  values  on 
Facebook,  they  suggested  that  the  personal  nature  of 
Facebook  content  may  be  at  the  root  of  some  of  the 
discrepancy between perceived ownership rights and reality 
[25]. In our data set, social media sites do stand apart from 
other  media  types  since  they  may  contain  more  personal 
content  than  more  creative  communities.  In  comparing 
social media versus other types, we see the same pattern for 
nearly  every  licensing  term:  a  slight  favoring  of  the  site 
having less control over their content. For example, a mean 
opinion score of 2.83 over 3.51 (p < 0.001) means that users 
were  venturing 
towards  “somewhat  disagree”  over 
“somewhat agree” as to whether social media sites should 
have a “worldwide” license. This suggests that they might 
favor some geographic constraints in the content use. 
Interestingly,  examining  expectation  data  rather 
than 
opinion—what  the  users  think  the  terms  actually  are—for 
some  of  the  terms  we  actually  see  the  exact  opposite.  On 

1458

SESSION: MULTIMEDIA CREATION AND REMIXING

social media sites, 42% of users versus 36% for other users 
think  that  the  site  has  the  right  to  transfer  or  sublicense 
content  to  third  parties  (p  <  0.05),  54%  versus  45%  think 
that the license the user grants is irrevocable (p < 0.01), and 
92% versus 86% think that the site does not have to pay the 
user  royalties  (p  <  0.001).  This  difference  suggests  that 
though users may think that social media sites actually have 
more  control  over  their  content  than  other  types  of  sites, 
they want them to have less. Though these differences are 
quantitatively  small,  the  conceptual  difference  between 
opinion and expectation is worth noting.  
Overall,  while  there  are  non-random  differences  between 
media types, the fact that the trend is still similar in terms of 
real numbers suggests that people have basic opinions about 
how  any  content  should  be  used.  However,  these  basic 
opinions  are  supplemented  by  at  least  some  differences 
based on the website and type of content. 
DISCUSSION  
The  first  part  of  this  study  was  to  extend  prior  work  on 
privacy policies to copyright and Terms of Service, asking 
whether  people  read  TOS  and  whether 
they  would 
understand  them  even  if  they  did.  The  answer  is  no.  The 
11%  of  our  participants  who  reported  reading  was 
somewhat higher than we expected based on prior work, but 
still represents a minority and may also be affected by self-
reporting  bias.  Low  readability  and  high  word  counts  for 
TOS is on par with privacy policies, though we did find that 
people  have  good  intuitions  about  some  of  the  more 
common  sense  terms,  such  as  right  to  display.  However, 
low  accuracy  in  predicting  the  existence  of  terms  such  as 
transferrable  and  modifiable  are  more  problematic  since 
these  terms  are  common—and  apparently  users  do  not 
realize this. 
Given these findings, our major point of reflection is: does 
it matter? Why is it important that users understand TOS? Is 
it  important  enough  that  fixing  this  problem  should  be  a 
design goal? We argue that it does matter, for two reasons. 
The first is that copyright licenses are far from one size fits 
all. Based on our analysis of what terms exist on different 
websites,  we  see  a  great  deal  of  variability.  Beyond 
ubiquitous  and  common  sense  terms  such  as  right  to 
display,  there  are  those  that  appear  infrequently  such  as 
right  to  commercial  use.  Therefore,  users  cannot  assume 
that  the  terms  will  be  the  same  across  different  websites. 
This goes against conventional wisdom that the legalese in 
TOS is all boilerplate terms. 
Moreover, our data shows that people do care. This follows 
previous  work 
that 
information  in  privacy  policies  can  affect  purchasing 
behavior  [35]  and  that  Facebook  users  report  content 
ownership as one of their concerns about using the site [36] 
while  having  strong  opinions  about  that  ownership  [25]. 
Though we did not ask our participants directly about how 
licensing  terms  would  affect  their  site  use,  we  saw  strong 

that  has  shown, 

for  example, 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

differences  in  opinion  about  different  terms.  Clearly, 
copyright licenses are not one size fits all for users either.  
Consider the three terms appearing as outliers in Figure 2. 
Transferrable, modifiable, and irrevocable are the terms that 
appear  most  often  appeared  when  not  expected.  Figure  1 
also  illustrates  that  they  have  the  lowest  opinion  scores, 
suggesting they could be the ones participants care the most 
about.  Distaste  over  transferrable  and  modifiable  licenses 
suggests a desire for control over how content is used: for it 
not to be changed nor given to someone else. Not wanting 
irrevocable licenses suggests a desire for choice—ability to 
cut ties with a website at any given point.  
The fact that opinions and expectations align suggests that 
people  generally  trust  these  websites  to  protect  their 
interests when it comes to their content. Users don’t want to 
grant transferrable, irrevocable licenses to modify work, but 
they  also  don’t  think  that  they  are.  This  misalignment 
between  expectations  and  reality  is  a  significant  usability 
problem.  Many  users  are  granting  these  rights  without 
realizing, and they might be unhappy if they knew. 
The question as to how this harms the user would be highly 
dependent on the intent of the website—but the truth is that 
these licensing terms give them the option to use content in 
these ways. At the time of our data collection,8 LinkedIn’s 
license  was 
in  part  assignable,  sublicensable,  and 
irrevocable,  and  granted  the  right  for  them  to  create 
derivative  works.  Assignable  and  sublicensable  (similar  to 
transferrable) mean that they have your permission to give 
this license to some other party (for example, license your 
content for use on a different website). Creating derivative 
works could mean anything from changing the font size to 
producing a blockbuster film based on a blog post. Finally, 
irrevocable means that once you have granted these rights, 
you  cannot  un-grant  them.  Even  if  LinkedIn  had  no 
intention of selling books filled with wisdom gleaned from 
content posted by Mark Zuckerberg or Kim Kardashian, or 
featuring  your  profile  on  a  new  “world’s  worst  resumes” 
webpage  (and  this  is  unlikely),  users  had  given  them  the 
option  of  doing  these  things.  The  fact  that  they  did  so 
unknowingly is a usability problem. 
Of course, with only about a tenth of users having read the 
TOS,  is  this  misalignment  of  expectation  and  reality  the 
responsibility of the website? With the TOSs we analyzed 
having  an  average  of  3851  words  and  requiring  a  college 
sophomore reading level, users may have long been trained 
out of attempting to understand them. However, it is clear 
from our results that users do have opinions about how their 
content  should  be  used—perhaps  to  the  point  where  the 
licensing terms would affect their decision to use a site. Just 
as  researchers  have  devised  more  readable  modes  of 
presentation  for  privacy  policies  [18],  websites  should 
                                                             
8 LinkedIn’s copyright terms have changed significantly since the time of 
this  study,  and  no  longer  claim  so  many  rights  in  their  license. 
https://www.linkedin.com/legal/user-agreement  

consider presenting their licensing terms in a readable way 
outside of the block of TOS legalese. 
Additionally, the fact that there are differences in opinions 
based on media type suggests that there could be differing 
norms and attitudes about copyright among different types 
of  content  creators.  Interestingly,  the  website  with  the 
highest accuracy score of participants accurately predicting 
their licensing terms, Archive of Our Own, is also a website 
that  was  specifically  designed  with  the  social  norms  of  a 
certain creative community in mind [15]. 
This  is  not  to  say  that  site  designers  should  alter  their 
licensing terms based on the specifics of these findings, but 
that they should consider more carefully the needs of their 
particular community of users. Consider the amount of user 
research that often goes into design decisions such as where 
to place a button on a website or exactly how the flow of a 
pay transaction should be designed. How often, in contrast, 
do websites conduct user studies about what their copyright 
policies—or any part of their Terms of Service—should be?  
Websites  are  often  constrained  by  legal  departments  and 
required  language  for  terms  and  conditions.  However,  in 
explaining  those  terms,  it  is  important  to  be  mindful  of 
terms  that  users  would  find  most  alarming—for  example, 
the right to modify or transform. This licensing term could 
mean  anything  from  changing  the  font  size  to  editing 
content to creating a blockbuster film. A study of data use 
requirements  on  mobile  apps  found  that  simply  knowing 
why the app needed that information did much to alleviate 
privacy concerns [19]. An understanding of not only what 
the  term  means  but  what  the  site  actually  means  to  do 
would  be  an  important  step  towards  alleviating  user 
concerns about uses of their content. For example, Archive 
of Our Own’s TOS has a line after their license (including 
in part “modifying or adapting”) that reads: “Modifying and 
adapting here refer strictly to how your work is displayed—
not how it is written, drawn, or otherwise created.”9 Even 
this  amount  of  plain  language  explanation  is  rare.  The 
introduction  of  this  paper  describes  instances  of  social 
media users becoming alarmed when copyright terms were 
brought  to  their  attention.  These  problems  could  often  be 
avoided  without  a  change  in  the  policies  themselves,  but 
rather by explaining in clear terms the purpose behind them.  
CONCLUSION  
Online  content  contribution  is  an  important  component  of 
the systems that we study within CSCW, and copyright is a 
necessary  yet  often  invisible  layer  in  these  environments.  
Understanding  user  impressions  of  policy  therefore  fills  a 
gap in this space. Towards this end, some HCI researchers 
have  put  forth  the  complexity  of  privacy  policies  as  an 
important  usability  problem  [2,5,16,18,19,21],  and  have 
also come up with technological solutions to help [18,19]. 
In extending the descriptive part of this work to copyright 

                                                             
9 https://archiveofourown.org/tos (as of April 16, 2015) 

1459

licensing 

the  variability  of 

terms, we reveal that user information deficit about online 
terms  and  conditions  is  generalizable  beyond  privacy. 
Moreover, 
terms  across 
websites,  the  mismatch  between  user  expectation  and 
reality,  and  differing  user  opinions  about  licensing  terms 
reveals that this is information that matters.  
We consider this an important lesson for designers of user-
generated content websites who may assume that users do 
not  read  terms  and  conditions  and  therefore  do  not  care 
about their content. However, there have been a number of 
examples  in  the  past,  such  as  with  Facebook,  Instagram, 
and  OK  Cupid,  where  users  have  demonstrated  that  they 
cared deeply [22,30,34]. Our work suggests that when users 
do stop to think about individual licensing terms that they 
might  agree  to,  they  are  not  ambivalent  about  how  their 
content  can  be  used.  As  Jackson  et.  al  suggest,  policy 
should  be  considered  alongside  design  and  practice  as  an 
important component of CSCW research [14]. 
Website designers could go a long way towards helping by 
simply including plain language explanations of their terms 
and  intentions.  Additionally,  there  is  a  potential  for 
technological solutions. For example, researchers have had 
some success in automatic parsing of privacy policy text in 
order to present information to the user in a more readable 
way [18,29]. Licensing terms would be even easier to parse, 
since they tend to user very similar language and structure. 
Future  research  in  this  area  could  provide  design  and 
technological  solutions  for  helping  online  content  creators 
understand  their  rights,  and  also  look  beyond  Terms  of 
Service  to  further  complexities  of  intellectual  property 
rights. Ownership and copyright are increasingly important 
as content contribution continues to be a major part of life 
online,  and  we  hope  that  future  CSCW  work  will  take  up 
additional problems in this space as well. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
Thank you to Josephine Antwi, Titus Woo, Joseph 
Gonzales, and Jessica Feuston for their assistance on this 
project, as well as to colleagues (particularly Annie Antón, 
Eric Gilbert, and Rebecca Tushnet) and reviewers for their 
valuable feedback. This work was supported by NSF IIS-
1216347. 
  
REFERENCES  
1.  Yannis Bakos, Florencia Marotta-Wurlger, and David R. 

Trossen. 2009. Does Anyone Read the Fine Print? 
Testing a Law and Economics Approach to Standard 
Form Contracts. New York University Law and 
Economics Working Papers Paper 195. Retrieved from 
http://lsr.nellco.org/nyu_lewp/195 

2.  Rainer Bohme and Stefan Kopsell. 2010. Trained to 

Accept? A Field Experiment on Consent Dialogs. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '10). 

1460

SESSION: MULTIMEDIA CREATION AND REMIXING

3.  M. Buhrmester, T. Kwang, and S. D. Gosling. 2011. 

Amazon’s Mechanical Turk: A New Source of 
Inexpensive, Yet High-Quality, Data? Perspectives on 
Psychological Science 6, 1, 3–5.  

4.  Mary J. Culnan and Thomas J. Carlin. 2006. Online 
Privacy Practices in Higher Education: Making the 
Grade? Communications of the ACM 52, 2, 126–130. 

5.  Julia B. Earp, Annie I. Antón, Lynda Aiman-Smith, and 

William H. Stufflebeam. 2005. Examining Internet 
Privacy Policies Within the Context of User Privacy 
Values. IEEE Transactions on Engineering 
Management 52, 2, 227–237. 

6.  Casey Fiesler and Amy S. Bruckman. 2014. Remixers’ 
Understandings of Fair Use Online. Proceedings of the 
ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work & Social Computing (CSCW '14). 

7.  Casey Fiesler, Jessica Feuston, and Amy S. Bruckman. 
2015. Understanding Copyright Law in Online Creative 
Communities. Proceedings of the ACM Conference on 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social 
Computing (CSCW '15) 

8.  Nathaniel Good, Rachna Dhamija, Jens Grossklags, et 

al. 2005. Stopping Spyware at the Gate: A User Study of 
Privacy, Notice and Spyware. Proceedings of 
Symposium On Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS).  
9.  Nathaniel Good, Jens Grossklags, Deirdre K. Mulligan, 

and Joseph A. Konstan. 2007. Noticing Notice: A 
Large-Scale Experiment on the Timing of Software 
License Agreements. Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI '07).  

10.  J.K. Goodman, C.E. Cryder, and A. Cheema. 2013. 
Data Collection in a Flat World: The Strengths and 
Weaknesses of Mechanical Turk Samples. Journal of 
Behavioral Decision Making 26, 3, 213–224. 

11.  Mark A. Graber, Donna M. D'Alessandro, and Jill 

Johnson-West. 2002. Reading Level of Privacy Policies 
on Internet Health Web Sites. The Journal of Family 
Practice 51, 7, 642–5.  

12. Sara M. Grimes. 2006. Online multiplayer games: A 
virtual space for intellectual property debates? New 
Media & Society 8, 6, 969–990.  

13. Christopher M. Hoadley, Heng Xu, Joey J. Lee, and 

Mary Beth Rosson. 2010. Privacy as Information Access 
and Illusory Control: The Case of the Facebook News 
Feed Privacy Outcry. Electronic Commerce Research 
and Applications 9, 1, 50–60.  

14. Steven J. Jackson, Tarleton Gillespie, and Sandy 

Payette. 2014. The Policy Knot: Re-integrating Policy, 
Practice and Design in CSCW Studies of Social 
Computing. Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

26. Aleecia M. Mcdonald and Lorrie Faith Cranor. 2008. 

The Cost of Reading Privacy Policies. I/S: A Journal of 
Law and Policy for the Information Society 4, 543–565. 

27. Stephanie Teebagy North. 2011. Twitteright: Finding 
Protection in 140 Characters or Less. Journal of High 
Technology Law 11, 2, 333–364.  

28. G. Paolacci, J. Chandler, and P.G. Ipeirotis. 2010. 

Running Experiments on Amazon Mechanical Turk. 
Judgment and Decision Making 5, 5. 

29. Joel R. Reidenberg, Travis Breaux, Lorrie Faith Cranor, 
et al. 2015. Disagreeable Privacy Policies: Mismatches 
Between Meaning and Users’ Understanding. Berkeley 
Technology Law Journal 30.  

30. Martin Robbins. 2014. Does OKCupid need our 

consent? The Guardian. 
http://www.theguardian.com/science/the-lay-
scientist/2014/jul/30/does-okcupid-need-our-consent 

31. Willem E. Saris, Melanie Revilla, Jon A. Krosnick, and 

Eric M. Shaeffer. 2010. Comparing Questions with 
Agree/Disagree Response Options to Questions with 
Item-Specific Response Options. Survey Research 
Methods 4, 1, 61–79. 

32. Oshani Seneviratne and Andrés Monroy-Hernández. 

2010. Remix Culture on the Web: A Survey of Content 
Reuse on Different User-Generated Content Websites. 
Proceedings of Web Science Conference (WebSci '10). 

33. Anna C. Squicciarini, Mohamed Shehab, and Joshua 
Wede. 2010. Privacy Policies for Shared content in 
Social Network Sites. VLDB Journal 19, 6, 777–796.  
34. Brian Stelter. 2009. Facebook’s Users Ask Who Owns 

Information. The New York Times. 
http://www.nytimes.com/2009/02/17/technology/interne
t/17facebook.html 

35. Janice Y Tsai, Lorrie Cranor, Serge Egelman, and 

Alessandro Acquisti. 2010. The Effect of Online Privacy 
Information on Purchasing Behavior: An Experimental 
Study. Information Systems Research 22, 2, 254–268. 

36. Hui Zhang, Munmun De Choudhury, and Jonathan 

Grudin. 2014. Creepy but Inevitable  ? The Evolution of 
Social Networking. Proceedings of the ACM Conference 
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social 
Computing (CSCW ’14).  

on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social 
Computing (CSCW '14). 

15. Anne Jamison. 2013. Fic: Why Fanfiction is Taking 

Over the World. Smart Pop, Dallas, TX. 

16. Carlos Jensen and Colin Potts. 2004. Privacy Policies as 

Decision-Making Tools: An Evaluation of Online 
Privacy Notices. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '04). 

17. Matthew Kay and Michael Terry. 2010. Textured 
Agreements: Re-envisioning Electronic Consent. 
Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Usable Privacy 
and Security (SOUPS).  

18. Patrick Gage Kelley, Lucian Cesca, Joanna Bresee, and 

Lorrie Faith Cranor. 2010. Standardizing Privacy 
Notices: An Online Study of the Nutrition Label 
Approach. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '10). 

19. Jialiu Lin, Shahriyar Amini, Jason I. Hong, Norman 

Sadeh, Janne Lindqvist, and Joy Zhang. 2012. 
Expectation and Purpose: Understanding Users’ Mental 
Models of Mobile App Privacy through Crowdsourcing. 
Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on 
Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp ’12). 
20. Matthew Lombard, Jennifer Snyder-Duch, and Cheryl 
Campanella Bracken. 2002. Content Analysis in Mass 
Communication: Assessment and Reporting of 
Intercoder Reliability. Human Communication Research 
28, 4, 587–604.  

21. Ewa Luger, Stuart Moran, and Tom Rodden. 2013. 

Consent for All: Revealing the Hidden Complexity of 
Terms and Conditions. Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI '13). 

22. Matthew Lynley. 2012. Why the Web is Freaking Out 

Over Instagram’s New Terms of Service. The Wall 
Street Journal. Retrieved from 
http://blogs.wsj.com/digits/2012/12/18/why-the-web-is-
freaking-out-over-instagrams-new-terms-of-service/ 
23. Trina J. Magi. 2010. A Content Analysis of Library 

Vendor Privacy Policies: Do They Meet Our Standards? 
College & Research Libraries 71, 3, 254–272. 

24. Catherine C. Marshall and Frank M. Shipman. 2011. 

The Ownership and Reuse of Visual Media. 
Proceedings of the 11th ACM/IEEE-CS Joint 
Conference on Digital Libraries. 

25. Catherine C. Marshall and Frank M. Shipman. 2015. 

Exploring the Ownership and Persistent Value of 
Facebook Content. Proceedings of the ACM Conference 
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social 
Computing (CSCW ’15). 

1461

