CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Examining American and Chinese Internet Users’

Contextual Privacy Preferences of Behavioral Advertising

SALT (Social Computing Systems) Lab, School of Information Studies, Syracuse University

Yang Wang, Huichuan Xia, Yun Huang

{ywang, hxia, yhuang}@syr.edu

ABSTRACT
Online Behavioral Advertising (OBA), which involves track-
ing people’s online behaviors, raises serious privacy con-
cerns. We present results from a scenario-based online sur-
vey study on American and Chinese Internet users’ privacy
preferences of OBA. Since privacy is context-dependent, we
investigated the effects of country (US vs. China), activ-
ity (e.g., online shopping vs. online banking), and platform
(desktop/laptop vs. mobile app) on people’s willingness to
share their information for OBA. We found that American re-
spondents were signiﬁcantly less willing to share their data
and had more speciﬁc concerns than their Chinese counter-
parts. We situate these differences in the broader historical,
legal, and social scenes of these countries. We also found that
respondents’ OBA preferences varied signiﬁcantly across dif-
ferent online activities, suggesting the potential of context-
aware privacy tools for OBA. However, we did not ﬁnd a
signiﬁcant effect of platform on people’s OBA preferences.
Lastly, we discuss design implications for privacy tools.

Author Keywords
Online Behavioral Advertising; OBA; Privacy; Context;
China; USA; Cross-Country Study.

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.m. Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g. HCI):
Miscellaneous

INTRODUCTION
Advertising networks are increasingly using Online Behav-
ioral Advertising (OBA) to provide ads tailored to individual
Internet users. The US Federal Trade Commission (FTC) de-
ﬁnes OBA as “the practice of tracking an individual’s online
activities in order to deliver advertising tailored to the indi-
vidual’s interests.” [12] By proﬁling an individual’s online ac-
tivities and characteristics, OBA could build models to infer
users’ preferences and display tailored ads accordingly [18].
As indicated by prior research [5], OBA could beneﬁt adver-
tising companies greatly by increasing the click-through rates
and prices of the ads [5]. OBA could also beneﬁt Internet

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW ’16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02...$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819941

539

users by tailoring ads to their potential interests, and to a cer-
tain degree, by supporting websites to provide free services
(e.g., free web content or email) to these users [34, 54].
However, OBA has also raised privacy concerns due to its
pervasive tracking. Turow et al.’s 2009 survey of 1,000 Inter-
net users in United States found that 68% of them “deﬁnitely
would not” and 19% “probably would not” allow advertisers
to track them online, even anonymously [53]. Similarly, the
2011 TRUSTe and Harris Interactive online survey found that
up to 85% of the respondents had a negative attitude towards
online tracking and OBA [52]. While most users do not like
being tracked by advertising companies, users’ attitudes to-
wards OBA vary [54]. For instance, one study indicates that
even though many users consider OBA to be creepy and dis-
like being tracked online, some of them still ﬁnd targeted ads
relevant and favorable [34]. Depsite people’s concerns, on-
line tracking and OBA are clearly happening [1, 18, 33].
There is a growing stream of empirical research on people’s
attitudes towards OBA, and most of them focused on the US
(e.g., [28, 34, 41, 53, 54]). Little is known about how people
in other countries feel about OBA, such as in China. Com-
pared to the US which ranks the second in the number of In-
ternet users and has about 10% of the world’s Internet popula-
tion, China has the world’s largest Internet population, more
than 20% of the world’s total. According to a 2014 report
published by the China Internet Network Information Cen-
ter (CNNIC), online advertising in China has become more
prevalent and targeted [10]. In addition, 70% of Chinese mo-
bile phone users would prefer to view ads on mobile apps in
order to use the apps for free, and 32.4% are tolerant of mo-
bile advertising so long as it does not inﬂuence their normal
user experience [10]. These results motivate us to systemat-
ically examine and compare American and Chinese Internet
users’ perceptions of OBA.
In addition, privacy is a highly context-dependent concept
[4, 36]. This is particularly important in the domain of OBA,
as some Internet users prefer to receive relevant ads despite
their privacy concerns [34, 54]. Thus, if users only have pri-
vacy concerns for OBA in certain contexts, then privacy tools
may be built to selectively block OBA based on contexts.
This has the potential to allow both the industry and Internet
users to reap the beneﬁts of OBA, while respecting people’s
privacy. Despite the importance of context, few studies have
systematically examined the impact of context on people’s
perceptions of OBA.

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

To examine how context may affect user preferences of OBA,
we conducted a scenario-based survey study. Besides coun-
try, we examined activity and platform. For activity, we cre-
ated ﬁve types of online activities including online shopping,
online banking, online health information seeking, online dat-
ing, and online social networking. For platform, we included
two platforms - desktop/laptops, and mobile apps - on which
online activities and OBA can occur. We investigated survey
respondents’ willingness to share their information for OBA
when they are conducting these ﬁve types of online activities
on one of the two platforms.
There are two main reasons why we chose to focus on these
three variables in our study: country (US/CN), activity (ﬁve
different online activities), and platform (mobile/desktop).
First, they are all important aspects of the context in which
people experience OBA. While they have been suggested
in the literature as playing important roles in people’s pri-
vacy/security decision-making (e.g. [6, 7, 15]), to the best of
our knowledge, they have not been systematically investi-
gated in the context of OBA.
Second, similar to prior privacy studies on OBA (e.g., [28]),
our primary goal is to assess the relative effect of each vari-
able after controlling for other variables. The interactions be-
tween these three variables are also of interest. For instance,
the interaction between country and platform is interesting
because China’s mobile service providers (e.g., China Uni-
Com) have publicly announced tracking the web browsing
history of their mobile phone users1. However, we did not
ﬁnd any public information about whether Chinese service
providers track their users’ browsing behavior on the desk-
top/laptop. Therefore, Chinese users might have different ex-
pectations about being tracked by the service providers be-
tween their desktop/laptop computers and mobile devices.
We found that American respondents were signiﬁcantly less
willing to share their information for OBA and had more spe-
ciﬁc concerns than their Chinese counterparts. We also found
respondents’ preferences of OBA varied signiﬁcantly across
different online activities. However, we did not ﬁnd a signif-
icant effect of platform on respondents’ preferences of OBA.
These results can inform the design of privacy tools for OBA.
In summary, this paper makes three main contributions. First,
we found that the type of online activity has a signiﬁcant im-
pact on users’ willingness to share personal information for
OBA purposes, contributing to the empirical evidence of the
contextual nature of privacy preferences and suggesting the
potential of context-aware privacy tools for OBA. Second, we
identiﬁed Chinese Internet users’ perceptions of OBA, which,
to our knowledge, is non-existent in the literature. Third,
we systematically compared American and Chinese Internet
users’ perceptions of OBA, highlighting the nuanced differ-
ences against the broader historical, legal and social backdrop
in these two countries.

1https://www.techinasia.com/china-unicom-tracking-mobile-
browsing-history-check-database/

540

RELATED WORK

Conceptualization of Privacy
In this paper we focus on information privacy [46]. One def-
inition that ﬁts with the OBA context is “the claim of an in-
dividual to determine what information about himself or her-
self should be known to others” [53]. Smith et al. develop
a validated scale for measuring main dimensions of users’
general privacy concerns about organizational practices: (1)
collection, or the concern about the extensive collection of
personal identiﬁable information; (2) unauthorized secondary
use, which refers to information being collected for one pur-
pose but used for a different purpose; (3) improper access, or
the concern of personal information being available for unau-
thorized view or use; and (4) errors, or the concern for delib-
erate or accidental errors in personal information [47].
A growing body of literature advocates the study of privacy
in speciﬁc context. Helen Nissenbaum’s theory of contextual
integrity eloquently points out that human behaviors, e.g., an
event or transaction that occurs, are situated in some context:
geographical space and certain constituted norms in a polit-
ical, or cultural environment [36].
In this paper, we study
privacy in the context of OBA.

Privacy in OBA
OBA is usually employed by proﬁling users based on track-
ing their online activities, such as the websites they visit over
time [34]. Because of the pervasive and invasive online track-
ing [1], OBA has raised privacy concerns [2, 34, 53, 54]. For
instance, users generally understand the need of web ads for
receiving free online services, however, users do not think
tracking them is part of the deal [34].
Various factors could inﬂuence users’ privacy preferences to-
ward OBA. For instance, one study found that data retention
(i.e., the length of time that this data is retained) and scope
of use (i.e., how such data would be used) have substantial
inﬂuence on users’ willingness to share their information for
OBA [28]. Users also have varying preferences for sharing
different types of personal information. For instance, prior
research ﬁnds that users are relatively more willing to share
information about their computers than their personally iden-
tiﬁable information with OBA [34].
Government agencies, Internet standard groups, and browser
vendors are also paying close attention to OBA and its re-
lated privacy issues. In 2012, the U.S. Federal Trade Com-
mission and the White House released several reports to dis-
cuss privacy issues and possible consequences of OBA [13].
W3C, the group that establishes Internet standards, started a
working group on tracking protection in 2011. The working
group has also been working on the speciﬁcations of a “Do
Not Track” (DNT) mechanism that allows people to signal
their intent of opting out of online tracking in web browsers
that websites and ad networks can choose to honor. Browsers
such as Microsoft Internet Explorer have implemented mech-
anisms to support DNT. However, how much the industry is
honoring the DNT signals is unclear. The State of Califor-
nia requires online service providers to disclose whether and
how they respond to DNT signals in their privacy policies [8].

SESSION: INTERNATONAL INSIGHTS

However, not all websites include such information in their
privacy policies.
In terms of regulation, the US currently does not have legis-
lation that regulates OBA. Industry’s self-regulation was also
found to be insufﬁcient. For instance, researchers found var-
ious usability issues in tools designed for enabling Internet
users to opt out of online tracking [27]. Various privacy-
enhancing OBA schemes have been proposed (e.g., [3, 51]),
but none have been adopted in real-world practice. In other
words, OBA could still put Internet users’ privacy at risk.

Cross-Country Study of Privacy and Advertising
Prior literature shows that people in different countries can
have very different privacy perceptions of the same thing
[23, 55]. For example, one study found that American stu-
dents demand more privacy protection in their places of resi-
dence than their Turkish counterparts [23]. Another study on
the use of social networking sites (SNS) found that Ameri-
can users are more concerned about online privacy in general
than their Chinese and Indian counterparts, but Chinese users
are more concerned about their online identities [55]. Some
scholars argue that differences in countries associated with
privacy perceptions are rooted in history and conventions. For
example, Smit et al. suggest that Europeans tend to consider
their privacy to be a fundamental human right, whereas peo-
ple in the US regard privacy more as an individual matter and
a sort of contractual negotiation with some organization [45].
In terms of user perceptions of advertising, prior studies have
also suggested differences in countries. For instance, one
study found that Japanese users are more irritated by mobile
advertising (via SMS) than their Austrian counterparts [31].
However, both groups consider entertainment and credibility
as key factors in assessing the value of ads [31]. Another
study found that Chinese users’ attitudes towards mobile ads
(via SMS) are more affected by the attitudes of other Chinese
users than intrinsic features of the ads themselves [19]. In
particular, younger Chinese women are more easily affected
by their peers because of their pursuit of fashion [19].
While OBA is encountered by Internet users around the
world, most of the empirical research of OBA focuses on
users in the US (e.g., [34, 53, 54]). One exception is a study
of Internet users from Romania and US, which found Roma-
nian users have more positive attitudes toward targeted ad-
vertising and they are more prone to click the ads than Amer-
ican users [56]. In our study, we systematically examine and
compare American and Chinese Internet users’ perceptions
of OBA. This comparison is valuable because they are the
two biggest Internet-using countries. Since prior research has
found that Americans and Chinese have different privacy dif-
ferences in domains such as online commerce [58], SNS [55],
and location sharing apps [29], we suspect that there will be
differences for OBA too. Therefore, our ﬁrst research ques-
tion is:
RQ1 (Country): Do American and Chinese Internet users
have different privacy preferences of OBA?

Contextual Privacy Preferences
There is a strong theoretical rationale and empirical evidence
that context affects people’s privacy decision-making. Nis-
senbaum’s theory of contextual integrity [36] is particularly
relevant. She proposes context-based rules and expectations
for protecting users’ privacy against what speciﬁc informa-
tion may be collected, with whom the websites may share,
and under what conditions such information sharing may oc-
cur [37]. Prior studies have found that users’ privacy pref-
erences vary across different contexts such as location shar-
ing [4, 24], mobile apps [30], and ubiquitous computing sys-
tems [42].
In the domain of OBA, few studies have systematically ex-
amined the impact of contexts on users’ privacy preferences
of OBA. While there has been research on factors that could
affect Internet users’ attitudes towards OBA [28], these stud-
ies focus on different “features” of a website (e.g., length of
data retention) rather than different usage “contexts” in which
OBA could occur (e.g., online shopping). In our study, we
examine users’ willingness to share their information with
OBA in speciﬁc online activities (e.g., ﬁnding medical infor-
mation for a health issue online). This matters because if peo-
ple’s preferences vary across different online activities, then
privacy-sensitive mechanisms can be built to collect certain
user data in certain circumstances for OBA.
RQ2 (Activity): Do Internet users’ privacy preferences of
OBA vary across different online activities?
Another aspect of context is the platform on which OBA oc-
curs. Prior research has found that people can be more risk-
seeking on their mobile devices than on desktop computers
(e.g., searching more sensitive topics on mobile devices) [39].
We are curious whether the platform in which OBA occurs
would affect people’s preferences of OBA. We are particu-
larly interested in OBA in mobile apps because researchers
have identiﬁed privacy and security risks of ads appearing
within the apps [17]. Furthermore, people may already have
some privacy preferences (e.g., the exact resources or data on
the device that the app can access) during the installation of
mobile apps, but these preferences do not specify nor regulate
whether these resources or data can be used for OBA.
RQ3 (Platform): Do Internet users’ privacy preferences of
OBA differ between the two platforms: desktop/laptop and
mobile apps?

METHODOLOGY
We conducted an online survey study hosted by Qualtrics
in the summer of 2014. This study was designed using
a mixed-model approach where country (China or the US)
and platform (desktop/laptop or mobile) are between-subjects
variables, while activity (e.g., online shopping) is a within-
subjects variable. Each respondent viewed ﬁve hypotheti-
cal web usage activities, which are described in detail below.
This study was approved by our Institutional Review Board.
Our study design adopted many aspects of a previous OBA
study by Leon et al. [28], including the explanation of OBA,
the role-playing aspect of the study, and some speciﬁc ques-
tions (e.g., what personal information people are willing to

541

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

share for OBA). While Leon et al. studied the impact of dif-
ferent data collection practices (e.g., data retention policies)
on users’ attitudes towards OBA [28], we instead use a sim-
ilar methodology to explore the impacts of country, online
activity, and platform on people’s OBA privacy preferences.

Survey Content
We designed the survey in English, which was then trans-
lated into another version in Simpliﬁed Chinese (CN) by two
native Chinese speakers. The survey has two branches cor-
responding to the two platforms: desktop/laptop and mobile
apps. We randomly assigned each respondent to one of the
two branches. Each branch has a total of 24 questions.
Our respondents started the survey with a few questions about
general web advertising. For instance, the ﬁrst question,
which was open-ended, asked, “In a sentence or two, please
tell us what you think about website advertising.” The sur-
vey then introduced respondents to the concept of OBA with
a typical example: “Imagine that you are looking to buy a car
and decide to visit the cars.com website. Cars.com has con-
tracted with XYZ Advertising Company which collects infor-
mation about your interactions with the cars.com website in
order predict your preferences and to show you ads that are
most likely to be of interest to you. These ads are known as
targeted ads, or online behavioral advertising (OBA). For ex-
ample, if you search for ‘Audi A8’ or read an article about
Audi cars on the cars.com website, XYZ Advertising Com-
pany could show you ads for BMW cars and other luxury
cars.” This introduction of OBA was also adopted from the
study by Leon et al. [28].
Respondents were then introduced to the two platforms: “Tar-
geted ads can appear on websites or on mobile apps. For the
following questions, we ask you to focus on using [your desk-
top or laptop PC / apps on your smart phone]” (for the desktop
branch and the mobile branch, respectively). We did this be-
cause we want to ensure that our respondents can clearly dis-
tinguish the two platforms and then focus on the platform that
they were assigned to. Respondents were then asked about
their generic preferences about OBA. For instance, one ques-
tion was “Would you be willing to allow OBA to use and
store the information about your:” with answers representing
various personal information such as age, gender, and infor-
mation about their online interactions (e.g., searched items).
Next, respondents were presented with the ﬁve types of online
activities: online shopping, online health information seek-
ing, online dating, online banking, and online social network-
ing. These activities represented a wide range of typical on-
line activities and we portrayed each of them taking place on
a representative website or its mobile app in China and the
US, respectively. The ﬁve concrete activities provided in the
study were: (1) buying books for oneself from a website or
an app (Amazon.com in the US, JD.com in CN); (2) ﬁnding
medication for a health condition (ﬂaky scalp) on a website
or an app (CVS.com in the US, HaoDF.com in CN); (3) dat-
ing someone online on a website or an app (Match.com in
the US, JiaYuan.com in CN); (4) transferring money online
on a banking website or on its app (Chase.com in the US,
cmbChina.com in CN); and (5) joining an interest group on a

SNS website or an app (Facebook.com in the US, Renren.com
in CN). In order for us to make reasonable comparisons, the
websites/apps for China and the US are similar in terms of
their functions and popularity.
These descriptions of online activities differed by activity and
platform, but other factors were kept constant (e.g., data re-
tention time). As an example, we show the description of the
shopping activity on the Amazon mobile app below:
Imagine that you want to buy some books on Amazon for
yourself. Amazon has contracted with an advertising com-
pany, which collects information about your interactions with
Amazon in order to predict your preferences and show you
ads that most likely to be of interest to you. For example, if
you search “camera” or read a custom review about a cam-
era lens, the advertising company could show you ads for
Canon, or another camera brand.
Now in particular, imagine that you decide to buy the books
via the Amazon app on your smart phone.
1. The advertising company, which has contracted with Ama-
zon would collect your browsing data within the app.
2. The advertising company would retain and use collected
information about you for one month.
3. Amazon can share your information with its afﬁliated part-
ners (which are other companies which have business part-
nership with the website).
Would you be willing to allow the advertising company to
collect and share your browsing data as follows within the
Amazon app?
Similar to the study by Leon et al. [28], the respondents were
asked to answer a series of questions on a ﬁve-point Likert-
scale about their willingness to share ten types of personal in-
formation for each online activity. These ten types of personal
information were name, age, gender, income bracket, mari-
tal status, home address, email, search items entered, infor-
mation inferred from web browsing (e.g., “genres of books I
like”) and information on web pages, as well as the time spent
on them. The possible responses ranged from “I would not
be willing at all” to “I would be completely willing.” These
types of personal information were also adopted from [28].
Prior studies have also shown that some of this information
(e.g., gender, age) can be inferred from users’ browsing data
if not collected directly from them [21]. The sequence of on-
line activities were randomized. For each online activity, the
ten types of personal information were also randomized.
After these activity-based questions, the survey asked respon-
dents additional questions about their opinions of the ﬁve
websites/apps, for instance, a ﬁve-point Likert-scale question
on how much they trust the corresponding service provider.
We asked these questions because they could play a role in
users’ willingness to share information with these services.
Before ending the survey with a set of demographic ques-
tions, we asked a second open-ended question: “Do you have
any further comments on OBA, which might appear on [web-
sites / mobile apps on your smart phone]?”

542

SESSION: INTERNATONAL INSIGHTS

We originally designed the survey to ask each participant
about ten situations (ﬁve online activities x two platforms).
We conducted a pilot test of the initial survey design and re-
ceived the feedback that the survey had too many questions
and many seemed redundant. Thus, we decided to have re-
spondents focus on a platform to reduce the number of survey
questions and the need to switch between too many situations.

Participants
For the US version of the survey, we recruited respondents
from Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) who were from the
US and had a 95% or higher approval rating and reported to
be 18 or older. We also implemented a mechanism on MTurk
to ensure that respondents who have taken one branch of our
survey were excluded from taking the same one again or the
other branch [38]. For the Chinese version of the survey, we
recruited respondents from ZhuBaJie.com (ZBJ), the main
crowdsourcing site (equivalent of MTurk) in China. How-
ever, ZBJ does not have the API support for us to implement
the automatic mechanism that prevents respondents from an-
swering the survey repeatedly. For this purpose, we manually
examined the responses on Qualtrics to ﬁlter out repeated re-
sponses by using the ZBJ user IDs. The American and Chi-
nese respondents took a comparable amount of time to ﬁnish
the survey (US: median 11 minutes; CN: median 14 minutes).
MTurk and ZBJ respondents who completed the survey were
compensated $2 and 15 RMB (about $2), respectively.
To help determine whether our respondents took the survey
seriously, we used a combination of measures such as un-
usually short completion time and nonsense responses to the
open-ended questions. After the ﬁltering, we had a total of
379 valid responses: 190 from the US and 189 from China.
For each country, responses were roughly evenly split be-
tween the mobile app and desktop branches (US-desktop: 95,
US-mobile: 95; CN-desktop: 97, CN-mobile: 92).
In terms of demographics, there were similarities and dif-
ferences between the US and Chinese samples. First, the
US sample had more male respondents (54%) than female
respondents (46%) while the Chinese sample had an equal
split in gender (male 50%, female 50%). Second, the US
sample was signiﬁcantly older than the Chinese sample (US:
M=35, SD=11.2; CN: M=27, SD=5.7; Mann-Whitney U
Test, p<0.001).
In terms of education level and IT back-
ground, the US and Chinese samples were comparable. For
both countries, about 93% of respondents had at least some
college education. The percentages of American and Chinese
samples with IT background were 38.9% and 36.5%, respec-
tively. For each country, the participant demographics were
similar in the two platform branches.

Method of Analysis
Factor Analysis
The respondents were asked about their willingness to share
ten types of personal information in the ﬁve speciﬁc online
activities. To represent the ten types of personal information
with a smaller set of latent factors, we conducted a paral-
lel analysis (PA), followed by an exploratory factor analysis
(EFA) with promax rotation. PA is a Monte Carlo simulation

543

method to determine the number of latent factors [26]. EFA
is useful in exploring the underlying latent factor structure by
combining highly correlated variables into latent factors.
The PA analysis suggested three latent factors for both the US
and Chinese samples across different online activities. The
three latent factors correspond to browsing information (e.g.,
searched items), demographic information (e.g., age), and
contact information (e.g., email), respectively. The EFA sug-
gested the underlying structure of the three factors as shown
in Table 1. To assess the convergent validity of the latent fac-
tors (i.e., whether each item in a factor is measuring the same
underlying concept), we calculated Cronbach’s α value for
each factor. The results indicated that the Cronbach’s α val-
ues of the three factors are all above .85. Alpha values of 0.7
or higher are considered acceptable [50].

Repeated Measures ANCOVA
We performed a series of repeated measures ANCOVA (anal-
ysis of covariance), each for a particular latent factor (brows-
ing, demographic, or contact information) to assess the ef-
fects of country (US vs. China), online activities (e.g., online
shopping vs. online dating), and platform (mobile vs. desk-
top) on respondents’ willingness to share that type of infor-
mation for OBA purposes. The independent variable is a fac-
tor score, which is the average of the constituent items of that
factor. The country and platform are between-subject inde-
pendent variables, while the online activity is a within-subject
independent variable (i.e., repeated measures). Respondents’
age, gender, IT background as well as their levels of trust with
the website or app in a particular online activity were treated
as between-subject covariates. We also included interaction
terms of the three independent variables (country, platform,
and activity) in the ANCOVA analysis.

α
0.92

0.90

Browsing Information
Info inferred from my browsing
Info on pages I visited
Search items I entered

Demographic Information
Age
Gender
Income bracket
Marital status

Factor loading

0.87
0.81
0.91

0.96
0.85
0.59
0.86

0.87

Contact Information
Name
Email
Home address
Table 1. Exploratory factor analysis (EFA) of respondents’ willingness
to share ten personal information items for OBA. Factor structure and
loadings of the ten information items for American respondents in the
scenario of online shopping (Amazon) on the desktop/laptop are pre-
sented. The factor structure is consistent across American and Chinese
samples across different online activities and platforms. Cronbach’s α
value is calculated for each factor.

0.80
0.87
0.85

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Content Analysis
We analyzed answers to the two open-ended questions on
website advertising and OBA. Our coding scheme drew from
the prior literature on OBA (i.e., directed content analysis)
and was also partly created from additional themes, emerged
from the data (i.e., conventional content analysis) [20].
In
particular, prior studies have identiﬁed different perceptions
of OBA such as useful, creepy, annoying and intrusive [2,54].
Prior literature has also identiﬁed speciﬁc concerns about
OBA such as privacy violation, unauthorized data collec-
tion, and information being used by unauthorized third par-
ties [54]. We included these in our initial coding book.
After analyzing the responses, we identiﬁed new themes not
covered by the code book. Examples of these new codes in-
clude “overwhelming” and “slowing down the system.” We
added these new codes into the code book, which has a ﬁ-
nal count of 13 codes. Two researchers coded the data in-
dependently using the same coding scheme. The Cohen’s κ
value [11] for our inter-coder reliability is .72, exceeding the
acceptable threshold of .7 [25].

RESULTS
Overall, we found that country and online activity have sig-
niﬁcant effects on people’s preferences of OBA, but we did
not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant effect of platform.

Country: US vs. China
We start by comparing the perceptions of web ads and OBA
of the American and Chinese respondents. We include En-
glish translation of the Chinese answers in this paper.

Attitudes Towards Web Advertising
The American and Chinese samples had several differences in
their answers to the ﬁrst open-ended question about website
advertising (i.e., before the introduction of OBA). First, the
Chinese sample was signiﬁcantly more accepting of web ad-
vertising than their American counterparts, as shown in Fig-
ure 1. We categorized the overall sentiment of each response
to website advertising as positive, neutral, or negative.
The positive reactions include feeling web advertising as ac-
ceptable, useful or necessary while the negative reactions in-
clude being seen as annoying, intrusive, distracting, over-
whelming, slowing down the website, untrustworthy or even
unsafe. For instance, one Chinese respondent said, “There are
a lot of web ads. The good and bad are jumbled together. The
authenticity is low.” Some American respondents were not
only aware of the risks but also crafted their own strategies to
test out the ads. For example, one US respondent explained,
“I think it is unsafe, and it can be amusing or informative.

If I see attractive advertising on the peripheral, I may check
Google the name in the ad, perhaps even google the word
‘scam’ after it, and see what I see. If I think it is safe, I will
go to their website with care, always on the ready to close the
window if I sense danger. So if I do check out the ad, it will
NOT be by clicking on the ad but rather by investigation and
then maybe going to the site directly not via their ad.”
Second, 53% of American respondents mentioned targeted
ads without prompting whereas only one Chinese respondent
did so. For instance, one US respondent commented, “I like
to opt out of targeted ads, but it’s a hassle and the ones done
by cookies come back when I clear my cookies. I don’t mind
ads in general because I know it keeps the websites free,
but targeted ads are annoying because it’s things I already
bought, decided not to buy, or was a gift.” The one Chinese
respondent touched on targeted ads: “After searching things
in Baidu, no matter what websites I open, the same products
I searched before would jump out.” This difference between
the American and Chinese samples suggests that the Ameri-
can respondents were more aware of OBA than the Chinese
respondents. We will situate these differences in the broader
contexts of these two countries (e.g., legislation, industry self-
regulations, and media portrayals of OBA) in the discussion
section.

Generic OBA Privacy Preferences
After the introduction of OBA and the two platforms, our re-
spondents were then asked about their willingness to allow
OBA to store and use various types of their personal informa-
tion. We call these generic OBA privacy preferences because
no speciﬁc scenario was given in the question. Figure 2 shows
that the American respondents were less willing to share each
type of information than their Chinese counterparts. How-
ever, the largest percentage of American and Chinese respon-
dents were willing to share information about their hobbies
and gender while the smallest for their home address.
More speciﬁcally, there were two notable differences. First,
for credit score/report, only 5% of the American respondents
were willing to share compared with 34% of the Chinese re-
spondents. Since there is no established credit score system in
China, we actually translated it as credit report, which exists

Figure 1. American and Chinese respondents’ sentiments of web ads.

Figure 2. The percentages of Chinese (CN, left) and American (US,
right) respondents who would be “willing” or “completely willing” to
share each type of information for generic OBA purposes.

544

Nega%ve Neutral+

Posi%ve

32.0%
48.4%

23.1%
17.7%

44.9%
33.9%

Positive 

Neutral  

Negative 

33.9% 

44.9% 
US 
CN 

17.7% 

23.1% 

48.4% 

32.0% 

Hobbies 
Search items  
Gender 
Education 
Info on page visited 
Info inferred 
Age 
Credit score  
Sexual orientation 
Email 
Marital status 
Political preferences 
Income  
Home address 

57% 
51% 
51% 
49% 

42% 
42% 
37% 
34% 
30% 
30% 
29% 
27% 
26% 

10% 

41% 

29% 

44% 

26% 

18% 

24% 

35% 

11% 

4% 

5% 

6% 

20% 

22% 
22% 

SESSION: INTERNATONAL INSIGHTS

Figure 3. Respondents’ average willingness to share the three types of information with OBA in the ﬁve speciﬁc online activities under four conditions
(CN/US x Desktop/Mobile). The means were calculated based on respondents’ answers to ﬁve-point Likert questions where 1, 3 and 5 represents “not
willing at all,” “neutral,” and “completely willing,” respectively. American respondents were signiﬁcantly more concerned about sharing information
with OBA than Chinese respondents (the two lines for CN are always higher than the two lines for US). Different online activities also varied signiﬁcantly
in terms of respondents’ willingness to share information with OBA (the lines are zig-zagged across different activities, with the browsing info being the
most notable case). Platforms (desktop vs. mobile) did not have much difference (the two lines for each country do not have much space).

Dep. Vars
Contact Info
Name
Email
Address

Demo. info
Age
Gender
Income
Marital status

Browsing info
Search items
Info inferred
Page visited

Indep. Vars Mean sq

F value

Pr(> F)

Country (Cty)
Platform (Pla)
Activity (Act)
Age
Gender
IT background
Trust level

Country
Platform
Activity
Cty x Act
Age
Gender
IT background
Trust level

Country
Platform
Activity
Cty x Act
Age
Gender
IT background
Trust level

427.6
5.3
0.8018
140.6
20.2
103.5
179.5

107.3
3.62
3.194
0.584
122.67
29.67
10
242.26

232
1
15.982
3.618
143.5
13.7
64.2
404.7

136.5
1.698
6.063
44.89
6.437
33.04
57.31

27.61
0.931
16.46
3.011
31.56
7.63
2.573
62.33

75.7
0.322
45.32
10.26
46.84
4.46
20.95
132.1

2.00E-16
0.193
7.71E-05
7.70E-11
0.0116
1.88E-08
2.95E-13

2.51E-07
0.335
3.33E-13
0.0173
3.79E-08
0.006
0.1096
3.28E-14

2.00E-16
0.571
2.00E-16
3.39E-08
3.17E-11
0.0354
6.44E-06
2.00E-16

***

***
***
*
***
***

***

***
*
***
**

***

***

***
***
**
*
***
***

*** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05

Table 2. The repeated measures ANCOVA results of the three types of
personal information: contact, demographic, and browsing information.
The interaction terms (Cty x Act, Cty x Pla, Act x Pla, Cty x Act x Pla)
were included in the analysis but only shown here when they are sig-
iniﬁcant. The adjusted R2 for the ANCOVA models of (contact, demo-
graphic, and browsing information) are 0.36, 0.19, and 0.31, respectively.

in China but is not as common as credit score in the US. In
addition, while 30% of the Chinese sample would be willing
to share email, only 6% of the US sample would. The 2014
CNNIC report of Internet Development in China shows that

42.5% of Chinese Internet population uses email compared
to 89.3% uses instant messaging [9]. This result may suggest
that Chinese Internet users do not use email that much and
therefore they disregard email address as critical or sensitive.

Scenario-Based OBA Privacy Preferences
Having examined our respondents’ generic privacy prefer-
ences for OBA, we now focus on their contextual preferences
under various speciﬁc settings. To assess the effects of coun-
try (US vs. China), online activities (e.g., online shopping vs.
online dating), and platform (mobile vs. desktop) on respon-
dents’ willingness to share different types of information for
OBA purposes, we conducted a series of repeated measures
ANCOVA. As shown in Table 2, after controlling for the co-
variates (age, gender, IT background, and trust level with the
site), country and online activity had signiﬁcant effects on re-
spondents’ willingness to share information for OBA. How-
ever, we did not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant effect of platform. We also
ran the analysis without the interaction terms and analyzed
the American and Chinese samples separately. The results of
the main effects were consistent with that in Table 2.
Similar to the ﬁndings of the ﬁrst open-ended question on
web advertising and the generic OBA privacy preferences,
Chinese respondents were signiﬁcantly more willing to share
all three types of information (browsing, contact and demo-
graphic information) for OBA than their American counter-
parts (p<0.001) when controlling for online activity and plat-
form as well as the covariates as shown in Table 2. Figure 3
plots American and Chinese respondents’ average willing-
ness of sharing the three types of information for OBA in each
of the ﬁve online activities and on each of the two platforms.
Figure 3 also clearly shows that the lines of the Chinese sam-
ple are always much higher than that of the American sam-
ple. In particular, Chinese respondents were generally will-
ing to share browsing information while American respon-

545

CN.Desktop

CN.Mobile

US.Desktop

US.Mobile

Demographic Info

Contact Info

Browsing Info

3.5

3.0

2.5

e
r
a
h
s
o
t
 

 

s
s
e
n
g
n

i
l
l
i

2.0

W

1.5

banking dating health shopping sns

banking dating health shopping sns

banking dating health shopping sns

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

dents were not. This may be because our Chinese respon-
dents did not know much about the implications of sharing
the browsing information (e.g., companies could infer their
demographics, create proﬁles for them and generate targeted
ads [21]).
Attitudes Towards OBA
Right before the last part of the survey on demographics, we
asked our respondents whether they have any further com-
ments about OBA in an open-ended question. A large num-
ber of respondents did not provide any substantial answers.
They provided simple answers such as “No more,” “N/A,” or
“Thank you.” To capture each respondent’s free response of
OBA, we combined each respondent’s answers to both open-
ended questions (on web ads and OBA) and coded the an-
swers using our code book.
Overall, our coding results show that 25.1% of Chinese re-
spondents felt OBA is helpful, compared with only 10% of
American respondents holding that view. 14.8% of Chinese
respondents and 12.5% of American respondents felt neutral
about OBA. However, for negative perceptions, the most fre-
quently reported perception for Chinese respondents (27.2%)
was “privacy violation” in a general sense without specifying
how their privacy might be intruded by OBA. For example,
one Chinese respondent said, “I suspect this will violate per-
sonal privacy.” In comparison, the American respondents had
more speciﬁc concerns such as being tracked, which was the
most common negative perception of the US sample (10%).
For instance, one American respondent explained, “I feel that
this is a serious invasion of privacy. While I understand the
need for advertising on free websites, I don’t like being cyber-
stalked in this manner.” This difference between American
and Chinese respondents also implies that the American re-
spondents may be more aware of OBA and its speciﬁc privacy
implications than the Chinese respondents.

Online Activity
Next, we examine the effect of online activities on respon-
dents’ preferences towards OBA. As shown in Table 2, our
repeated measures ANCOVA shows a statistically signiﬁcant
impact of online activity on respondents’ willingness to share
each of the three types of information (browsing, contact and
demographic information) for OBA (p<0.001) when control-
ling for country, platform, and the covariates. Figure 3 also
shows the zig-zagged lines of both US and Chinese samples,
suggesting the differences among these online activities.
We then perform post-hoc pairwise comparisons between dif-
ferent online activities using the Tukey’s HSD (honest sig-
niﬁcant difference) test with Bonferroni correction. For de-
mographic information, respondents were signiﬁcantly more
willing to share with the dating site than the banking and
health sites (p<0.001). Similarly, for contact information,
respondents were signiﬁcantly more willing to share with
the dating site than the banking and health sites (p<0.05).
These differences are intuitive because online dating sites
usually ask for demographic and contact information to cat-
egorize and match users. For browsing information (e.g.,
search items), respondents were signiﬁcantly more willing to
share with the shopping site than the banking and dating sites

(p<0.001). This may be because people have experienced and
thus understand that shopping sites usually log user behavior
data (e.g. products users have purchased or viewed before) to
make personalized product recommendations.
We also found a signiﬁcant interaction effect between country
and online activity for browsing and demographic informa-
tion. As shown in Figure 3, the American respondents were
more willing to share their demographic information with the
shopping site than the social networking site whereas the Chi-
nese respondents were somewhat the opposite. Demographic
information would seem more reasonable to provide to so-
cial networking sites (e.g., in the user proﬁle) than online
shopping sites. However, perhaps the American respondents
felt less willing to share information with the SNS site (Face-
book) because of the privacy-related discussion about Face-
book in the popular media (e.g., [43]).
In the open-ended question on OBA, our respondents touched
on general perceptions towards OBA in different online ac-
tivities. Respondents were generally aware of and accepted
OBA in the online shopping context. One American respon-
dent described, “I have noticed an inﬂux in ads that tailor
to my shopping behaviors over the last year. For example I
was recently in the market for a backpack and now I FRE-
QUENTLY get ads on various websites offering me deals on
backpacks.” One Chinese respondent explained, “OBA could
facilitate my online shopping, but I am also concerned about
my privacy being violated.”
Respondents were generally against OBA in the online bank-
ing context. One American respondent commented, “I would
not want to give my information to a second party when vis-
iting a website. ESPECIALLY something like banking. If that
second party’s security was compromised, my banking infor-
mation could be at risk.” Similarly, a Chinese respondent
answered, “I could accept OBA, but it must tell me what kind
of risks I may take, particularly regarding online banking.”

Platform: Desktop/Laptop vs. Mobile Apps
Lastly, we examine the effect of platform on people’s percep-
tions of OBA. As shown in Table 2, we did not ﬁnd a sta-
tistically signiﬁcant effect of platform on respondents’ will-
ingness to share various types of information with OBA in
speciﬁc online activities. Visually, Figure 3 shows that the
two lines of each country (i.e., one for desktop/laptop, and
the other for mobile app) are relatively close, suggesting lack
of signiﬁcant differences.
In the open-ended question about OBA, respondents in the
mobile branch of the survey brought up many points related
to mobile apps. For instance, one American respondent was
concerned about one such app being able to monitor what the
user does in other apps: “My biggest concern is how much
data they’re collecting about what I do outside of the partic-
ular app in question. Amazon knowing what I do in the Ama-
zon app is less concerning to me than Amazon knowing all the
browsing and app habits on my phone in general.” One Chi-
nese respondent was also picky about where OBA ads should
appear in a mobile app: “it’s acceptable if it appears when the
mobile app was ﬁrst opened. It’d be very annoying if it ap-

546

SESSION: INTERNATONAL INSIGHTS

pears in other places [of the app].” These speciﬁc requests
should be considered for OBA in mobile apps.

DISCUSSION
In summary, we found country and online activity having sig-
niﬁcant effects on our respondents’ willingness to share infor-
mation for OBA. We did not ﬁnd signiﬁcant impact of plat-
form.

Contextual Privacy Preferences of OBA
Country: US vs. China. Prior research suggests that Ameri-
cans are more concerned about online privacy than Chinese in
a number of domains (e.g., online commerce [58], SNS [55],
and location sharing apps [29]). Our study extends this lit-
erature by examining OBA - an important yet under-studied
domain - and uncovers signiﬁcant yet nuanced differences be-
tween Internet users from these two countries.
In particular, we found that American respondents were sig-
niﬁcantly less willing to share their information for OBA pur-
poses than their Chinese counterparts. A large percentage
of the US sample voluntarily expressed their opinions about
OBA in response to the ﬁrst open ended question about web-
site advertising in the survey before any introduction of OBA,
while only one Chinese respondent did so. In addition, when
expressing their opinions about OBA, most Chinese respon-
dents discussed privacy concerns in a general sense whereas
the American respondents expressed more speciﬁc misgiv-
ings, such as being tracked. These results suggest that the
American respondents were more aware of OBA and its spe-
ciﬁc privacy implications than their Chinese counterparts.
In the US, privacy has been long been recognized as an es-
sential human right. Warren and Brandeis’ seminal article
“The right to privacy” in 1890 has arguably ushered in an
era of public recognition of and discussion about privacy and
subsequent legislation in the US [57]. The American govern-
ment created the Fair Information Practice Principles (FIPPs)
in the 1970’s, which underly many privacy laws worldwide.
While the US does not have an omnibus or cross-domain pri-
vacy law, there are many domain-speciﬁc privacy laws such
as RFPA (The Right to Financial Privacy Act) and HIPPA
(Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act).
Online privacy has become one of the priorities for the
US government. For instance, in Dec. 2010, the Federal
Trade Commission (FTC) released a report entitled “Protect-
ing Consumer Privacy in an Era of Rapid Change: A Pro-
posed Framework for Businesses and Policymakers,” which
describes a new regulatory framework including the “Do Not
Track” mechanism allowing people to opt out of OBA. In
Feb. 2015, the Obama administration released a draft of the
Consumer Privacy Bill of Rights Act which allows individual
consumers to sue service providers for privacy violations.
The mass media frequently covers online privacy topics in-
cluding those regarding OBA2. There are also many US-
2Examples: http://www.nytimes.com/2009/03/16/technology/
internet/16privacy.html;
http://www.wsj.com/public/page/what-
they-know-digital-privacy.html; http://www.cbsnews.com/videos/60-
minutes-probes-data-brokers-and-online-tracking/

547

based civil liberty organizations such as American Civil Lib-
erties Union (ACLU) and Electronic Privacy Information
Center (EPIC) that regularly blow the whistle on industry and
government practices that may infringe people’s privacy. The
2013 Snowden revelation of government surveillance has had
much coverage in the media. However, a recent study sug-
gests that it has limited and short-lived effects on the Ameri-
can public’s interests in privacy [40]. In addition, Ad indus-
try organizations such as Digital Advertising Alliance (DAA)
have launched public campaigns about OBA and their self-
regulations (e.g., the OBA icon and the opt-out option).
In sum, the topic of online privacy seems to be highly visi-
ble in contemporary American society, which provides many
opportunities for ordinary citizens to gain knowledge about
OBA, along with its privacy implications as well as how to
deal with OBA (e.g., opt out of OBA).
In contrast, privacy is a relatively recent concept in China.
Historian Peter Zarrow wrote “[In the late Qing dynasty (c.
1890-1912)] No single word existed that was equivalent to
the English ‘privacy’ in the sense of personal, closed off from
the public, inner life, family life, private (individual) rights
and related concepts.” [35] He also noted that the discussion
on privacy mostly revolved around a “realm of si [personal,
self, selﬁsh, private] in terms of its relationship to the realm
of gong [public, public space, open, communal].” [35] Under
the traditional Chinese culture of collectivism, the concept
of si even has negative connotations of suspicious and self-
ish. Hu noted that the Chinese word yin si for “privacy” did
not appear in the two most popular and authoritative Chinese
dictionaries in 1993 [22]. This is more than a century after
Warren and Brandeis’ classic article on privacy.
In terms of regulation, the ﬁrst national standard on per-
sonal information protection entitled “Information Security
Technology Guidelines for Personal Information Protection
Within Public and Commercial Services Information Sys-
tems” in China was drafted in 2008 and then issued in 2013
by the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology. This
standard provides guidelines regarding collection, use, and
sharing of personal information in public and commercial
systems, but it does not have any legal force.
In March 2014, the Chinese Advertising Association Inter-
active Network Branch issued the ﬁrst set of Chinese indus-
try self-regulatory OBA guidelines entitled “Chinese Inter-
net OBA User Information Protection Framework Standard.”3
Many Chinese Internet juggernauts such as Baidu are part of
this self-regulatory group. They adopted an OBA icon (the
letter i inside of a circle) very similar to the DAA’s OBA
icon (the letter i inside of a triangle, ofﬁcially called “Ad-
Choices”4). However, we are not aware of any public cam-
paign about this Chinese OBA icon nor any opt-out options
provided by this Chinese industry self-regulatory group. We
are also not aware of any civil liberty organization in China
that ﬁghts for ordinary citizen’s privacy, let alone privacy in
OBA.

3http://www.iac-i.org/privacy/index.html
4http://www.youradchoices.com/

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

The topic of online privacy occasionally appears in the Chi-
nese news media, including some articles on OBA. However,
these articles often are about privacy studies or opinions from
the western countries5. This may explain our Chinese respon-
dents’ scant knowledge of OBA and its privacy implications
because user education is almost absent. This lack of knowl-
edge could also play a role in Chinese respondents’ more will-
ingness to share information with OBA as well as lack of spe-
ciﬁc privacy concerns when some of them were indeed con-
cerned about OBA. One interesting question is that if China
had a Snowden-like incident, would it drastically make Chi-
nese people more privacy concerned? It is already widely
known that the Chinese government is actively monitoring
Internet usage and ﬁltering information that is deemed inap-
propriate [49]. While this is purely speculative, we suspect
that Snowden-like incidents are unlikely to happen in China
or have similar impact as that in the US.
We recognize that these two countries have huge populations,
and that the concepts and practices of privacy may not be uni-
form within and unique to these countries. Nevertheless, con-
sidering the historical, legal, and cultural factors, while spec-
ulative, may help us situate these differences in the broader
social contexts of these two countries.
One factor that may play a role is the “power distance” that
people accept in these two countries. According to Geert Hof-
stede’s cultural dimensions theory, the power distance dimen-
sion measures “the extent to which the less powerful members
of institutions and organisations within a country expect and
accept that power is distributed unequally.” [16] China has a
high rating of 80 for “power distance,” while the US has a low
rating of 40 [16]. These scores suggest that Chinese society
is much more accepting of power inequalities than American
society. In the context of OBA, the ad industry has the upper
hand over Internet users. China’s high score of power dis-
tance may suggest that Internet users tend to accept that the
ad industry has more power in controlling OBA than them-
selves, and thus they are less concerned about OBA because
they accept that they do not have much say or control in OBA.
The differences in these historical, legal, and social contexts
may have inﬂuenced the divergent opinions of our Chinese
and American respondents on OBA. Our study not only sheds
lights into Chinese Internet users’ perceptions of OBA, but
also highlights the nuanced differences between the Ameri-
can and Chinese Internet users.
However, it is important to note that since our study did not
investigate these cultural or social factors, we cannot make
any conclusive claims about the impact of these factors on
people’s privacy attitudes towards OBA. Nonetheless, this is
a promising area for future research.
Online activity. Several empirical studies have found that the
majority of American people do not like OBA [34, 53]. They
felt OBA is sometimes smart and useful in providing the ads
that interest them; at the same time scary and creepy because
of the amount of information tracked and collected in order to

5Examples, http://www.kexuehome.com/articles/201504211120.html;
http://3g.forbeschina.com/review/201407/0034073.shtml

create the targeted ads [54]. While privacy is a very situation-
dependent concept [48], few prior studies have explicitly con-
sidered speciﬁc online activities when soliciting people’s per-
ceptions and preferences about OBA. One notable exception
is the study by Leon et al. [28], which inspired many aspects
of our own study. Using a concrete online activity for seeking
health-related advice, they investigated different factors (e.g.,
time of data retention) that may impact people’s willingness
to share information for OBA [28]. Our study makes a unique
contribution by exploring beyond a single online activity, as
we created and tested a set of common yet different online
activities.
We found that the type of online activity indeed has a sig-
niﬁcant effect on our respondents’ willingness to share their
information for OBA. For instance, for demographic infor-
mation, respondents were signiﬁcantly more willing to share
with the dating site than with the banking and health sites.
This result is intuitive as online dating sites usually ask de-
mographic information to match users, so people are likely
to understand and accept these practices. These results also
align well with the concept of contextual integrity [36, 37]
because these data collection/usage practices are reasonably
understood and expected under the particular context.
Platform. Prior research has found that people behave differ-
ently on their mobile devices versus desktop (e.g., searching
more sensitive topics on mobile devices [39]). In addition,
people tend to have different security experiences and consid-
erations between the desktop and the mobile environment [7].
These results suggest that platform may play a role in people’s
privacy-related decision making. However, according to our
ANCOVA results, we did not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant effect of plat-
form (desktop/laptop vs. mobile apps) on respondents’ will-
ingness to share information for OBA. Statistically speaking,
this means that our exploration of this factor is inconclusive.
We introduced the two platforms to our respondents. How-
ever, based on the pilot testing of the original survey, we
decided to ask each participant to think about OBA only on
one platform. Therefore, they were not given an opportunity
to explicitly compare these two platforms. This might con-
tribute to the non-signiﬁcant result on platform. Future stud-
ies could consider asking participants to explicitly compare
their preferences of OBA on different platforms.

Design Implications
What do these results mean for designing privacy-enhancing
mechanisms, particularly those related to OBA? First, our re-
sults show that contextual factors such as country and the
type of online activity matter. Understanding the contex-
tual nature of privacy preferences can inform tools that se-
lectively block online tracking or collection of certain data
based on the context. Intelligent privacy tools that recognize
and consider these contextual factors as well as learn and ap-
ply people’s context-dependent preferences are more likely
to be effective in mitigating peoples concerns about OBA.
For instance, when users are browsing products on a rep-
utable e-commerce site, the protection mechanism could by
default allow the sharing of browsing information (e.g., items

548

SESSION: INTERNATONAL INSIGHTS

searched) but prohibit the collection and inference of users’
contact information.
Second, we value the perspective that Paul Dourish advocates
- context is not a static representation that can be separated
from the activity at hand but rather is actively produced and
enacted in the course of the activity [14]. Taking this per-
spective, we advocate that privacy tools should show the rel-
evant entities and resources that are involved in OBA to help
people produce and make sense of the context around their
online activities (e.g., buy a birthday gift online). Tools such
as Lightbeam6 embody some of this perspective by provid-
ing dynamic visualizations of third party trackers as people
browse a website, but they do not really show what kind of
information is being collected. It would be promising to com-
bine this sort of dynamic visualization with powerful web
measurement tools such as OpenWPM7 that may detect the
kind of information being collected.
Third, our respondents, particularly the Chinese respondents,
have little or insufﬁcient knowledge about OBA and its spe-
ciﬁc privacy implications. This is worrisome. User edu-
cation is critical. Government agencies, ad industry self-
regulatory groups, privacy tool developers, website designers,
and browser developers all play a role in educating Internet
users about OBA. Educational tools could be designed to im-
prove people’s awareness of OBA. Similar to how games are
designed to teach people about security [44] or a company’s
privacy practices8, games could be designed to teach people
about OBA, its privacy implications, and available user con-
trols. For instance, one could envision a game like Monopoly
where users selectively share (or “invest”) their personal in-
formation for OBA to maximize their beneﬁts (e.g., coupons,
free access to premium content) while safe-guarding their pri-
vacy (e.g., against third-parties).
Lastly, many currently popular privacy tools such as Ad-
blockPlus, Ghostery, and Privacy Badger primarily work on
desktop/laptop at the moment. Extending these tools to work
on mobile devices and in mobile apps would be useful. In
addition, translating and customizing these tools for non-
English speaking (e.g., Chinese) users would have a much
broader impact.

Study Limitations
Our study has a number of limitations. First, while we re-
cruited our American and Chinese respondents from the main
crowdsourcing site in each country, this methodology is sub-
ject to any bias that may reside in these crowdsourcing sites.
Therefore, we cannot make claims about whether our two
samples are representative samples of the Internet users in
these two countries and consequently, whether our two sam-
ples are completely comparable. While the Chinese sample
is signiﬁcantly younger than the US sample (which we have
controlled for in our ANCOVA analyses), the two samples are
comparable in terms of education level and IT background.

6https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/lightbeam/
7https://github.com/citp/OpenWPM/
8Zynga’s PrivacyVille: https://zynga.com/privacy/privacyville

549

We also note that recruiting perfectly comparable and repre-
sentative samples across different countries will be extremely
challenging, if not impossible.
Second, we only included one popular website or app for
each type of online activity in China and the US, respectively.
While we did control for respondents’ perceived trust with
each website as a co-variate in the analysis, our results might
still not be generalizable for these types of online activities.
Future studies could test multiple websites for each type of
online activity. In addition, we only explored ﬁve types of
online activities. While our pilot testing of the survey did not
receive any complaint about having unrealistic online activ-
ities, future work can look into methods such as experience
sampling and diary studies that could better capture people’s
perceptions of OBA in a wide range of their own online ac-
tivities. However, recruiting a large of number of participants
for such studies could be a challenge.
Third, only after conducting the study, we realized that the
descriptions of the ﬁve online activities have one minor differ-
ence - the ﬁrst sentence of the health scenario speciﬁed a con-
crete topic (i.e., “ﬂaky scalp”), while the other four scenarios
did not. For instance, the shopping scenario said “Imagine
that you want to buy some books on Amazon for yourself,”
but it did not specify a concrete topic of the book. While this
is a difference of speciﬁcity in the ﬁrst sentence, we believe
that this difference has little impact if any on our results. The
willingness to share information for the health scenario is al-
most always in the middle among the ﬁve scenarios. Besides,
the four other scenarios did not differ in the level of speci-
ﬁcity. Even if we exclude the health scenario and just com-
pare the other four scenarios, the results of online activity still
hold. There are signiﬁcant differences in willingness to share
among the four scenarios where shopping is the highest while
banking is the lowest.
Fourth, our respondents’ privacy preferences were self-
reported and may divert from their actual behavior in the real
world. However, this type of self-reported data could still
provide valuable insights into people’s perceptions of OBA.
Many empirical studies of privacy have used this kind of self-
reported, scenario-based method (e.g., [28, 32]).
Lastly, the mobile branch/version of our survey was not con-
ducted on mobile phones which may affect some respon-
dents’ imagination of OBA on smart phones. While there are
ways to recruit respondents and have them answer the survey
on their phones, we were concerned that the small screen and
keyboard of a mobile phone would make the survey more dif-
ﬁcult to answer and thus respondents may pay less attention.

CONCLUSION
Online behavioral advertising (OBA) is prevalent on the In-
ternet. While it could provide ads that people ﬁnd interest-
ing and useful, its underlying tracking and proﬁling of users
is unsettling. Prior research has studied Internet users’ per-
ceptions of OBA, most of these studies focused on American
users and did not study contextual factors (e.g., online activity
and platform) systematically. In this study, we surveyed both
American and Chinese Internet users about their perceptions

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

of OBA as well as their willingness to share personal informa-
tion for OBA in different speciﬁc situations (e.g., searching
for information about medication for a health issue in a health
mobile app). We found that Chinese respondents were much
more willing to share their data for OBA than their Ameri-
can counterparts. Given OBA is a global phenomenon, fur-
ther research is warranted to examine how people in different
countries perceive OBA and make decisions. We also found
that respondents’ willingness to share information for OBA
varied signiﬁcantly amongst different online activities. We
advocate designing context-aware privacy tools for OBA that
can support people to seamlessly make sense of the prevail-
ing context and make privacy decisions congruent with the
prevailing context.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We thank our respondents for sharing their insights. We are
also grateful to Pedro Leon, Blase Ur, Jeffrey Stanton, Ja-
son Dedrick and anonymous reviewers for their thoughtful
comments on earlier versions of this paper. This work was
supported in part by NSF Grant CNS-1464347.

REFERENCES
1. Gunes Acar, Christian Eubank, Steven Englehardt, Marc
Juarez, Arvind Narayanan, and Claudia Diaz. 2014. The
Web Never Forgets: Persistent Tracking Mechanisms in
the Wild. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM SIGSAC
Conference on Computer and Communications Security
(CCS ’14). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 674–689.

2. Lalit Agarwal, Nisheeth Shrivastava, Sharad Jaiswal,

and Saurabh Panjwani. 2013. Do not embarrass:
re-examining user concerns for online tracking and
advertising. In Proceedings of the Ninth Symposium on
Usable Privacy and Security. ACM, 8–24.

3. Michael Backes, Aniket Kate, Matteo Maffei, and Kim
Pecina. 2012. Obliviad: Provably secure and practical
online behavioral advertising. In 2012 IEEE Symposium
on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, 257–271.

4. Louise Barkhuus. 2012. The mismeasurement of

privacy: using contextual integrity to reconsider privacy
in HCI. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 367–376.
5. Howard Beales. 2010. The value of behavioral targeting.

Network Advertising Initiative (2010).

6. Steven Bellman, Eric J Johnson, Stephen J Kobrin, and

Gerald L Lohse. 2004. International differences in
information privacy concerns: A global survey of
consumers. The Information Society 20, 5 (2004),
313–324.

7. Reinhardt A Botha, Steven M Furnell, and Nathan L

Clarke. 2009. From desktop to mobile: Examining the
security experience. Computers & Security 28, 3 (2009),
130–137.

8. California Legislature. 2013. AB-370 Consumers:

internet privacy. (2013).

550

https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/
billNavClient.xhtml?bill_id=201320140AB370

9. China Internet Network Information Center (CNNIC).

2014a. China Internet Development Report. (2014).
http://www.cnnic.cn/hlwfzyj/hlwxzbg/hlwtjbg/
201407/P020140721507223212132.pdf

10. China Internet Network Information Center (CNNIC).
2014b. China Mobile Internet Survey Research Report.
(2014). http://www.cnnic.cn/hlwfzyj/hlwxzbg/
ydhlwbg/201408/P020140826360212699278.pdf

11. Jacob Cohen. 1960. A Coefﬁcient of Agreement for

Nominal Scales. Educational and Psychological
Measurement 20, 1 (April 1960), 37–46.

12. Federal Trade Commission and others. 2009. FTC staff
report: Self-regulatory principles for online behavioral
advertising, 2009. Federal Trade Commission,
Washington, DC (2009).

13. Federal Trade Commission and others. 2012. Protecting

Consumer Privacy in an Era of Rapid Change:
Recommendations for Businesses and Policymakers.
(2012). https://www.ftc.gov/sites/default/files/
documents/reports/

14. Paul Dourish. 2004. What We Talk About when We Talk
About Context. Personal Ubiquitous Comput. 8, 1 (Feb.
2004), 19–30.

15. Xianyi Gao, Yulong Yang, Huiqing Fu, Janne Lindqvist,
and Yang Wang. 2014. Private Browsing: An Inquiry on
Usability and Privacy Protection. In Proceedings of the
13th Workshop on Privacy in the Electronic Society
(WPES ’14). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 97–106.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2665943.2665953

16. Geert H. Hofstede. 1984. Culture’s consequences:

international differences in work-related values. Sage
Publications.

17. Michael C. Grace, Wu Zhou, Xuxian Jiang, and

Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi. 2012. Unsafe Exposure Analysis
of Mobile In-app Advertisements. In Proceedings of the
Fifth ACM Conference on Security and Privacy in
Wireless and Mobile Networks (WISEC ’12). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 101–112.

18. Saikat Guha, Bin Cheng, and Paul Francis. 2010.

Challenges in measuring online advertising systems. In
Proceedings of the 10th ACM SIGCOMM conference on
Internet measurement. ACM, 81–87.

19. Dehua He and Yaobin Lu. 2007. Consumers perceptions

and acceptances towards mobile advertising: An
empirical study in China. In International Conference
on Wireless Communications, Networking and Mobile
Computing. IEEE, 3775–3778.

20. Hsiu-Fang Hsieh and Sarah E. Shannon. 2005. Three

Approaches to Qualitative Content Analysis. Qualitative
Health Research 15, 9 (Nov. 2005), 1277–1288.

SESSION: INTERNATONAL INSIGHTS

21. Jian Hu, Hua-Jun Zeng, Hua Li, Cheng Niu, and Zheng

Chen. 2007. Demographic prediction based on user’s
browsing behavior. In Proceedings of the 16th
international conference on World Wide Web. ACM,
151–160.

22. S. Hu. 2000. Individual Privacy in Modernizing China.

Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Colorado, Boulder.

23. Naz Kaya and Margaret J Weber. 2003. Cross-cultural
differences in the perception of crowding and privacy
regulation: American and Turkish students. Journal of
environmental psychology 23, 3 (2003), 301–309.

24. Patrick Gage Kelley, Michael Benisch, Lorrie Faith
Cranor, and Norman Sadeh. 2011. When are users
comfortable sharing locations with advertisers?. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 2449–2452.

25. Klaus Krippendorff. 2004. Reliability in Content

Analysis: Some Common Misconceptions and
Recommendations. Human Communication Research
(July 2004), 411–433.

26. Rub´en Daniel Ledesma and Pedro Valero-Mora. 2007.
Determining the number of factors to retain in EFA: an
easy to use computer program for carrying out parallel
analysis. Practical Assessment, Research & Evaluation
12, 2 (2007), 1–11.

27. Pedro Leon, Blase Ur, Richard Shay, Yang Wang,
Rebecca Balebako, and Lorrie Cranor. 2012. Why
Johnny can’t opt out: a usability evaluation of tools to
limit online behavioral advertising. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. ACM, 589–598.

28. Pedro Giovanni Leon, Blase Ur, Yang Wang, Manya

Sleeper, Rebecca Balebako, Richard Shay, Lujo Bauer,
Mihai Christodorescu, and Lorrie Faith Cranor. 2013.
What matters to users?: factors that affect users’
willingness to share information with online advertisers.
In Proceedings of the Symposium on Usable Privacy
and Security. ACM, 7–26.

29. Jialiu Lin, Michael Benisch, Norman Sadeh, Jianwei

Niu, Jason Hong, Banghui Lu, and Shaohui Guo. 2013.
A Comparative Study of Location-sharing Privacy
Preferences in the United States and China. Personal
Ubiquitous Comput. 17, 4 (April 2013), 697–711.

30. Jialiu Lin, Bin Liu, Norman Sadeh, and Jason I. Hong.

2014. Modeling Users Mobile App Privacy Preferences:
Restoring Usability in a Sea of Permission Settings. In
Proceedings of Symposium On Usable Privacy and
Security (SOUPS’14). 199–212.
https://www.usenix.org/conference/soups2014/
proceedings/presentation/lin

31. Chia-Ling Eunice Liu, Rudolf R Sinkovics, Noemi

Pezderka, and Parissa Haghirian. 2012. Determinants of
consumer perceptions toward mobile advertising-a
comparison between Japan and Austria. Journal of
Interactive Marketing 26, 1 (2012), 21–32.

32. Kirsten E. Martin. 2012. Diminished or Just Different?

A Factorial Vignette Study of Privacy as a Social
Contract. Journal of Business Ethics 111, 4 (March
2012), 519–539.

33. J.R. Mayer and J.C. Mitchell. 2012. Third-Party Web

Tracking: Policy and Technology. In 2012 IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). 413–427.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SP.2012.47
34. Aleecia McDonald and Lorrie Faith Cranor. 2010.

Beliefs and behaviors: Internet users’ understanding of
behavioral advertising. Telecommunications Policy
Research Conference (TPRC).

35. Bonnie S. McDougall and Anders Hansson (Eds.). 2002.

Chinese Concepts of Privacy. Vol. 55. Brill Academic
Pub, Leiden Netherlands ; Boston.

36. Helen Nissenbaum. 2004. Privacy as contextual

integrity. Washington law review 79, 1 (2004), 119–158.

37. Helen Nissenbaum. 2011. A contextual approach to

privacy online. Daedalus 140, 4 (2011), 32–48.

38. Eyal Peer, Gabriele Paolacci, Jesse Chandler, and Pam

Mueller. 2012. Screening participants from previous
studies on Amazon Mechanical Turk and Qualtrics.
(2012).
experimentalturk.files.wordpress.com/2012/02/
screening-amt-workers-on-qualtrics-5-2.pdf
39. Dan Pelleg, Denis Savenkov, and Eugene Agichtein.
2013. Touch Screens for Touchy Issues: Analysis of
Accessing Sensitive Information from Mobile Devices.
In Proceedings of the Seventh International AAAI
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM).
496–505.

40. Sren Preibusch. 2015. Privacy behaviors after Snowden.

Commun. ACM 58, 5 (April 2015), 48–55. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2663341

41. Emilee Rader. 2014. Awareness of Behavioral Tracking

and Information Privacy Concern in Facebook and
Google. In Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security
(SOUPS). 51–67.

42. Florian Schaub, Bastian Konings, and Michael Weber.
2015. Context-Adaptive Privacy: Leveraging Context
Awareness to Support Privacy Decision Making.
Pervasive Computing, IEEE 14, 1 (2015), 34–43.

43. Somini Sengupta. 2013. Protecting Your Privacy on the

New Facebook. The New York Times (Feb. 2013).
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/07/technology/
personaltech/
protecting-your-privacy-on-the-new-facebook.
html

44. Steve Sheng, Bryant Magnien, Ponnurangam

Kumaraguru, Alessandro Acquisti, Lorrie Faith Cranor,
Jason Hong, and Elizabeth Nunge. 2007. Anti-Phishing
Phil: The Design and Evaluation of a Game That
Teaches People Not to Fall for Phish. In Proceedings of
the Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS
’07). ACM, 88–99.

551

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

53. Joseph Turow, Jennifer King, Chris Jay Hoofnagle, Amy

Bleakley, and Michael Hennessy. 2009. Americans
reject tailored advertising and three activities that enable
it. Technical report, Annenberg School for
Communications, University of Pennsylvania (2009).
http://repository.upenn.edu/asc_papers/137/
54. Blase Ur, Pedro Giovanni Leon, Lorrie Faith Cranor,
Richard Shay, and Yang Wang. 2012. Smart, useful,
scary, creepy: perceptions of online behavioral
advertising. In Proceedings of the Eighth Symposium on
Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS’12). ACM, 4–19.
55. Yang Wang, Gregory Norcie, and Lorrie Faith Cranor.

2011. Who is concerned about what? A study of
American, Chinese and Indian users’ privacy concerns
on social network sites. In Trust and trustworthy
computing. Springer, 146–153.

56. Ying Wang and Shaojing Sun. 2010. Examining the role

of beliefs and attitudes in online advertising: A
comparison between the USA and Romania.
International Marketing Review 27, 1 (2010), 87–107.
57. Samuel D. Warren and Louis D. Brandeis. 1890. The

Right to Privacy. Harvard Law Review 4, 5 (1890),
193–220.

58. Yue Jeff Zhang, Jim Q. Chen, and Kuang-Wei Wen.

2002. Characteristics of Internet Users and Their Privacy
Concerns. Journal of Internet Commerce 1, 2 (March
2002), 1–16.

45. Edith G Smit, Guda Van Noort, and Hilde AM Voorveld.

2014. Understanding online behavioural advertising:
User knowledge, privacy concerns and online coping
behaviour in europe. Computers in Human Behavior 32
(2014), 15–22.

46. H Jeff Smith, Tamara Dinev, and Heng Xu. 2011.
Information privacy research: an interdisciplinary
review. MIS quarterly 35, 4 (2011), 989–1016.

47. H Jeff Smith, Sandra J Milberg, and Sandra J Burke.

1996. Information privacy: measuring individuals’
concerns about organizational practices. MIS quarterly
(1996), 167–196.

48. Daniel J Solove. 2006. A taxonomy of privacy.

University of Pennsylvania law review (2006), 477–564.

49. Zixue Tai. 2010. Casting the Ubiquitous Net of

Information Control: Internet Surveillance in China
from Golden Shield to Green Dam. International
Journal of Advanced Pervasive and Ubiquitous
Computing 2, 1 (2010), 53–70.

50. Mohsen Tavakol and Reg Dennick. 2011. Making sense
of Cronbach’s alpha. International Journal of Medical
Education 2 (June 2011), 53–55. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.5116/ijme.4dfb.8dfd

51. Vincent Toubiana, Arvind Narayanan, Dan Boneh,

Helen Nissenbaum, and Solon Barocas. 2010. Adnostic:
Privacy Preserving Targeted Advertising. In Network
and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS’10).

52. TRUSTe. 2011. Privay and online behavioral

advertising. (2011).
http://www.truste.com/adprivacy/

552

