CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

TryFilm: Situated Support for Interactive Media 

Productions 

Tom Bartindale1, Guy Schofield2, Clara Crivellaro1, Peter Wright1  

1Culture Lab, Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom 

2Department of Theatre Film and Television, University of York, York, United Kingdom 

tom@bartindale.com, guy.schofield@york.ac.uk, c.crivellaro@ncl.ac.uk, p.c.wright@ncl.ac.uk 

is  changing 

the  media  production 

ABSTRACT 
The emergence of participatory, on-demand and interactive 
media 
landscape. 
Producing  interactive  media  is  often  more  complex  than 
creating  traditional  linear  films,  resulting  in  increased 
pressure for production teams. In this paper we explore what 
implications this has for cast and crew who participate in the 
production  of  such  new  media.  We  explore  how 
collaborative technologies can support creative practitioners, 
within  these  challenging  settings.  We  present  TryFilm,  a 
collaborative  editing  system,  designed  by  the  authors  and 
deployed  during  an  interactive  film  shoot  by  a  small  film 
company featuring a cast of early career actors. 
.  

Author Keywords 
Editing; Video; Production; Participation; Actors; Complex 
Environments; Pro-am; Tangible; Tabletop; Collaborative 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.1 Video (e.g., tape, disk, DVI) 

INTRODUCTION 
The  convergence  of  broadcast  TV  and  film,  Web  2.0 
generally  and  social  media  in  particular  [10]  have  together 
reconfigured  the  landscape  of  film  and  TV  production  for 
amateur  and  professional  makers  alike.  The  rise  of  a 
participatory culture of media production through online and 
user-generated content services such as YouTube, has begun 
to  democratize  the  process  of  media  production  and 
distribution: an industry previously dominated by large well-
funded production houses and broadcast corporations.  

infrastructure. Freed from the prohibitive costs of chemical 
film  stock,  cameras  and  processing,  these  companies  can 
take  advantage  of  ‘all-digital’  production  workflows:  in 
which footage is shot, edited and distributed entirely through 
digital means.  

teams  have  remained 

Although  digital  technology  is  increasingly  used  in  the 
production and distribution of video, the workflows used by 
production 
largely  unchanged. 
Planning often takes place on paper, with a single document 
- the only record of an intricate set of tasks that need to be 
performed.  The  organizational  structure  of  the  production 
team is crucial to the success of the project and crews often 
rely on a standardized set of working practices in which each 
member  has  a  strictly  specialized  role  within  a  complex 
hierarchy.  

Small  independent  film  companies,  besides  using  highly-
trained but relatively inexperienced crews - fresh from film 
schools,  often  use  new  (unknown)  acting  talent.  By 
definition,  Early  Career  Actors  (referred  to  here  as  ECAs) 
often do not have a body of skills and experience to perform 
at their best in complex new media film shoots.  

In  a  number  of  previous  research  projects,  including 
StoryCrate [1],  we have explored how collaborative digital 
systems  can  support  media  production  workflows.  On  the 
basis  of  this  research  we  were  approached  by  a  small 
independent 
in 
technologies to support their small film crews and ECAs in 
facing the challenges typical  of low-budget  film shoots for 
interactive media. In particular, they wished to explore how 

film  company  who  were 

interested 

Developments in digital video technology are empowering a 
new  generation  of  independent  film  companies  who  are 
producing high quality  media within the constraints of low 
budgets, 
technical 

timeframes  and 

limited 

limited 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for  components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires prior 
specific  permission  and/or  a  fee.  Request  permissions  from 
Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA  
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819929 
 

 

1412

Figure 1. The TryFilm system deployed on location 

 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

technology  could  help 
them  better  manage  complex 
branching  narrative  productions  by  promoting  better 
communication and coordination between cast and crew.  

To  achieve  this  we  developed  ‘TryFilm’  (see  Figure  1)  -  a 
situated collaborative editing and playback tool, which uses 
a  hybrid  interaction  modality  combining  a  multi-touch 
surface and tangibles. Regularly  updated  with  new  footage 
from the shoot, the system not only allows instant playback 
of the ‘rushes’ (unedited footage, straight from the camera), 
but  also  offers  the  ability  to  trial  edits  within  a  branching 
narrative.  Most  significantly  for  the  production  team, 
TryFilm was designed to be accessible to all members of the 
cast and crew, enabling them to maintain a shared awareness 
of the state of the production as it progressed. The research 
aim of the project was to ascertain whether facilitating group 
communication, reflection and learning through technology 
could enable a reconfiguring of traditional production roles 
and  allow  cast  and  crew  to  better  manage  the  production 
while developing actors’ skills.   

THE CASE STUDY 
Trylife are an independent film company who produce high 
quality,  branching-narrative  fiction  films  that  are  delivered 
to  audiences  via  an  interactive  website.  These  films 
approximate  the  format  of  a  ‘choose-your-own-adventure’ 
novel.  At  key  points  in  the  narrative,  viewers  can  make 
decisions for the protagonists, the results of  which have an 
effect on the outcome of the drama. Each ~22 minute episode 
presents  approximately  15  different  choices  to  the  viewer. 
Funded and supported by charities and social organizations, 
Trylife’s films are intended to engage young audiences with 
social issues relevant to them (e.g. sexual health, drugs and 
knife-crime)  and  to  discuss  the  consequences  of  personal 
decisions relating to these issues.  

the  distribution  phase  of 

Trylife are a typical example of the recent generation of film 
companies empowered through low-cost digital technology. 
Their  use  of  an  all-digital  workflow  and  early  career 
production teams has enabled them to build a reputation for 
producing innovative, high-quality interactive films despite 
having  very  limited  budgets.  Trylife’s  Executive  Producer 
approached  us  during 
the 
company’s  first  interactive  film,  as  a  second  episode  was 
being  planned.  Reflecting  on  this  first  production,  the 
company  had  identified  a  number  of  areas  in  which  the 
production team had struggled, which they speculated might 
be solved through improving communication, reflection and 
engagement  within  the  production  team.  We  saw  this 
partnership as providing an ideal case study through which 
to  explore  how  digital  technologies,  which  facilitate  and 
promote collaboration and learning might be used to support 
complex media productions. 

To thoroughly understand the company’s situation, we began 
by  undertaking  interviews  and  in-depth  discussions  with  a 
cross-section  of  the  Trylife  production  team  and  ECAs 
involved in the production of previous Trylife episodes. The 
Executive  Producer,  Director, 
lead  actor  and  Social 

 

1413

in 

involved 

Engagement  Manager  were 
five  group 
discussions in which they guided us through the production 
process  of  their  previous  episode  chronologically;  here  we 
supported the group envisioning not only a perfect workflow, 
but  also  an  ideal  experience  for  the  cast  and  crew,  which 
would ensure that the cast were kept informed, engaged and 
mentored while at the same time, a high quality episode was 
produced. After each session, we discussed and fed back our 
interpretation  of  their  experiences,  verifying  that  we  had 
understood the specifics of their practice.  

in 

strict 

sequence 

CHALLENGES OF PARTICIPATORY NEW MEDIA 
PRODUCTIONS 
A  typical  film  production  workflow,  as  used  by  most 
professional production companies consists of a number of 
phases  occurring 
[20].  Usually 
commissioned on the basis of a script or treatment, an initial 
pre-production  phase  involves  planning  in  great  detail. 
Documents such as storyboards and lists of shots are drawn 
up, cast and crew are hired and equipment and locations are 
secured.  In  the  production  phase,  the  cast  and  crew  are 
deployed and the film is shot. This latter phase is typically 
the  most  demanding  in  terms  of  logistics,  as  it  involves  a 
large  number  of  people  with  different  skill-sets  (who  may 
never have met before) working together to perform a huge 
number  of  specialized  tasks.  After  the  film  is  shot,  the 
footage is processed, edited and prepared for distribution.  

This rigid workflow has, over many years, become standard 
practice, largely due to the historical constraints of shooting 
on  chemical  film.  The  expense  of  film  stock,  necessity  for 
powerful  lighting,  the  number  of  crew  required  to  operate 
each camera and the fact that footage cannot be played back 
until  after  processing  has  meant  that  film  crews  consist  of 
many specialists who rarely share roles and rely on capturing 
footage in as few ‘takes’ as possible, avoiding reshooting at 
all costs.  

Perhaps surprisingly given the youth of their cast and crew 
and  their  use  of  exclusively  digital  formats,  Trylife’s 
production  workflow  was  based  heavily  on  this  traditional 
method and took little advantage of the affordances of digital 
technology, which might allow playback, continual checking 
and more flexible roles. Footage was occasionally reviewed 
on-set by the director and DoP (Director of Photography) and 
the producer, director and DoP would watch the rushes at the 
end of each day off-site, but other members of the cast and 
crew were excluded from these sessions. 

Three  main  challenges  emerged  from  our  workshops  with 
Trylife:  increased  production  demands,  the  shoot  as  an 
opportunity  for  shared  learning,  and  the  problem  of 
maintaining situational awareness for everyone on location.  

Assisting with increased Production Demands 
Digital video has freed many film crews such as Trylife from 
the expense of buying and processing chemical  film  stock, 
however  this  phenomenon  has  meant  directors  are  able  to 
shoot more takes, generating substantially more footage than 

previously possible.  

Web  2.0  is  also  providing  a  platform  for  new  forms  of 
storytelling;  for  example,  the  use  of  branching  narratives 
actively engages viewers by allowing them to choose how a 
film  plot  evolves  [4].  However  these  new  formats  present 
significant challenges for production crew and actors both in 
terms of the complexity of projects and the sheer amount of 
content  required.  Most  of  these  difficulties  arise  from  the 
necessity  to  shoot  more  footage  (more  scenes,  more 
locations, and more possible combinations of content) than 
traditional  productions,  often  within  the  same  limited 
budgets and timeframes.  

As an example, Trylife's second episode was 22 minutes long 
but required 172 pages of script in 75 scenes, requiring over 
100 hours of footage to be shot. In real terms, this translates 
to more days shooting, more location changes, more takes of 
similar  scenes  and  more  time  on  set  -  factors  that 
significantly impact both  the  ECA and crew experience on 
location. 

The  design  challenge  presented  here  was  to  develop  a 
technology that supported cast and crew to better monitor 
the  progress  of  the  shoot,  helping  with  continuity  and 
management of the schedule for cast and crew. 

Supporting Learning for Early Career Actors  
As a socially engaged film company, Trylife were committed 
to  maximizing  the  learning  opportunities  available  to  the 
young  actors  participating  in  the  shoot.  These  learning 
opportunities  not  only  concerned  Trylife  promoting 
discussion  about  the  social  issues  depicted  in  the  films  but 
also  involved  helping  the  actors  develop  their  acting  skills 
and  CVs.  Supporting  continued  ECA  learning  was  of 
particular importance as for many of the cast, this was their 
first experience of a real-world production.  

Self-Reflection and Peer Support  
Institutions  that  teach  acting  typically  do  so  through  a 
process  that  has  been  described  as  situated  learning  [14]. 
This  process  focuses  on  communities  of  practice  in  which 
people learn from one another through a complex balance of 
instruction,  apprenticeship,  and 
learning-through-doing. 
Within drama schools this involves promoting concepts such 
as self-reflection, visualization of action from the audience’s 
perspective, and empathic understanding of characters [15]. 
Peer  interaction  [2]  is  used  to  motivate,  teach  and  inform 
groups  of  actors  as  part  of  this  situated  learning  process. 
Specific  techniques  such  as  recording  and  playing  back 
monologues  to  perform  micro-analysis  and  annotation  on 
personal 
during 
rehearsals; and performing group critique sessions with other 
actors,  are  used  not  just  during  training  but  throughout 
actors’ careers.  

performances; 

real-time 

feedback 

The move from drama school to the film set can be a difficult 
transition,  particularly  when  ECAs  begin  to  work  in 
independent  film  making  contexts.  Only  recently,  through 
digital video technology has it even been technically possible 

 

1414

SESSION: MULTIMEDIA CREATION AND REMIXING

to playback footage whilst still on location in order to review 
footage. On some crews, a Digital Imaging Technician (DIT) 
is employed to manage data storage and assist with camera 
settings and image integrity, necessitating that high-quality 
monitors and computers for playback (often using annotation 
tools  such  as  Adobe  OnLocation)  are  present  on  set.  The 
organizational  hierarchies  present  in  traditional  production 
teams  however,  usually  prevent  most  of  the  cast  and  crew 
having access to content on location. It is therefore difficult 
for actors to receive feedback and to engage in the kinds of 
reflective  practices  -  in  particular  visualization  of  action  - 
which they have been taught to use in training.  

The most common practice in these situations (although still 
rare) is daily group feedback sessions led by the director, in 
which  feedback  for  each  actor  is  given  from  the  director’s 
notes. This strategy only allows actors to adjust their practice 
for the following day’s shoot rather than in response to their 
performance  throughout  the  day.  Similarly,  the  crew  also 
lacks the tools to reflect on their approach and the influence 
of their own work on the generated footage.  

On previous shoots Trylife observed that amongst the ECA 
cast,  peer  support  was  an  important  part  of  the  learning 
process,  increasing  crew  cohesion  and  supporting  team 
building  and  personal  improvement.  This  however  was 
difficult  to  maintain  in  a  high-pressure  environment  where 
many scenes are shot with a small subset of the actors, whilst 
others prepare or are at alternative locations. 

Similarly,  mentoring  relationships  were  important  to  the 
learning  process  for  ECAs.  However,  since  the  cast  of 
Trylife’s productions consisted mainly of ECAs, the number 
of experienced cast members capable of providing mentoring 
was limited and their time was at a premium: they therefore 
were unable to offer personal attention to each cast member. 
Trylife  noted  that  the  few  opportunities  for  professional 
mentoring  were  greatly  valued  by  the  ECAs,  who  were 
sometimes  overwhelmed  by  the  pressures  and  complex 
nature of the production.  

Engagement with Social Issues  
Trylife’s branching narrative enables the viewer to try out a 
variety  of  different  routes  through  the  story  depending  on 
character choices. To support discussion about these choices 
with the ECAs, Trylife employed a number of youth workers 
to  be  on  location.  Film  sets  are  often  challenging, 
intimidating and confusing environments. Furthermore, the 
demands of film production scheduling mean that filming of 
scenes rarely takes place in the same order as the narrative. 
Trylife  found  that  the  ECAs  were  struggling  to  understand 
how  their  characters’  roles  and  the  decisions  made  in  the 
narrative affected the different outcomes of each scene that 
they were asked to play. 

The design challenge presented here was to consider ways 
in  which  ECAs  could  access  the  branching  narrative 
format in a way that would support peer learning and self-
reflection  but  would  also  help  the  cast  engage  with  the 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

social issues raised in the film.  

Facilitating Situational Awareness 
Film shoots are complex situations in which each member of 
the production team  works chiefly to fulfill  his or her own 
role, and in the majority of cases, has little interaction with 
the  cast.  Cast  members  may  be  performing  20-30  scenes  a 
day  and  are  required  to  perform  similar  scenes  repeatedly 
with only subtle changes in dialog or action, in addition to 
multiple takes of the same scene.  

Continuity is a term used in the film industry to refer to the 
necessity  for  consistency  in  the  characteristic  of  objects  or 
actions  in  a  scene:  for  example  ensuring  that  the  level  of 
water in a glass does not change between consecutive shots. 
In Trylife’s previous episode, continuity tracking became a 
major cause for concern due to the large volume of potential 
combinations in which each set of scenes could be viewed. 
This led to a constant state of uncertainty for both cast and 
crew, whereby the cast often lost track of where they were in 
the  narrative,  and  the  context  in  which  their  character  was 
performing. The pressure and pace of the  filming schedule 
also made it difficult for the cast to understand which scene 
was being shot, which location they were moving to next and 
where they were within the wider production cycle.  

As  discussed,  cast  and  crew  are  active  at  different  times 
throughout each day, often interspersed with long periods of 
waiting.  Trylife  had  commented  that  during  their  previous 
shoot, it had been difficult to keep the cast to maintain their 
characters  over  the  course  of  filming,  leading  to  longer 
shooting times as actors re-entered roles and re-familiarized 
themselves  with  the  context.  In  addition  to  the  main 
characters,  Trylife  used  a  variety  of  non-speaking  ‘extras’, 
employed day-to-day. It  was  found to be a difficult task to 
keep this group up-to-date with the shoot over long working 
hours and multiple days given their intermittent attendance. 
Given appropriate support, Trylife suggested that they might 
be able to use these ‘down time’ periods as opportunities for 
personal  development  or  engagement  of  ECAs  with  the 
content. 

The  design  challenge  here  was  to  develop  a  system  that 
allowed cast members to review footage quickly and easily, 
annotate  it  and  review  how  the  viewer  would  see  it, 
providing a context for their acting work,  reinforcing the 
relationship between takes and helping to motivate cast not 
present when related footage was shot. 

and 

their 

limitations.  To 

THE TRYFILM DESIGN 
In designing for these requirements we considered available 
technologies 
encourage 
collaboration  we  rejected  single-user  setups  such  as  large 
screens  connected  to  a  single  computer  with  mouse  and 
keyboard as this might preclude multi-user and collaborative 
use. Likewise, simple off-the-shelf editing software such as 
iMovie  and  Windows  Movie  Maker  lacked  many  of  the 
features  required (such as being able to quickly search and 
catalog  complex  scenes  and  annotate  footage)  while 

professional editing suites such as Premiere or Final Cut Pro 
were  considered  too  unwieldy  for  cast  and  crew  to  use 
without  training.  Furthermore,  none  of  these  solutions 
allowed the exploration of branching narrative structures and 
individual scenes in a single environment. 

Our response was to develop the TryFilm system (see Figure 
1).  Designed  for  deployment  at  a  film  shoot,  TryFilm  is  a 
large (1.5m long) playback and editing system with a multi-
modal  touch  and  tangible  interface  (Samsung  Pixelsense). 
The  self-contained  flight-cased  unit  contains  a  40” 
interactive tabletop display and integrated computer, above 
which is mounted a 40” LCD display at right angles. It has 
removable legs and is easily transportable as a vertical unit 
on wheels, taking around 5 minutes to assemble by a pair of 
crew members.  

Interaction 
The  design  of  TryFilm  draws  from  a  corpus  of  previous 
research that demonstrates the benefits of tangible, tabletop 
interfaces  for  use  in  collaborative  settings.  This  work 
establishes  the  value  of  tabletop  interfaces  for  supporting 
group  learning  and  discussion  around  specific  topics  [13]. 
Large tabletops have been found to promote understanding 
and  coherence  of  gestural  actions  amongst  groups  of  users 
[6],  and  large,  high-resolution  displays  are  well  suited  to 
hosting  complex  data-sets  and  large  amounts  of  media. 
Indeed,  physical  or  tangible  controls,  or  representations  of 
data  have  been  shown  to  offer  advantage  for  group 
interaction over purely digital representation [21]. 

Tabletops and tangibles can be an easily-accessible  way of 
supporting shared activities [8]. Physical control objects can 
be used to embody interface control structures, enforce group 
communication  and  control  over  functionality  while 
fostering  mutual  awareness  amongst  the  group  [9].  To 
support  group  awareness  of  actions,  Gutwin  et  al.  [7] 
emphasize the need to design visual feedback cues into the 
system  to  balance  the  individual  and  group  interaction 
paradigms present. 

In  other  learning  environments  and  in  traditional  (non-
branching)  media  production  there  has  already  been  work 
done to explore how new forms of situated technology can 
support  peer  learning.  For  example,  the  use  of  digital 
technologies  (specifically 
in 
supporting  direct  engagement,  self-directed  learning,  self-
reflection and peer support is well documented [13, 17]. In 
particular this community has recognized the affordances of 
shared large-scale interfaces such as tabletops in supporting 
learning  tasks,  and  in  particular  self-directed  learning 
through reflection [12]. 

tabletops  and 

tangibles) 

As  discussed  previously,  TryFilm  builds  on  previous 
research  by  the  authors  in  which  collaborative  interfaces 
have been developed to explore alternative working models 
for  media  production.  In  particular  it  builds  on  the  [1] 
StoryCrate project, in which a collaborative tabletop editing 
system  was  developed  and  deployed  to  support  a  linear 

 

1415

drama  shoot.  StoryCrate  enabled  crew  members  to  upload 
and edit footage within minutes of shooting, allowing them 
to continually visualize the film as it developed.  

Users  interact  with  TryFilm  through  a  hybrid  scheme  of 
tangibles and touch. Functions which change or manipulate 
content or switch between display modes are performed by 
manipulating  tangible  tiles  (Figure  2).  More  subtle  actions 
such  as  list-scrolling,  drawing,  and  view-scrolling  are 
performed  using  simple  and  intuitive  single-touch  gestures 
on the table surface. These interaction modes can be used in 
tandem  and  bi-manually  to  create  a  rich  and  intuitive 
interaction experience for the user.  

 

Figure 2. Tangible Controls Used in TryFilm 

Media  is  represented  throughout  the  system  as  static 
thumbnails  overlaid  with  icons  representing  the  attached 
metadata  and  currently  available  media.  The  interface 
consists of three levels of detail: tree view, storyboard view 
and clip edit view representing the shoot wide status, specific 
scene status and individual performance status respectively. 
Prior to a shoot, TryFilm is loaded with a representation of 
the branching narrative by the crew including the script and 
some meta-data about shoot locations and a brief description 
of the scene content.  

These clips can be viewed individually, or within the context 
of a scene by placing them in a timeline (see Figure 3). Alone 
however,  the  single  scene  visual  representation  is  not  rich 
enough  to  represent  the  complex  branching  narrative,  so  a 
tree-like visualization of the narrative is rendered where each 
‘leaf’ is a scene, and ‘branches’ are routes viewers could take 
through the narrative (see Figure 3). Relationships between 
specific scenes are created in the open-source mind-mapping 
tool FreeMind and visualized as a color-coded tree on system 
startup.  

Drawing from the design configuration of StoryCrate [1], a 
digitized pen and pad, wireless keyboard and a memory card 
reader border the tabletop for input of sketches, metadata and 
also  video  and  images  from  camera  memory  cards. 
Leveraging the ECAs’ and crew’s familiarity with pictorial 
storyboards, the TryFilm interface is built around the visual 
representation of a film timeline.  

As TryFilm was primarily targeted at users with little prior 
experience operating production equipment, it was important 
to  design  coherent  and  easy-to-learn  interaction  techniques 

 

1416

SESSION: MULTIMEDIA CREATION AND REMIXING

that could be understood immediately.  For example, as the 
preview  and  clip-edit  functions  influence  playback  on  the 
same  screen,  the  tangible  controls  initiating  playback  are 
physically attached to each other with a cord to enforce this 
constraint.  Rather  than  enter  freeform  content  using  the 
inaccurate method of finger interaction, an Anoto pen is used 
for  drawing  new  timeline  content.  This  allows  the  user  to 
work  away  from  the  interface  and  keep  the  paper  copy  for 
his or her reference.  

Throughout the shoot, video content enters TryFilm without 
affecting  the  existing  workflow:  the  crew  inserts  memory 
cards directly from each camera, usually when memory cards 
are  changed  for  backup  (2-3  times  a  day).  Attached  to 
TryFilm’s  interactive  tabletop  is  a  large  non-interactive 
display.  The  use  of  such  displays  for  supporting  group 
learning tasks by  focusing the group on a large centralized 
vertically  mounted  display  is  common  practice,  and  often 
found  in  the  form  of  electronic  whiteboards  [18]  where 
simultaneous group interaction with content is undesirable.  

Robustness 
Emphasizing  the  importance  of  reliability,  three  levels  of 
technology  are  described  by  Buxton;  “standard  spec., 
military  spec.,  and  artist  spec”  [5].  ECAs  working  in  a 
situated  environment  within  a  highly  constrained  and 
pressured workflow clearly require the third level of robust 
design.  As  such,  key  design  paradigms  drawn  from  music 
and  production  technology  were  included  in  TryFilm  both 
for  practicality  and  to  give  credibility  to  the  system  on 
location.  Auto-save,  rollback  and  restore  of  the  interface 
state were implemented alongside a startup system designed 
for rapid user feedback and background loading. TryFilm’s 
editing  is  non-destructive,  working  on  a  copy  of  the  raw 
footage, and clips can be reset at any time. A confirmation is 
required  to  ‘delete’  clips  from  the  interface.  The  sensitive 
optical  tracking  technology  and  lack  of  weather  proofing 
required us to provide a 1.5m x 1.5m black-out waterproof 
gazebo  enabling  use 
in  all  weather  conditions,  and 
deployment  outside  the  immediate  shoot  location  where 
space is at a premium. Deployment of the gazebo increases 
setup  time  of  the  system  from  five  to  fifteen  minutes  on 
average. 

Supporting Self-Reflection, Discussion and Coaching 
Supporting  self-reflection  for  ECAs  is  facilitated  primarily 
through  playback  of  individual  clips  or  edited  sequences. 
Clips arrive and are collected onto a re-useable ‘shelf’ area 
at the top of the display. This shelf is a common storage area 
between  all  scenes,  supporting  easy  copy,  paste  and  move 
operations  across  multiple  scenes.  Clips  can  be  moved 
between the timeline and the shelf to perform editing.  

Although  TryFilm  supports  complex  editing  tasks,  we 
designed the action of playback to be as simple as placing the 
preview tangible onto a thumbnail of the clip. Once a specific 
clip is found, pinning it to the surface and lifting the tangible 
control adds this clip to the ‘shelf’ area of the interface for 
organization  or  further  manipulation  or  placement  on  the 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

timeline. Once clips are associated with a scene storyboard, 
they can be recalled at any time by viewing the timeline for 
that scene.  

TryFilm offers a random access model for playback. Rapid 
access  of  clips  from  any  day  of  the  shoot  allows  the 
comparison  of  shots  filmed  previously  with  recent  ones, 
supporting comparison and analysis of acting over the length 
of the shoot. All clips that have been imported are stored in 
the file-menu control. Any clip from any day of the shoot can 
be  recalled  quickly  by  placing  this  tangible  control,  which 
displays  clips  in  a  paged,  date-ordered  list  grouped  by  the 
relevant shoot day.  

In clip-edit mode, a single time scale is displayed on the table 
surface, and the chosen clip is looped onto the preview output 
display. Placing and moving the in and out controls onto the 
display alters the start and end position of the clip, which is 
reflected in the playback. This view acts a ‘focused’ mode, 
easily  supporting  repeated  playback  of  a  single  clip,  and 
takes  over  the  interaction  space  of  the  tabletop  preventing 
other actions. 

Each  recording  or  ‘take’  of  a  scene  may  involve  slight 
variations in an actor’s performance  which  need reviewing 
in  the  context  of  the  director’s  comments  during  shooting. 
TryFilm allows users to stack these multiple takes vertically 
on  the  timeline,  and  then  switch  between  them  by  placing 
and  rotating  the  switch-take  control  on  a  vertical  stack  of 
clips. This allows for the rapid review of footage of different 
performances  of  the  same  scene.  By  making  possible  for 
ECAs  to  scrutinize  all  of  the  footage  that  was  shot  (even 
those  deemed  un-usable  by  the  crew),  ECAs  are  able  to 
engage with the crew decisions, roles and methods of judging 
success in moments of down-time. 

Supporting Situational Awareness 
Facilitating ECAs’ awareness of the current shoot progress 
(which scene is being shot, how many are left remaining) is 
key to support them gaining an understanding of their own 
role within the production and preventing boredom. TryFilm 
is  designed  with  a  large  vertically  mounted  display  which 
can  be  seen  from  most  places  on  location  when  others  are 
playing back footage.  

This breaks with the traditional compartmentalized model of 
production in which only the director and producer can view 
footage on location, and supports building of ownership of 
content by the rest of the cast and crew. Users can add key-
value text notes as metadata to any media in the system by 
placing  a  tangible  on  the  item  and  selecting  from  a  pre-set 
list or adding custom terms using the keyboard. These notes 
can be viewed by any user of the system, allowing others to 
input  into  the  notes  made  individually,  and  support  users 
keeping  notes  and  tagging  clips  with  reminders  relevant  to 
their practice.  

For  more  expressive  creative  input  into  TryFilm,  two 
drawing interactions are supported. A digital Bluetooth pen 
mounted on the interface can be used to draw new content 

 

1417

frames  on  the  supplied  paper  pad  at  any  point  during  the 
shoot.  These  frames  appear  as  still  image  tiles  identical  to 
video clips and can be used as in-place notes, placeholders 
for  new  or  missing  content,  or  visual  descriptors.  The 
Annotation control can place the tree-view into a ‘drawing’ 
mode, which allows users to draw onto the background of the 
tree  with  their  fingers  to  annotate  and  markup  the  data  for 
reference.  

A progress bar on each node indicates how much of the scene 
footage has been shot, and nodes change color depending on 
the  last  shot  added  to  them,  helping  to  visualize  shoot 
progress. In Scene Edit mode, TryFilm presents a multi-track 
linear timeline onto which video clips can be placed, edited 
and then played back. The clip editing window overlays the 
entire  interface  when  editing  single  clips,  allowing  for 
accurate manipulation of tangible controls that change the in 
and out points of the clip, supporting instant scrubbing and 
accurate playback of individual performances. The ability to 
see each decisions  made aims to drive each crew-members 
understanding of how the content will be used and how the 
rest  of  the  crew  is  performing  to  produce  the  content, 
fostering an appreciation of other roles within the team. 

Supporting Engagement 
ECA’s  engagement  in  the  film  production  environment  is 
often  overlooked,  however  it  is  important  for  ECAs  to 
appreciate the value of their contribution and experience the 
sense of collective achievement that comes with contributing 
to a larger production. 

TryFilm, besides providing access to footage shot throughout 
the production, also enabled cast and crew to try out different 
versions  of  the  narrative.  Clips  can  be  assembled  onto  the 
timeline of any of the scenes, and played back by placing the 

Figure 3. TryFilm’s Tree view (top) and Scene Edit view 

(bottom) 

 

play-head  control  on  the  timeline,  creating  quick  edits. 
Moving  this  control  or  scrolling  the  timeline  scrubs  the 
video,  allowing  for  rapid  movement  between  cuts.  In  tree-
view  (see  figure  3),  these  scenes  can  be  previewed  as 
complete  edits  and  then  reconfigured  to  check  for  issues 
between scenes. By drawing a line through the scenes in the 
desired playback order, ECAs can try out different edits of 
each scene, and even create their own alternative narratives, 
reinterpreting the script using available footage.  

As  all  footage  from  the  shoot  is  available  to  view,  the 
playback of previous days’ clips can help cast who were not 
present  at  those  shoots  to  place  their  own  performances  in 
the  context  of  their  character’s  narrative  journey  and 
understand  the  current  production  schedule.  The  rapid 
turnaround  of  footage  into  TryFilm  is  intended  to  build 
ownership over the content, and facilitate discussion around 
the scenes that are fresh in the ECAs’ mind.  

DEPLOYMENT 
The deployment of TryFilm took place during a twelve day 
film shoot planned by Trylife in a busy district of London. 
The film was shot over five locations ranging from a council-
run  youth  center  to  private  houses,  a  hospital  and  a  police 
station.  Trylife  recruited  a  freelance  film  crew  of  twelve 
members,  all  of  whom  were  recent  film-school  graduates. 
The crew was joined by fifteen ECAs recruited from the local 
area  through  workshops  at  youth  organizations  and  acting 
groups, and through specialist talent recruitment agencies.  

Three  of  the  cast  had  previous  experience  performing  in  a 
professional  environment,  whilst  for  12  this  was  their  first 
professional role. In addition, a very experienced actor from 
the  Trylife  team  was  available  as  a  mentor  throughout  the 
shoot. During the shoot, two teams of three researchers made 
observations,  took  notes  and  conducted  multiple  short 
interviews  with  each  member  of  cast  and  crew.  A  video 
camera was set up above TryFilm to capture each interaction 
that took place (see Figure 4). 

It  was  essential  that  the  research  team  exercise  timing  and 
sensitivity in conducting their research so as not to hinder the 
production team. Key to this strategy was leveraging the film 
experience  of  our  researchers  (all  of  whom  had  worked  in 

Figure 4. Still from the camera above TryFilm on location  

 

 

1418

SESSION: MULTIMEDIA CREATION AND REMIXING

film previously) in offering their time and skills as additional 
crew members. To build trust with the crew and secure their 
role  on  set,  the  research  team  provided  logistical  and 
production support when required. While one member of the 
research  team  was  to  provide  support,  observe  and  answer 
questions about TryFilm, the rest took on formal crew roles, 
fulfilling the DIT (Digital Image Technician) role, copying 
and storing the footage for Trylife.  

During the shoot, cast and crew were introduced to TryFilm 
by the research team and the Executive Producer. Crucially, 
they were shown its capabilities but not instructed in how it 
should  be  used  or  by  whom;  rather  we  followed  a  similar 
strategy as in  the  deployment of StoryCrate [1],  in that  we 
encouraged all the cast and crew to play and experiment with 
the  system,  rather  than  presenting  it  as  a  tool  for  one 
particular group or task.  

We  were  open  and  responsive  to  new  appropriations  of 
TryFilm  during  the  shoot,  following  up  observations  with 
targeted  interviews  when  appropriate.  A  responsive  and 
iterative research strategy was used where questions arising 
from  the  cast  and  crew’s  activity  could  be  discussed 
immediately  and  responded  to  quickly  with  follow  up 
questions. Daily meetings of the research team were held to 
reflect  on 
the  days’  activity  and  build  a  coherent 
understanding  of  their  observations.  Through  this  process, 
interviews with cast and crew were guided by an increasing 
understanding  of  context.  Questions  could  also  be  cross-
referenced between interviewees to build a richer and more 
detailed picture and importantly, updates could be  made to 
TryFilm in response to user feedback. 

RESULTS 
In each location, TryFilm was set up and deployed alongside 
the  camera  and  lighting  equipment  store  or  ‘green  room’ 
(waiting  area  for  actors)  –  sites  which  were  a  focus  for 
activity during the shoot – and was made available during the 
entire  period  of  the  shoot.  The  multi-modal  design  of  the 
interface  facilitated  a  simple  learning  process  primarily 
through  observation  and  repetition  of  peer  viewed  actions, 
but  specifically  through  the  use  of  iconographic  tangibles,  
“[…]it’s  so  easy  to  use  because  we  could  just  play  with  it 
ourselves – just read the little widgets and whatever its says 
it  does.”.  After  a  few  brief  introductions,  the  researchers 
were  rarely  asked  for  assistance  in  performing  tasks,  with 
users preferring to ask a peer and even teaching members of 
the crew. 

By the end of  production, TryFilm  had been  used by  more 
than 20 members of the  production team. Not surprisingly, 
given the amount of time spent waiting on set, the cast used 
the system far more than the crew. The male and female leads 
used the system most often (up to three hours per day over a 
number  of  sessions)  reflecting  the  fact  that  they,  of  all  the 
cast,  spent  most  time  on  set.  Other  cast  members  used  the 
system more sporadically, often in groups of 2-4 for up to 1 
hour at a time.  

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

The crew used the device far less often than the cast, indeed 
several never experimented with it at all. The lighting team 
for example checked their setups with the director and used 
neither TryFilm, nor the camera monitors, taking pride in the 
fact that they knew what needed to be done from experience. 
Makeup Artists and the Continuity Assistant, along with the 
Director and Producer used the device most often (up to 30 
minutes per day), mainly to check for continuity errors.  

Self-Reflection and Group Discussion 
From the beginning of the production, the cast used TryFilm 
chiefly to access and play back footage of their scenes, most 
commonly to reflect on their own performances, “I’ve been 
looking  at  mainly  my  body  language  and  my  facial 
expressions,  just  to  help  me  see  how  I  could  change  them. 
Looking to see if my performance was natural”. Typically, 
cast  were  recalling  scenes  from  much  earlier  points  in  the 
shoot  next  to  ones  shot  that  day  for  comparison.  Actors 
reflecting on their own practice reduced the pressure for the 
crew in recalling and making notes on specific points, using 
TryFilm as a reference for later discussion, “…It really has 
helped  me  not  to  breathe  down  their  neck  and  separately 
have a look at what’s happening, then discuss it with them 
later.”  

One cast member in particular described how the opportunity 
for analyzing a bad performance outweighed the emotional 
strain of watching it back, “At least I’ve seen it before, even 
if I’m meant to look horrible or I do look horrible, let me see 
it before”. Similarly, the male lead used TryFilm’s ability to 
view  shots  in  the  order  they  might  be  edited  to  maintain 
consistency of his character and performance, “… being able 
to do my scene and come back and watch it, make the cuts 
myself and improve it. You get more of an idea of what you 
could do to change it, to make it better…” He added that he 
could see how performing this task on location could assist 
his  development  as  an  actor  supplementing  the  minimal 
feedback  he  received  from  the  director  on  set.  Often  these 
playback  and  editing  sessions  took  place  in  small  groups, 
where  actors  would  critique  and  compare  each  other’s 
performances. In particular, the male and female leads often 
viewed  multiple  takes  of  their  performances  together  to 
observe  their  interactions  with  each  other.  The  tangible 
controls were found to be useful here as the actors could pass 
controls to each other, enabling rapid turn-taking while both 
cast members were at the interface. 

 Due  to  changing  weather  TryFilm  was  confined  to  a 
waterproof blackout tent in some locations. This prevented 
observation of the content from a distance, but introduced a 
private viewing area, which was utilized by the cast, many of 
whom spent hours monitoring, evaluating and reflecting  on 
their own performances without the pressure of judgment by 
others. Even the experienced actors took to using TryFilm in 
this  way,  “I don’t usually like to watch myself back on the 
camera,  but  when  it’s  like  that,  I  guess  it  can  help  you 
improve your performance, if you notice something on it as 
well.”  This  scenario  highlighted  the  unexpected  tension 

 

1419

between  supporting 
peripheral awareness of content by the wider team. 

in-depth 

individual  playback  and 

Coaching and Mentoring 
Alongside  casual  playback  of  footage,  members  of  the 
Trylife team were actively using TryFilm to engage ECAs in 
acting coaching sessions. On numerous occasions, a member 
of  the  team  would  take  specific  ECAs  over  to  TryFilm, 
navigate to previous footage, and engage the actors in guided 
reflection, offering feedback on their performance using the 
large display to present footage back to the actors. Often the 
result of a session would entail the actor bringing others to 
TryFilm  and  presenting  what  they  perceived  as  their  best 
work, building self-confidence and morale amongst the cast.  

The  Executive  Producer  of  Trylife  (who  had  trained  as  a 
youth worker) saw a clear opportunity for using the tool to 
engage  members  of  the  cast  and  crew  with  each  other, 
seeking out individuals and grouping them together around 
TryFilm where he would perform guided playback, selecting 
particularly interesting clips, “[…] what I wanted to do was 
make sure that even right down to the runner would go and 
have a look and see what we were actually creating because 
[…]they  can’t  really  see  what  the  finished  product’s  like 
[…]It’s great so it keeps people motivated.” 

On other occasions, TryFilm was used by crew members to 
demonstrate  to  the  actors  the  effect  of  certain  performance 
techniques.  During  a  fight  scene,  the  Stunt  Coordinator 
struggled  initially  to  convince  the  cast  members  that 
punching  a  short  distance  to  one  side  of  an  actor’s  head 
would  create  the  illusion  of  an  impact  on  screen.  Playing 
back footage from earlier in the day using TryFilm, the cast 
were able to see the effect of the illusion and take up correct 
positions without help in subsequent scenes.   

Engagement of Cast and Crew 
As using TryFilm became everyday practice, the cast became 
adept  at  navigating  and  manipulating  footage  and  through 
these  skills  started  ‘playing’  with  the  film,  trying  out 
different  playback  sequences  outside  the  official  narrative. 
This playfulness was important in maintaining engagement 
of  the  cast  with  the  project,  particularly  during  periods  of 
boredom on set; however, a negative consequence of this was 
identified by the Director, who expressed concern that within 
a  production  with  more  experienced  actors, 
these 
opportunities would foster second-guessing of the director’s 
actual decisions and increase dissent amongst the cast. 

Allowing TryFilm to be operated by anyone on location was 
found  to  give  the  actors  a  greater  stake  in  the  production 
process. In comparison to the  monitors sometimes  used by 
directors, which are generally off-limits to the cast, TryFilm 
offered  a  shared  space  that  the  cast  were  genuinely 
encouraged to use. As one cast member stated, “S***, that 
must  be  really  expensive.  Normally  young  people  are  told, 
’Don’t touch that, don’t touch this, don’t touch that’ but with 
that it’s like, ‘Yes man, just go on it.’”  

In  particular  the  crew  valued  how  TryFilm  motivated  the 

cast,  “So,  it's  really  nice…if  they  have  a  few  minutes,  and 
have  a  look  at  what  we're  filming  because  it  helps  them, 
keeps  them  motivated  because  they  see  that  it  looks  good. 
Then it gives them a boost, so they can go out and keep doing 
it.”  

TryFilm became such a part of the actors’ workflow that the 
crew often looked for missing cast members around it before 
checking  elsewhere.  Significantly,  the  Director  valued  the 
centralized  and  public  nature  of  TryFilm  as  a  method  of 
drawing his team together over the shoot, “But yes, all the 
young  people  coming  in  and  standing  around  it  and  then 
being  told  that  they  can  use  it  and  actually  start  messing 
around with it, was great. It just created this buzz”. 

Situational Awareness 
TryFilm’s capacity to make footage available to view shortly 
after shooting played a large role in encouraging the cast to 
consider the production roles of the wider crew. They were 
able to see a direct correspondence between actions they saw 
the crew performing and their effect on the output of the film. 
This  built  appreciation  of  the  crew’s  skills,  furthered 
understanding  of  their  roles  and  helped  increase  trust, 
bridging  the  traditional  social  divide  between  the  cast  and 
crew.  Actors confirmed that seeing the result of the crew’s 
input  on  location  led  to  greater  awareness  of  the  craft 
involved  in  producing  the  film  -  something  which  they 
thought  might  be  of  use 
their  own  professional 
development, “I learned a lot these days, like if I wanted to 
do a short film. If I wanted to shoot something myself why 
not, you get the gist of it.” 

in 

The understanding of their place within the team and value 
of  their  decisions  became  central  to  peripheral  crew 
members’  interactions  with  TryFilm  after  observing  actors 
use  it,  “To  see  what  was  actually  going  on  and  how  it  all 
looked. How it all will come together eventually. Obviously 
there are all them angles and then how they they're just going 
to cut and then put it all  - like it just flips between - it was 
good to see all - how it is done.”  

in  different  scenes  was  valuable 

The  actors  assembled  clips  into  short  edits  to  see  how  the 
viewer  would  experience  their  performance,  “it’s  so  much 
more clear, you can really start playing with the editing and 
dragging it all together”. In particular, the ability to see how 
scenes and narrative emerged incrementally through actors’ 
performances 
for 
understanding  their  characters’  continuity.  TryFilm  was 
helpful 
day-to-day 
understanding of how the shoot was progressing, including 
on  days  when  they  were  not  present,  “What  I’m  really 
enjoying is the stuff that was on the night shoot went, what, 
the  next  day  or  it  can  be  just  straight  away,  just  plug  in”. 
Cast  members  commented  on  the  value  of  seeing  their 
performance in the context of the wider narrative,  “I got to 
see other scenes that I wasn’t in and it’s just helpful to see 
the whole world of the story”. 

cast  members’ 

in 

supporting 

Interestingly, even during these sessions, few members of the 

 

1420

SESSION: MULTIMEDIA CREATION AND REMIXING

cast and no members of the crew chose to use the branching 
narrative  view  to  watch  the  entire  production  from  start  to 
finish. Instead, the attention of each member of the team was 
usually focused on fragments of scenes and their interactions 
with  each  other.  Rather  than  use  TryFilm  for  logging,  the 
crew  used  traditional  paper  logs  to  keep  track  of  how  the 
shoot was progressing. 

for  continuity.  One  of 

Increasing  the  visibility  of  content  on  location  was  an 
important role of TryFilm, and in particular the large display 
enabled  cast  and  crew  to  analyze  and  compare  specific 
footage 
the  makeup  artists 
commented,  “it's  good  as  a  makeup  artist  on  their  (the 
casts’) behalf because if they wanted to pick up anything, like 
detailing. Especially with us, we use HD makeup, we can see 
it  clearly  on  the  screen  because  it's  quite  wide.  Yes,  so  we 
can pick up all the little details”.  

Emergent Behavior and Playful Interaction 
Unexpectedly, we observed, on multiple occasions, that the 
novelty  of  the  device,  its  availability  and  the  access  to 
content encouraged members of the cast to bring their peers 
from  the  local  community  to  the  shoot,  use  TryFilm  to 
explain and engage them with the issues, the process of film 
making  and  show  off  their  role,  “I’ve  brought  my  friends 
along to come and see it, I’ve tweeted about it and I think it’s 
really,  really  helpful”.  The  Trylife  team  also  saw  an 
opportunity to use TryFilm to engage local  residents in the 
filming process. Local residents were invited to visit the set 
and  TryFilm  was  used  to  help  quickly  explain  the  project, 
ensuring the goodwill of the local community. 

The Executive Producer realized the value of incrementally 
collecting the ‘best clips’ for when he needed to explain the 
vision  and  progress  of  Trylife  to  VIPs,  stakeholders  or 
visitors to the set. Initially, he presented individual clips, but 
once more footage was available, he set to editing his own 
trailer  using  TryFilm,  effectively  producing  an  on-site 
marketing tool, which demonstrated the progress of the shoot 
and the quality of the content. Towards the end of the shoot, 
this  edit  was  exported  to  a  professional  format  (Final  Cut 
Pro) and was finished by a professional editor for release on 
the internet, becoming an official trailer for the production. 

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
In  designing  TryFilm,  we  took  insights  gained  through 
working  with  established  broadcast  crews  on  linear  film 
projects and applied them to a very different situation: early-
career  film  companies  working  on  low-budget,  interactive 
media productions. As discussed, TryFilm was designed to 
support  a  range  of  activities, 
including  rush-editing, 
construction of new branching narratives, guided reflection 
on acting practice.  

In practice we found that cast and crew used the system in a 
limited number of ways for very different purposes. The vast 
majority of interactions with the system was by the cast and 
involved simple browsing, comparing and playback of clips 
to reflect on performances. Crew members used the system 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

rarely,  mostly  using  it  for  error-checking  and  continuity, 
again  relying  on  the  device  as  a  high-resolution  playback 
system.  

The tangible interaction  scheme  was  helpful in  making the 
system  easy  to  access  and  also  enabled  cast  members  to 
rapidly  switch  control  of  the  interface  from  one  to  another 
during  discussions.  However,  far  more  important  to  how 
often  TryFilm  was  used,  was  the  way  it  functioned  as  a 
shared  space  for  reflection,  training  and  social  interaction 
between  cast  and  crew.  TryFilm  did  not  disrupt  or 
reconfigure  the  crew  hierarchy.  It  did  however  enable  the 
Director  and  Producer  to  maintain  a  largely  traditional 
production workflow, while promoting communication and 
discussion between team members, enabling the cast to feel 
more  involved  and  the  crew  to  maintain  a  better  shared 
awareness of how the work was progressing.  

Our analysis suggests that the technology supported ECAs to 
develop their own practice and to support the functioning of 
the  production  team  as  a  whole.  The  cast  valued  having  a 
shared space in which to reflect on their practice, gain peer 
support  and  learn  more  about  the  practice  of  film  making, 
with  the  chance  to  apply  these  skills  immediately.  Their 
interactions  with  TryFilm  had  a  positive  effect  on  the 
production in general and enabled them to contribute to the 
work  of  the  production  team  by  assisting  new  actors  and 
extras joining the production. Crucially, this benefit came at 
no extra cost to the production team in terms of time, as cast 
members could learn and experiment during their down time, 
without needing support from a dedicated crew member.  

We  found  that  many  of  Trylife’s  concerns  were  similar  to 
their more established counterparts in previous projects. For 
example,  some  of  the  crew  speculated  that  allowing  the 
entire  cast  and  crew  access  to  the  project  footage  could 
impact the hierarchical structure of the shoot. In particular, 
the Director suggested that giving more experienced actors 
access to footage during their time on location might cause 
them to be over-critical of their performances, undermining 
his authority on set, although no such problems were faced 
during the deployment.  

Of  particular  interest  was  the  emergent  behavior,  which 
developed  around  TryFilm.  For  example,  the  production 
team was able to use the interface to support engagement of 
both the local community and stakeholders in the production. 
We  suggest  that  facilitating  open  collaborative  working 
spaces in the design of interfaces for new media production 
has the potential not just to support existing workflows but 
to lend new capabilities to established production teams.  

Despite  the  Production  Team’s  request  for  features  to 
support  viewing  of  branching  narratives,  this  feature  was 
rarely  used  and  the  crew  used  paper  documents  to  log  and 
keep  track  of  footage  despite  TryFilm’s  logging  and 
annotation  capabilities.  This  demonstrates  how  familiarity 
and  skill  with  a  simple  device  can  outweigh  the  perceived 
benefits of a new system. We speculate that this might have 

been  overcome  with  prior  training  of  the  crew-members, 
however  a  better  solution  may  well  have  been  to  explore 
ways  of  better  integrating  TryFilm  with  pen  and  paper 
logging systems, possibly using systems like Anoto.  

As  the  complexity  of  interactive  film  projects  increases, 
TryFilm demonstrates how multipurpose tools that facilitate 
instant  playback,  on-site  shot  review  and  contextual 
awareness of a shoot can support actors’ and crews’ practice 
and  development.  Our  deployment  suggests  that  simple, 
inclusive interaction schemes that create shared and flexible 
social  spaces  can  be  useful 
in  augmenting  existing 
production  environments,  extending  the  work  that  can  be 
done  by  capitalizing  on  long  periods  of  cast  downtime 
common to most film productions.  

In  particular,  through  working  with,  rather  than  against 
existing workflows and using systems that encourage greater 
collaboration  and  discussion  between  team  members,  film 
companies can work more efficiently, realize more complex 
projects  and  make  more  of  their  resources,  especially  in 
terms of their acting talents. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This  work  was  supported  by  the  RCUK  Digital  Economy 
Programme  [grant  number  EP/G066019/1  -  SIDE:  Social 
Inclusion through the Digital Economy] 

REFERENCES 
1.  Bartindale, T., Sheikh, A., Taylor, N., Wright, P. and 

Olivier, P. 2012. StoryCrate: tabletop storyboarding for 
live film production. CHI ‘12. ACM Press (2012) 

2.  Boal, A. Games for Actors and Non-Actors: 

Amazon.co.uk: Augusto Boal: Books. 
http://www.amazon.co.uk/Games-Actors-Non-Actors-
Augusto-Boal/dp/0415267080. 

3.  Boal, A. Theater of the Oppressed. Pluto Press, 2000. 
4.  Bordwell, D. Film futures. SubStance, (2002). 
5.  Buxton, B. Artists and the art of the luthier. SIGGRAPH 

31, 1 (1997), 10–11. 

6.  Fleck, R. and Rogers, Y. Actions Speak Loudly with 

Words: Unpacking Collaboration Around the Table. ITS 
’09, ACM Press (2009). 

7.  Gutwin, C. and Greenberg, S. Design for individuals, 

design for groups. CSCW ’98, ACM Press (1998), 207–
216. 

8.  Hornecker, E. and Buur, J. Getting a grip on tangible 

interaction. CHI ’06, ACM Press (2006), 437. 

9.  Hornecker, E. A design theme for tangible interaction: 

embodied facilitation. ECSCW ‘05, (2005), 23–43. 

10. Jenkins, H. Convergence Culture: Where Old and New 

Media Collide. NYU Press, 2006. 

11. Jenkins, H. Confronting the Challenges of Participatory 

Culture: Media Education for the 21st Century. MIT 
Press, 2009. 

12. Kharrufa, A., Leat, D., and Olivier, P. Digital mysteries: 

designing for learning at the tabletop. ITS’ 10, (2010), 
197. 

13. Kharrufa, A.S. and Olivier, P. Exploring the 

 

1421

SESSION: MULTIMEDIA CREATION AND REMIXING

requirements of tabletop interfaces for education. 
International Journal of Learning Technology 5, 1 
(2010), 42. 

14. Lave, J. and Wenger, E. Situated learning: Legitimate 

peripheral participation. 1991. 

review of the literature. Journal of Computer Assisted 
Learning, (2005). 

19. Stanislavsky, K. An Actor’s Handbook: An Alphabetical 

Arrangement of Concise Statements on Aspects of 
Acting. Taylor & Francis, 2004. 

15. Mezirow, J. Fostering Critical Reflection in Adulthood. 

20. Telo, A.R. Participatory Film Production as Media 

1990. 

16. Nash, K., Hight, C., and Summerhayes, C. New 

Documentary Ecologies. Palgrave Macmillan, 2014. 

17. Scott, S., Grant, K., Carpendale, S., Inkpen, K., and … 

R. Co-located Tabletop Collaboration: Technologies 
and Directions. Workshop. CSCW ‘02, (2002). 
18. Smith, H., Higgins, S., Wall, K., and Miller, J. 

Interactive whiteboards: boon or bandwagon? A critical 

+ 

Practice. International Journal of Communication 7, 
2013, 21. 
http://ijoc.org/index.php/ijoc/article/view/1593. 
21. Terrenghi, L., Kirk, D., Sellen, A., and Izadi, S. 

Affordances for manipulation of physical versus digital 
media on interactive surfaces. CHI ’07, ACM Press 
(2007), 1157.  

 

1422

