CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Identity Work on Social Network Sites: Disadvantaged 

Students’ College Transition Processes 

Tsubasa Morioka 

School of Information 
University of Michigan 

tsubasa.morioka@gmail.com 

Nicole B. Ellison 

School of Information  
University of Michigan  

enicole@umich.edu 

Michael Brown  

School of Education  
University of Michigan  
mbrowng@umich.edu 

the  first  in  their  family  to  go  to  college)  and  low-income 
students  (which  we  define  as  disadvantaged  college 
students in this paper) continues to increase at a rapid rate 
[2].  And  yet,  the  likelihood  for  successfully  attaining  a 
college  diploma  for  these  students  remains  grim:  76%  of 
low-income  students  fail  to  attain  a  Bachelor’s  degree 
within  six  years,  and 89% of  low-income,  first  generation 
students  fail  to  complete  a  Bachelor’s  degree  within  six 
years  [34].  Research  also  shows 
that  among  first-
generation,  low-income  students  who  drop  out  of  college, 
nearly two thirds do so after their first year [17]  – so this 
period  is  especially  critical.  Surprisingly,  higher  dropout 
rates  for  low-income  students  exist  even  when  students 
have  the  academic  skills  and  material  resources  necessary 
to be a successful and effective student [39]. Extending the 
work  of  Markus  and  Nurius  [30]  on  self-concept  to  this 
context,  we  can  consider  the  possibility  that  students 
struggle because they fail to establish future self-images, or 
“possible  selves,”  regarding  their  identity  as  college 
students.  Students  who  claim  school-focused  future  self-
images  are  more  likely  to  do  well  in  school  because  they 
personalize goals, connect current behavior to future states, 
and  find  meaning  in  their  current  situation  [11].  Thus,  a 
successful  first-year  transition  in  which  students  identify 
themselves as college students – and take actions consistent 
with  that  understanding  –  is  critical  for  successfully 
navigating the college experience.   
Social  media  platforms  provide  users  with  the  ability  to 
express 
information,  which  can  have 
implications  for  how  we  perceive  ourselves  [20,  45]  and 
how  we  feel  about  ourselves  [41].  Both  the  expression  of 
one’s own identity and exposure to others’ identity-related 
self-presentational messages  suggest that social media can 
be a supportive platform for individuals going through a life 
change  by  providing  an  outlet  for  engaging  in  adaptation 
behavior,  which  consists  of  two  components:  identity 
exploration  (identity  play)  and 
identity  reaffirmation 
(identity work) [24]. 
In  this  study,  we  examine  how  college  students  from 
disadvantaged  backgrounds  use  social  media  during  their 
first  year  of  college  and  before  getting  to  campus,  with  a 
particular  focus  on  issues  of  identity  transition.  Extensive 
research has documented identity management practices on 
social media, yet little is known about the extent to which 
disadvantaged  college  students  engage  in  constructing, 
trying  out,  and  adopting  provisional  identities  in  these 

identity-related 

ABSTRACT 
Prior research suggests that some social media practices can 
play  a  role  in  shaping  students’  adjustment  to  college; 
however,  the  specific  mechanisms  by  which  social  media 
can  support  the  identity  work  associated  with  successful 
transitions  to  college  are  not  well  understood.  This  paper 
investigates how social media experiences and interactions 
can  support  college-focused  identity  construction  for  low-
income,  first-generation  college  students.  Drawing  on  in-
depth,  semi-structured  interviews  with  31  emergent  adults 
from  disadvantaged  backgrounds  in  the  United  States,  we 
identify social media affordances that support the process of 
identity  work  during  a  critical  transition  period.  Findings 
indicate  that  social  media  platforms  support  provisional 
identity  work,  but  disadvantaged  college  students  lack 
access  to  mentor-like  figures  that  could  be  accessible 
through  social  media.  We  also  find  barriers  to  sharing 
information online that may extend to other life transitions 
in multiple life contexts and review the design implications 
of our findings.  
Author Keywords 
Social  media;  social  network  sites;  emergent  adults; 
transition; identity work; college; Facebook. 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous. 
INTRODUCTION 
Getting  a  college  diploma  has  never  been  more  important 
for  socioeconomic  well-being;  in  2014,  compared  to  their 
high  school-educated  counterparts,  Millennial  college 
graduates ages 25 to 32 who were working full time earned 
about  $17,500  more  annually,  were  more  likely  to  be 
employed (89% vs. 82%), and were significantly less likely 
to  be  unemployed  (3.2%  vs.  12.2%)  [1].  U.S.  college 
enrollment among first generation students (those who are 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. 
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must 
be  honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or 
republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior
from 
specific  permission 
Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819959 
 

fee.  Request  permissions 

and/or 

a 

 

848

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Internet 

for 

college-going 

spaces,  especially  around  the  college  transition  process. 
Furthermore,  previous  studies  with  a  focus  on  how 
traditional  college  students  utilize  social  media  [12]  may 
not  capture  the  experiences  of  students  from  low-income 
backgrounds  and  minority  youth,  who  may  need  more 
academic and social support to stay in college and obtain a 
degree than their more affluent peers [40].  
We conducted semi-structured interviews with 31 first-year 
college  students  from  low-income  households  about  their 
first-year  experience,  social  media  use,  and  utilization  of 
the 
college-related 
information. We discuss our findings using an “affordance” 
lens in order to ensure the relevance of our insights to other 
social media platforms beyond the ones used by students at 
the  time  of  data  collection,  and  to  avoid  technologically 
deterministic  assumptions  of  “impact” 
[42].  Three 
categories  of  affordances  facilitate  students’  identity  work 
on  social  media.  First,  association  of  ties,  persistence  of 
information,  and  visibility  allow  college  students  to  learn 
how  to  be  college  students  by  discovering  roles  and 
expectations.  Second,  a  reduced  cues  environment  and 
asynchronous communication channels can enable students 
to engage in “selective self-presentation,” or the ability to 
edit and construct a school-focused college identity online, 
based  on  how  they  want  to  be  perceived  [45].  Third,  the 
increased  accessibility  of  existing  network  ties  enhances 
college  students’  access  to  relevant  social  support  for 
reaffirming working identity. 
RELATED RESEARCH 
To set the stage for our analysis, we first share an overview 
of 
identity  construction,  which  draws  from  Ibarra’s 
conceptualization  of  identity  work,  play,  and  provisional 
selves [24]. Then, we review the current state of research in 
the  field  concerning  identity  work  and  its  relationship  to 
social media.  
Transitioning into New Identity Roles 
According to Goffman [19], identities are  constructed and 
negotiated  in  social  interaction  by  the  identity  cues  we 
intentionally “give” and unintentionally “give off.” People 
make  identity  claims  by  presenting  a  version  of  self  that 
signals how they wish to be viewed by others and how they 
perceive themselves. Goffman [19] claims that adherence to 
role-related  expectations  facilitates  the  passage  through 
one’s 
the 
internalization  of  corresponding 
[19,  32]. 
Socialization scholars extend these theories by investigating 
the  notion  that  people  continue  to  construct  and  negotiate 
identities  as  they  gain  opportunities  to  elaborate  on  and 
illustrate provisionally claimed identities with experiences.  
A  successful  transition  to  college  relies  partly  on  students 
forming  an  authentic,  college-centered 
identity.  The 
experience  of  establishing  a  college-centered  identity  is 
positively  associated  with  a  sense  of  fit  [10,  35]  and 
empowerment [21], which reinforces students’ engagement 
with  their  academic  experience,  persistence  in  the  face  of 

environment, 

role-enacting 

and 

resulting 

in 

identities 

that  are  part  of 

adversity,  and  realization  of  their  potential  [9,  10,  39]. 
Fortifying  a  school-focused  identity  requires  provisionally 
connecting  “the  beliefs,  understandings,  relationships, 
representations,  and  activities 
the 
educational  experience  to  students’  lives”  [38].  This 
identity  transformation  is  especially  challenging  for  the 
population  we  are  studying,  who  often  have  fewer  role 
models  and  examples  in  their  immediate  households  and 
lived environments [17, 39]. 
This  study  investigates  the  process  of  role-enactment  at  a 
time  of  transition,  a  period  when  individuals  who  are  “in 
between” roles improve their understanding of the new role 
and  refine  their  self-image  in  that  role  [46].  We  use  role 
transition  theory  and  related  research  to  understand  how 
college  students  may  engage  in  the  process  of  new  role 
enactment  during  transition  to  college  [24,  43].  We  also 
consider  the  process  of  adaptation,  which  involves  three 
basic  tasks  important  for  adjusting  to  new  roles  and 
rehearsing  “provisional  selves:”  role  model  observation, 
experimentation  with  self-image,  and 
identity  self-
evaluation based on feedback [24].  
In the organizational sphere, scholars conceptualize identity 
work  as  people’s  engagement 
in  forming,  repairing, 
maintaining, and strengthening or revising their identities to 
preserve existing identities and/or externally ascribed self-
concepts [37, 39]. Identity play, as a complementary notion 
to  identity  work,  is  defined  as  people’s  engagement  in 
provisional  but  active  trials of  possible  future  selves  [24]. 
Ibarra [24] addresses the playful aspect of identity work and 
presents  a  framework  for  understanding  how  people  go 
through  processes  of  identity  development  whereby  the 
individual  begins  to  take  on  the  identity,  attitudes,  and 
relationships of the next role – in this case that of college 
student  –  before  he  or  she  has  actually  attained  it.  This 
framework  considers 
the  process  by  which  people 
reconstruct their identities – for instance, as they move from 
identifying as a high school to independent college student.  
In order to assume a new identity role, people experiencing 
life  changes  need  to  overcome  transition  hurdles  by 
engaging 
includes  1) 
observing  role  models  and  identifying  elements  they  want 
to  emulate;  2)  experimenting  with  provisional  selves  by 
imitating  self-presentation  style  and  distinct  traits  they 
aspire  to;  and  3)  evaluating  which  provisional  selves  to 
adopt. This process requires one to reflect upon his or her 
provisional  selves  internally  as  well  as  externally  by 
receiving  social  feedback  [24].  We  expect  that  young 
people  may  engage  in  those  processes  using  social  media 
because  these  sites  enable  them  to  see  others’  self-
presentational  messages,  play  with  self-presentation  and 
identity  cues,  and  receive  social  feedback  in  the  form  of 
comments and ‘likes’ from their network.  
College Students and the Internet 
As  of  2014,  87%  of  18  to  29-year-olds  in  the  U.S.  use 
Facebook  and  53%  of  young  adults  use  the  second  most 

in  adaptation  behavior,  which 

849

the  site  may  be  related 

popular  social  media  site,  Instagram  [14].  Research  on 
digital inequality demonstrates that although a majority of 
adolescents use social media, how they use these platforms 
varies based on demographic factors such as gender, race, 
and socio-economic background [23, 27, 28]. Specific uses 
of 
to  students’  academic 
performance.  Analyzing  usage  of  Facebook  and 
its 
relationship to student GPA, Junco found that using the site 
to  share  links  and  to  check  on  friends  was  positively 
associated  with  GPA  while  chatting  and  posting  status 
updates were negatively  associated  [26].  In  another  study, 
Junco [27] found that African American students were less 
likely  to  use  the  site  to  check  on  friends  and  tag  photos, 
activities that may help with social integration into college 
and,  as  other  work  indicates,  academic  achievement.  This 
study  also  identified  a  relationship  between  parental 
educational level and specific Facebook activities, such that 
those with less educated parents were less likely to use the 
site for active communication with peers, such as chatting 
and RSVPing to events, potentially limiting their ability to 
benefit from their use [27]. College students report that they 
use  Facebook  as  one  of  their  primary  communication 
sources [36], but these findings suggest that disadvantaged 
college  students  may  not  make  use  of  the  platform’s 
affordances  to  build  a  social  support  system  which  could 
assist with social adjustment to college.  
Identity Work on Social Media 
Social  network  sites  (SNSs)  feature  a  unique  set  of 
affordances 
identity 
information  via  the  profile  and  other  features  [16].  Such 
affordances  have 
identity  by 
reshaping  how  individuals  view  themselves  and  others.  
The  affordances  of  SNSs  related  to  identity  processes 
include selective self-presentation and asynchronicity [15]. 
Selective  self-presentation,  the  act  of  emphasizing  or 
deemphasizing identity cues, allows individuals to curate a 
desired impression [45]. Asynchronicity permits individuals 
to  take  their  time  constructing  a  profile  or  messages  on 
social  media  and  gives  users  the  opportunity  to  focus  on 
their  self-presentational  messages  without  interfering  with 
conversational flow [45].  
The  social  and  technical  context  of  social  media  can  also 
pose constraints for emergent adults’ identity work: online 
environments  often  include  networked  contexts  in  which 
social  groups  are  collapsed,  audiences  are  impossible  to 
accurately  identify,  and  anything  posted  online  could  be 
taken out of context [7, 8]. 
Haimson et al. [22] explore social media as a space to do 
identity  work  around  gender  transitions.  They  found  that 
people  undergoing  gender  transition  found  inspiration, 
understanding,  and  an  audience  for  experimentation  from 
close 
from 
acquaintances. Similar to how Haimson et al. explore social 
media’s  role  in  identity  work  while  undergoing  gender 
transition,  we  examine  social  media  affordances  that  can 

strangers,  but  not 

the  display  of 

the  potential 

to  affect 

friends  and 

from 

that 

facilitate 

850

SESSION: EDUCATION IN THE CLASSROOM AND BEYOND

college 

identity 

students’ 

identities  via  SNSs 

support  the  transition  from  a  high  school  student  to  a 
college student. We pose the following research questions:  
RQ1:  Does  using  SNSs  to  observe  role  models  influence 
disadvantaged 
college 
transition 
processes and, if so, how? 
RQ2:  In  what  ways  does  enacting  and  reaffirming  their 
provisional 
influence 
disadvantaged students’ identity transition processes? 
RQ3:  What  are  the  barriers  to  sharing  college-related 
information  online  that  could  limit  the  opportunities 
presented by social media for engaging in identity work? 
METHODS 
Participants 
To recruit participants, a sample of first year students at a 
large  public  Midwestern  research  university  was  selected 
by the registrar based on students’ household income data. 
To qualify, participants needed to be from families with a 
combined income of less than $50,000, which is below the 
national  household  median  income  [13].  Out  of  6500 
enrolled  first  year  students,  9.7%  (630  students)  met  our 
criteria.  Of  this  group,  400  were  randomly  selected  to 
receive  an  email  from  the  registrar  inviting  them  to 
participate in the study and to take a brief online screener 
survey.  The  screener  survey,  used  to  select  interview 
participants, collected information about demographics and 
social media use.  
Our final dataset included 33 students – 12 men, 21 women. 
18  participants  identified  as  Students  of  Color  and  15 
participants identified as white. All of the participants had 
completed  their  first  year  of  undergraduate  education. 
Twenty-five  participants  were  first  generation  college 
students.  22  students  declared  a  major  in  the  engineering, 
science,  or  technology  fields;  the  remaining  students 
majored in humanities, political science, business, or were 
undecided. The sample was split evenly between in and out 
of state students.  
Procedure 
We  conducted  semi-structured  interviews  with  first  year 
college students to learn about their transition experiences 
and  their  use  of  social  media  to  gain  college-related 
information  (from  the  time  they  were  a  senior  in  high 
school  until  the  end  of  their  first  year  in  college).  
Interviews  were  conducted  between  July  2014  and 
September  2014  and  ranged  from  45  to  90  minutes.  We 
conducted interviews until we reached saturation. Twenty-
five participants were interviewed using video conferencing 
software;  all  others  were  interviewed  in  person.  We 
compensated each participant $25 for their time.  
Each  interview  began  with  warm-up  questions  that  asked 
participants about their hometown, their summer plans, and 
how  they  thought  their  first  year  went.  The  interview 
protocol  also  covered  their  social  media  usage,  their  pre-
college transition experiences, and their campus transition. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Additionally, the interviewer asked participants about their 
social network site use, their social media posting practices, 
and  how  they  searched  for  information  online.  For  the 
latter,  we  asked  participants  how  they  attained  college-
going information (information needed to make a decision 
about  which  institution  to  enroll  in)  and  college-related 
information  (information  about  academic,  social,  and 
professional  aspects  of  college  they  would  need  to  ease 
their transition to the college environment).  
After  the  interview,  we  asked  participants  to  log  into 
Facebook and to talk about interactions on their page that 
related  to  college  (e.g.,  visual  artifacts  of  college  life, 
postings about campus events or class experiences). As they 
did  so,  we  asked  participants  to  identify  instances  where 
they  communicated  with  others  about  college  or  shared 
college-related information.  
Data Analysis 
The  first  author  inductively  coded  the  transcripts  for 
emerging  themes  [31]  using  Atlas.ti.  After  identifying  the 
relevance  of  information-seeking  about  college,  social 
media practices, and social support received through social 
media, a meta-matrix was developed to compare examples 
across participants [33]. When we revisited and organized 
the emergent themes from the interview data into the meta-
matrix, we focused on understanding how the themes found 
in the data could support the process of adaptation found in 
the  socialization  literature.  In  the  section  that  follows,  M 
(male) and F (female) denote participants’ gender and FG 
signifies first-generation students.  
RESULTS 
Learning How to Be College Students on Social Media  
Our  first  research  question  asked  how  disadvantaged 
college students used social media to observe role models 
and to identify roles and characteristics that they wanted to 
emulate. We found that participants turned to social media 
to connect with mentor-like figures who gave them advice 
about  how  to  succeed  in  college.  Another  way  that 
participants  learned  about  characteristics  they  wanted  to 
emulate  as  college  students  was  to  learn  not  from  one 
specific  individual,  but  from  the  aggregate  collection  of 
content produced by multiple people in their networks.  
We  asked  participants  how  they  learned  about  college 
before they arrived on campus. Some participants reported 
interacting  with  older  college  students  on  social  media 
about  whether  they  liked  college,  what  classes  they  took, 
and  what  they  planned  to  major  in.  Participants  learned 
from  more  senior  students’  posts  about  what  they  would 
experience in the near future. For example, as a high school 
senior,  P15  (F)  reported  getting  a  feel  for  college  culture 
through  pictures  or  comments  older  students  posted  on 
social media:  

So, during [my senior year of high school], I did 
follow  a  lot  of  people  that  went  to  my  high 
school, because some of them did graduate. They 

would tweet about how they felt about school or 
how  it  was  so  different  and  all  this  other  stuff. 
…And I would read some of their tweets to get a 
feel for it … [On] Instagram, people post a lot of 
pictures in college, so there’s all these pictures.  

The  composition  of  participants’  friends  network  affected 
the extent to which they could easily access college-going 
information  via  social  media.  We  observed  differences  in 
how participants used social media to gain college-related 
information based on whether they had an older sibling or 
relative  who  had  gone  to  college.  P10  (F)  used  Facebook 
Messenger to connect with her brother’s friends in college: 

My brother put me in contact with a few people 
that I sent messages to on Facebook just because 
it’s really easy to find people on Facebook if you 
just know their full name. So I did that, but other 
than  that  I  didn't  really  –  [I:  So  what  kind  of 
things did you ask the folks that your brother put 
you  in  contact  with?]  I  asked  them  general 
questions,  like  how  they  like  the  school.  Maybe 
what  the  classes  were  like,  and  what  their 
favorite and least favorite thing about the school 
was. 

In contrast, P21 (F, FG), a first-generation college student 
without siblings that attended college, said social media did 
not provide the kind of information she wanted to see:  
We [my friend and I] would say, ‘College is like 
[a]  strange  fantasy  land  we  don't  know  much 
about.’ For whatever reason, we noticed that on 
social  media,  college  students  who  we  followed 
wouldn’t  open  up  about  their  experiences.  We 
didn’t really receive that much insight into their 
experiences.  

For  college-related  information  during  their  first  year  of 
college, participants followed people or Facebook groups to 
keep up-to-date on information they would need to survive 
in college as well as to pursue professional interests (learn 
about strategies for the MCAT, a national standardized test 
for  medical  school  applicants,  or  the  LSAT,  a  national 
standardized  test  for  law  school  applicants).  P3  (F,  FG) 
noted how she liked using social network sites because they 
enabled her to “look and see what [her friends] are up to” 
and  to  use  Facebook  and  Twitter  “for  advice  about 
college—not necessarily the acceptance, but how to survive 
on a college diet, how to survive in a college dorm, how to 
not kill your roommate when you want to…” The extent to 
which  participants  actively  used  social  media  for  seeking 
college-related 
information  varied:  some  participants 
followed  people  they  knew  on  social  media  and  merely 
observed 
their  posts,  whereas  others  actively  asked 
questions and sought advice on how to be a college student. 
For instance, P3 (F, FG) noted that she was mostly a lurker, 
while  P15  (F)  told  us  that  she  actively  engaged  on  social 
media  and  relied  on  Twitter  to  share  and  find  quality 
college-related information:  

851

I tweet about my exams a lot, when I'm studying 
for exams… I want to tweet, ‘Hey, guys. Studying 
for an exam.’ And get right back to it. [laughter] 
So,  I  do  tweet  about  that  stuff…When  I  have 
advice about a class or I’m missing a class in my 
schedule, I’d tweet that, and the upper classmen 
actually  respond  and  tell  me  about  classes  or 
what  kind  of  professors,  or 
to 
ratemyprofessors.com.  They  do  tell  you  that 
stuff. I think that's really helpful.  

to  go 

Through  Twitter,  P15  (F)  also  communicated  with  older 
college  students  for  information  about  things  like  good 
study  spots  during  finals.  Similarly,  participants  with  a 
specific  career  in  mind  described  using  social  media  to 
connect  with  people  who  shared  their  interests.  For 
instance, P15 followed people at her school who were also 
pre-med  on  Twitter  in  order  to  monitor  what  they  were 
talking about and doing. Similar to P15 (F), P29 (M, FG) 
discussed how he paid attention to posts on Facebook about 
classes,  scholarships,  or  a  professional  development 
program that piqued his interest.  
Fourteen of our participants described how SNSs and other 
social  media  functioned  as  a  source  of  college-going  and 
college-related  information  –  either  by  observing  the 
content other users posted on the site or by facilitating one-
on-one direct messaging with  weak  ties  and/or  strong  ties 
who  were  inaccessible  (or  less  accessible)  offline.  In  the 
next  section,  we  discuss  how  students  enacted  provisional 
selves as college students during their first year in college.  
Enacting and Reaffirming Provisional College Identities 
Online  
Our second research question asked how the affordances of 
social media allowed individuals to enact and reaffirm their 
reconstructed  working  identity.  When  we  compared  first-
generation  and  traditional  college  students  in  our  sample 
with regard to how they enacted provisional selves via their 
social  media  practices,  we  did  not  see  major  differences 
with  the  exception  of  P11  (F,  FG).  P11,  who  strongly 
identified as a first-generation college student, used  social 
media to give advice to younger students at her high school 
and others in her network, who she knew would be going 
through  similar  experiences.  She  tweeted  about  which 
professors she liked, why she liked a certain class, and other 
memorable  college-related  experiences  that  she  thought 
might  be useful.  As  a  first-generation  college  student,  she 
hoped that younger first-generation students would benefit 
from her social media posts. 
At  the  beginning  of  their  first  year,  students  who  did  not 
express  strong  identification  as  first-generation  college 
students, such as P9 (F, FG), reported following university 
groups and ‘liking’ their posts to indicate her interests. P5 
(F, FG) shared new experiences she had with friends such 
as a casual get-togethers, fun dinners, or traveling photos. 
When asked what impression P15 (F) thought she presented 
to  her  audience  on  social  media,  she  mentioned  being 

852

SESSION: EDUCATION IN THE CLASSROOM AND BEYOND

motivated to show the more playful and positive aspects of 
her college identity:   

I  think  [the  audience]  would  think  that  I  really 
like  sports,  and  I  really  like  joking.  Like  when 
people try to take stuff really serious on Twitter, 
I'm really... I try to make it a joke. I don’t want 
people to be all sad. And I really care about... I 
tweet about my future a lot and my family. So, I 
think they'll know that I really look at the future.  

Our  analysis  suggested  that  participants  turned  to  social 
media  to  get  social  reaffirmation  and/or  social  support  by 
receiving  feedback  on  the  provisional  college  selves  that 
they  presented.  For  instance,  when  P18  (F)  passed  a 
difficult college class, she posted about it on Facebook, and 
received 31 ‘likes’ from her peers and family members. P14 
(F)  implied  that  she  was  motivated  to  change  her  profile 
picture  and  cover  photo  of  her  Facebook  page  to  a 
promotional  poster  for  a  student  organization  in  order  to 
receive  positive  feedback  in  the  forms  of  ‘likes’  and 
comments  on  Facebook.  Similarly,  P14  (F)  said  her 
motivation for changing her profile picture was a desire to 
reflect her feminist identity for a feminist group event and 
to gain positive reaffirmation from her friends and family:  

[I:  Who  were  the  groups  of  people  that  were 
responding  to  you?]  Mostly  people  from  my 
[feminist  organization]  group.  I  just  feel  like  a 
lot  of  the  friends  that  I  made  at  the  University 
really  identify  as  feminists,  so  I  think  that  they 
were  all  excited  about  it.  And  my  family 
members loved it, too. 

During  finals,  P29  (M,  FG)  told  us  that  college  students, 
including  himself,  posted  motivational  messages  about 
surviving finals on social media:   

I know a lot of my other friends, when finals will 
be  coming  or  something,  they  will  post  these 
statuses, kind of like motivational messages, and 
I love reading them because it’s like the stuff that 
I post too, but it also motivates me, like, ‘I can 
do this, finals are just a part of college, you can 
get through it.’  

These 
forms  of  encouragement  may  have  helped 
participants maintain and affirm new provisional identities 
under stressful or challenging conditions.  
Other participants noted that seeing posts about classmates’ 
success  on  social  media  motivated  them  to  maintain  their 
provisional  college  identities.  For  instance,  P29  (M,  FG) 
explained how seeing his friend get an internship made him 
happy and motivated:  

It kind of makes me proud and happy to see that 
other people are doing stuff too and not just me. 
It  makes  me  think,  ‘At  one  point,  I'll  be  doing 
that too.’ Not necessarily in that field, but I will 
be doing big things like that, like internships and 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

new jobs. It motivates me and makes me happy at 
the same time.  

We  observed  participants  comparing 
their  college 
experiences  with  their  peers  through  social  media,  which 
encouraged them to maintain a provisional college identity. 
Barriers to Sharing Online 
Our  last  research  question  asked  about  barriers  to  sharing 
college-related  information  online,  which  could  limit  the 
opportunities  presented  by  social  media  for  reconstructing 
identity work. Although participants used social media for 
gaining  a  perspective  on  what  it  was  like  to  be  a  college 
student,  they  were  careful  not  to  disclose  too  much 
information  due  to  the  visibility  of  their  social  media 
content  and  the  norms  of  sharing  information  on  social 
media  platforms.  Students  were  sensitive  about  sharing 
information  for  the  following  reasons:  perceived  fear  of 
judgment, perceived norms around sharing information on 
social  media,  privacy  concerns, 
inefficiency,  and  a 
perceived lack of intimacy.  
Perceived Fear of Judgment 
For our participants, one of the barriers to posting college-
related  information  on  social  media  was  the  perceived 
judgment from one’s social network. For instance, P7 (M, 
FG) assessed what to post based on responses he expected 
to  receive  from  family  members  and  friends  on  social 
media,  an  outcome  of 
the  “context  collapse”  often 
associated with sites such as Facebook [47]. He described 
how  he  refrained  from  posting  anything  personal  or 
negative  about  college  on  social  media  in  order  to  avoid 
responses from unintended audience members:  

I  really  try  to  keep  anything super  personal  off 
[social  media]...  Because  it  seems  like  college, 
everybody  thinks  that  they  know  more  about 
college  than  what  you  do  ...  So  you  post 
something like, ‘Oh man these classes are really 
killing  me!’  or  ‘Oh  man  why  do  I  have  to  do 
this?’ … Then all of a sudden you get these 20-
some odd comments about, ‘Oh, well, [P7], you 
need to be doing this because this or this or this’ 
and ‘it’s good for your future…’  

Similarly,  P31  (F,  FG)  expressed  concerns  about  being 
perceived as one-dimensional and too focused on college if 
she  posted  a  lot  of  content  about  college.  P21  (F,  FG) 
reported  manufacturing  an  exciting  social  media  presence 
that  did  not  fully  capture  all  dimensions  of  her  college 
experience:  

I  like  to  take  pictures  of  the  high  points  of  my 
week or the fun things I’m doing, and only share 
those and not share the six hours I spent in the 
library  or  how  I  just  took  a  five-hour  nap.  No 
one cares about those mundane things… Nobody 
wants  to  follow  a  boring  person…  I  just  think 
[positive  self-presentation]  makes 
for  more 
interesting  social  media  presence  and  I  also 

think  it  …  maybe  enhances  your  conversations 
once you finally see those people face-to-face.” 

P21 (F, FG) refrained from posting some questions publicly 
to  social  media  because  she  didn’t  want  to  appear 
unknowledgeable:  

I mean, you don’t really want to publicize [that] 
I’m not capable of figuring out where to find the 
best  cup  of  coffee.  You  don’t  really  want  to 
create  that  persona  about  yourself  on  social 
media.  

According 
to  Gershon,  prospective  employees  create 
corporate-friendly social media profiles, but their efforts are 
hindered  by  a  lack  of  flexible  self-presentation,  especially 
when  there  are  multiple  sets  of  audiences  to  address  and 
when  they  manage  self-presentation  across  multiple  SNS 
platforms [48]. Not only were participants concerned about 
how  they  would  be  perceived  by  their  social  group,  they 
were  also  concerned  about  the  risk  of  getting  judged  by 
future employers. P22 (M, FG) mentioned his concern for 
not showcasing something that could be detrimental to his 
goals  and  his  ability  to  realize  his  desired  future  self.  He 
described  how  he  deleted  his  Twitter  account,  because  he 
did not like what his fraternity friends were posting:  

I  deleted  Twitter.  It’s  just  out  of  control,  not 
mine,  other  people’s  ...  I  know  some  of  the 
pictures people have been posting and, I'm sorry, 
like your future employer will see these pictures. 
Or  maybe  your  McDonald’s  employer  will  not 
see  these  pictures,  but  they  don’t  care.  But  if 
you’re  planning  on  going  to  law  school,  or  if 
you’re  planning  on  going  into  law  enforcement 
… it makes me think that’s probably not a good 
decision,  or  posting  about  smoking  weed  or 
mollies. These things are illegal, and, if you want 
to  do  them,  I  don’t  care.  That’s  your  business. 
But  posting  about  doing  illegal  substances  on 
Facebook or on Twitter – like, come on!   

Perceived Social Norms on Social Media  
Participants  expressed  concerns  about  not  violating  the 
perceived social norms on Facebook by asking for college 
advice  publicly  on  social  media.  P31  (F,  FG)  told  us  that 
she was highly conscious about the fact that not everyone 
would appreciate her asking for college advice: 

It’s just that asking for college advice wouldn’t 
help the people in my social network necessarily, 
so it is kind of just a courtesy thing. I don’t scroll 
through  my  note  and  news 
feed  and  see 
something that is not relevant to me. So I think 
people are now just like, “Okay, if I don’t want 
to see that, I’m not going to make someone else 
see that.” 

When the interviewer asked her if it would be a bad thing to 
ask  questions  about  college,  her  response  noted  how  the 

853

collective social norm on Facebook prohibited people from 
seeking college-related information publicly: 

Facebook  is  not  really  the  place  to  do  it.  If 
people  do  ...  We  have  something  like  college 
workshops  and  college  seminars,  and  college 
night,  all  these  things.  People  are  pretty  much 
familiar with it and then if they have a question, 
they’ll  seek  you  personally.  It’s  not  really  a 
public  forum  or....  There  are  so  many  other 
places to do it publicly that it’s more acceptable, 
but Facebook is more just a social, like, “Here's 
my private, personal life.” You don’t really... If 
there’s  a  place  to  do  it  else  that’s  more 
professional, you’re going to do it there.  

Privacy Concerns  
Because  social  media  content  will  persist  over  time  and 
users  could  not  predict  who  would  see  their  posts  in  the 
future,  20  of  our  participants  reported  being  extremely 
careful  about  what  they  posted,  and  one  participant 
refrained from posting anything publicly altogether. P3 (F, 
FG)  commented  on  the  persistence  of  content  as  one 
primary  reason  for  only  posting  appropriate  materials. 
Thus, she defined appropriateness based on the test of time:  

I  feel  like  [social  media  content]  will  never 
disappear  on  Facebook,  and  I  feel  as  though 
most  people  are  always 
their 
perspectives.  So,  I  don’t  really  feel  the  need  to 
constantly  post  something  that  can  change  in 
days or months, a year.  

evolving 

P5 (F, FG) suggested that she considered searchability and 
visibility  of  her  identity  online  when  sharing  identity 
information using social media:   

 In the world we’re in now, your face-page really 
can  be  someone’s  first  impression  of  you.  …  I 
guess I try to filter the things that I post through 
‘how  much  would  I  respect  another  person  if 
they were posting this?’  

When P22 (M, FG) was applying to colleges, he considered 
tweeting  the  university’s  Twitter  account  questions  about 
college,  as  encouraged  by  the  college.  However,  knowing 
that all of his friends would see his questions stopped him 
from  posting  a  tweet  to  the  school’s  Twitter  account 
publicly  because  details  about  his  college  application 
process  were  not  “appropriate  for  [his]  friends  to  know.” 
High  school  seniors,  who  contacted  college  students  for 
advice,  also  expressed  concerns  around  privacy.  High 
school  seniors  from  P31’s  (F,  FG)  school  only  contacted 
her by Facebook Messenger or by texting to learn about her 
life away from home and at the university.  
Inefficiency and a Lack of Intimacy of the Public Channel  
P31 (F, FG), for one, said that she didn’t seek information 
from older college students through social media because it 
was inefficient and impersonal.  

SESSION: EDUCATION IN THE CLASSROOM AND BEYOND

Texting’s just easier than opening up the app to 
contact  someone.  And  I  feel  it’s  more  personal 
through  text  versus  just  a  quick  Facebook  wall 
post or something  

P25 (M, FG) also preferred texting to public posts because 
of privacy and because “I always carry my phone with me 
everywhere.” However, in terms of contacting people, some 
participants, such as P10 (F), reported finding it easier to do 
so through social media. 
Opportunities for Sharing Information  
The way participants used Facebook Groups also suggested 
that  this  feature  removed  some  of  the  barriers  to  sharing 
information  publicly.  P6  (F)  talked  about  how  Facebook 
groups  allowed  users  to  broadcast  information  to  many 
individuals  with  shared  interests,  without  having  to  know 
them personally. For instance, P6 (F) joined the Facebook 
group  for  the  university’s  honors  society,  where  people 
asked  for  advice  on  what  classes  to  take.  P28  (M,  FG) 
joined  a  group  for  students  interested  in  the  STEM  field, 
where  he  found  out  about  a  summer  STEM  program  at 
another university.  
Participants  mentioned  that  the  Facebook  Page  for  the 
university’s  incoming  class  of  first  year  students  was 
beneficial.  For  P5  (F,  FG),  a  Facebook  group  for  her 
graduating  class  allowed  her  to  connect  with  classmates 
before the beginning of school by finding out about shared 
interests:  

That’s  how  we  all  have  started  talking,  and  we 
ended up going on a trip together to Chicago to 
see  a  show  at  the  beginning  of  school  because 
we all started talking about it. So it just depends. 
Sometimes  I’ll  make  new  friends  over  those 
Facebook  groups,  but  for  the  most  part,  I’m 
interacting  with  people  that  I  know  or  people 
that I have some sort of connection to.  

We  find  that  participants  are  highly  conscious  about  what 
image they present on social media. The social norm around 
posting  only  positive,  interesting  aspects  of  their  lives 
generated a polished version of college life, which, unless 
participants had a connection that purposefully used social 
media to help incoming students or were a part of incoming 
first  year  students’  Facebook  group,  acted  as  a barrier  for 
social  media  to  be  an  efficient  channel  for  doing  identity 
work.  Norms  against  posting  negative  or  overly  candid 
content  may  have 
inhibited  expressions  of  a  wider 
repertoire of possible selves – expressions that could act as 
a bridge between the current state and one’s desired self. 
DISCUSSION 
Identity Work and Transitioning on Social Media  
Disadvantaged college students used social media platforms 
to  explore,  enact,  and affirm provisional  identities  as  they 
transitioned  into  college.  First,  disadvantaged  college 
students  used  social  media  to  observe  older  students’ 
identity  work,  which  was  made  visible  via  social  media 

854

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

college 

students 

they 

re-aligned 

disadvantaged 

postings.  Additionally,  they  made  use  of  social  media’s 
efficient access to association of ties and posed questions to 
older  students  that  acted  as  mentors.  This  helped  to 
demystify  the  transition  process,  as  disadvantaged  college 
students  gained  information  about  specific  academic  and 
social  challenges  they  might  face  in  college.  In  learning 
how  to  be  college  students  provisionally,  we  found  that 
older  siblings  or  relatives  played  a  significant  role  in 
breaking structural barriers by being a resource for the often 
unstated  “rules  of  the  game”  regarding  how  to  be  an 
effective  student  [29].  The  literature  on  student  retention 
focuses on whether parents have college experience or not, 
but we found that older siblings or relatives may be just as 
important for helping students navigate the process. In fact, 
we  found  that  social  media  can  amplify  these  benefits  by 
providing access to older siblings’ networks.  
enacted   
Second, 
provisional  college  selves  as 
role 
expectations. Students began to claim new roles as college 
students  by  posting  college-related  pictures  and  status 
updates.  On  social  media  and  other  online  contexts, 
students  constructed  positive  and  school-focused  college 
identities. Only P5 (F, FG) and P21 (F, FG), who described 
their first-generation status as salient to their identity, took 
the initiative to demystify aspects of college life for others 
as they constructed their college identity on social media.  
Lastly,  access  to  a  diverse  association  of  ties  on  social 
media  afforded  college  students  the  ability  to  gain  social 
support in the forms of ‘likes’ and comments, which helped 
forge  and  expand  their  present  working  identity.  Students 
showcased  interests  important  to  their  college  identity  – 
such  as  passing  a  test  or  getting  an  internship  –  and 
received positive feedback from family, friends from their 
hometown,  and  friends  from  college.  Relationships  with 
classmates and college groups are important for creating a 
context  for  students  to  determine  expectations  about  what 
their  identities  as  students  ought  to  and  will  be  [18].  Our 
findings indicate that students used social media to look at 
one  another’s  identity  work  and  motivated  one  another  to 
excel in their newfound identity in difficult times. Similar 
to  Ibarra’s  work,  we  found  that  adaptation  to  new  roles 
depends  not  only  on  looking  the  part  but  also  external 
validation from peer groups [24]. 
Our  analysis  suggests  that  these  social  media  affordances 
could help college students engage in identity work because 
these  affordances  resonate  with  social  and  psychological 
processes 
identified  as 
instrumental in constructing or modifying identities during 
transition [25]. According to Baumeister and colleagues [5], 
the mechanisms underlying the role of social interaction in 
altering  possible  selves  are  information  and  support, 
identification,  and  social  validation  and  comparison.  We 
found 
that  students’  engagement  on  social  media 
correspond 
tasks  Ibarra  claims  are 
instrumental for role changes [25]. For instance, seeking out 

researchers  have  previously 

to  core 

identity 

transitional 

information  about  various  aspects  of  college  life  was 
instrumental 
in  helping  students  establish  provisional 
identities.  Presenting  and  sharing  college-related  selves 
may help buffer newer, more provisional possibilities from 
the  rules  of  and  obligations  that  govern  more  established 
identities. Lastly, students reaffirmed college identity after 
they gained social support from social ties, which is one of 
the mechanisms underlying the role of social interaction in 
adopting possible selves.  
identity  work 
Our  findings  on  students’ 
complement  recent  research  exploring  how  social  media 
can  support  life-changing  events.  For  instance,  our  study 
extends  work  by  Haimson  et  al.  [22],  which  investigated 
how  online  self-presentation  opportunities  can  enable 
transgender  people  to  reinvent  their  personal  style.    Both 
Haimson  et  al.’s  and  our  findings  suggest  that  identity 
search,  exploration,  and  advice-seeking  behavior,  which 
resulted in ideas for possible and ideal future selves, need to 
be  supported  better  by  online  tools.  Haimson  et  al.  found 
that  the  complexities  of  self-presentation  online  during 
identity  change  would  benefit  from  design  that  better 
supports  a  public  aspect  of  change  management,  where 
users can constantly reassess and negotiate self in relation 
to others. They also called for a private, collaborative social 
system  with  more  control  over  privacy.  Ibarra  [24]  found 
that junior level professionals try out and adopt provisional 
selves  when  they  move  into  a  more  senior  role  within  a 
corporate  setting.  Our  work  may  extend  Ibarra’s  work  in 
that we look at how social media can supplement face-to-
face channels in supporting new employees’ identity work 
by connecting them to older and more experienced students 
[24].  Our  work  may  also  complement  existing  work  on 
supporting  fatherhood  on  social  media  sites  [3].  Ammari 
and  Schoenebeck  [3]  found  that  fathers,  whose  roles  are 
steadily changing, experience judgment and stigma online. 
They  suggested 
that  fathers  would  benefit  from  an 
anonymous  platform  that  allowed  them  to  comfortably 
communicate with one another [3].  
Our  analysis  posits  that  social  media  platforms  support 
identity  work  for  disadvantaged  college  students 
in 
transition; however, there are barriers to sharing aspects of 
college  life  that  may  constrain  them  from  benefiting  fully 
from all that the platforms afford. With the hope that these 
insights may facilitate the creation of useful socio-technical 
interventions,  the  next  section  proposes  design  conditions 
for  supporting  identity  work  on  social  media  during  a 
transition period.  Although  our  design  approaches  address 
the  needs  of  first-generation  and  low-income  college 
students, we believe they will also be useful for other users 
who may be undergoing identity transitions as well as the 
general population of first year college students.  
 
 
 

855

Design Approaches for Supporting Identity Work during 
a Transition Period 
Increase Visibility of Mentors  
Our analysis demonstrates that college students can engage 
in  external  identity  work,  but  the  extent  to  which  they 
utilize social media for identity play, or exploring possible 
self-images  that  they  could  adopt  [24],  is  limited.  The 
transition  from  possible  selves  to  adapting  a  new  role 
occurs  when  individuals  1)  observe  role  models  and 
identify elements they want to emulate; 2) experiment with 
provisional  selves  by  imitating  self-presentation  style  and 
distinct  traits  they  aspire  to;  and  3)  evaluate  which 
provisional selves to adopt [24]. 
In  order  to  rework  identities  in  practice,  social  network 
sites,  particularly  ones  that  serve  as  the  primary  SNS 
platform within a student group, could explore designs that 
enable incoming first year college students to find mentor-
like  students  to  help  them  find  personalized  information 
about college life as well as enable first-generation college 
students  in  the  same  cohort  to  compare  and  discuss 
experiences.  In  this  instance,  we  suggest  enhancing  the 
visibility and association of ties afforded by primary SNSs 
like Facebook in order to enable incoming first-generation 
college students, who have no mentor-like figures in their 
network,  to  search  for  and  find  students  who  are  already 
acting  as  mentors.  For  instance,  primary  SNSs  could 
increase  the  visibility  of  mentor-like  figures  by  adding  a 
search  engine  option  to  filter  for  potential  mentors  and 
making  these  results  more  visible,  which  capitalizes  on 
friend-of-friend  connections  on  the  site.  Our  data  suggest 
that  participants  who  happened  to  have  people  in  their 
social  network  who  could  advise  them  about  college 
benefited  from  being  better  prepared,  academically  and 
socially. However, those without siblings, friends, or older 
high schoolmates they could ask about college (such as P2, 
P15,  P18,  P21,  and  P23)  failed  to  gain  new  information 
about the college environment using social media.  
Reduce Perceived Risk of Judgment 
One  potential  benefit  of  social  media  for  college-related 
identity  work  is  the  information-sharing  potential  of  these 
platforms. For instance, incoming first-year college students 
might  see  others  post  about  everyday  experiences  in 
college,  thus  demystifying  the  process.  Or,  as  has  been 
shown in other work on adult samples [44], incoming first-
year college students could use sites like Facebook to post 
questions about college and receive answers from a diverse 
set of ties. However, social norms around posting behavior 
(such  as  an  emphasis  on  positive  experiences)  limit  these 
opportunities.  We  suggest  that  although  perceived  risk  of 
judgment  is  not  restricted  to  first-generation  and  low 
income  college  students,  they  may  be  more  negatively 
affected because they cannot compensate for these missed 
opportunities via other channels. Their higher SES and non-
first  generation  counterparts  are  likely  to  have  access  to 
other  sources  of  informal  knowledge  associated  with 
college  success,  but  first-generation  and 
low-income 

856

SESSION: EDUCATION IN THE CLASSROOM AND BEYOND

in  college,  such  as  difficult  classes  or 

college students’ opportunities for accessing these forms of 
informal knowledge are limited. Due to the perceived risk 
of judgment for seemingly not “getting it” or for violating 
social norms against posting mundane or negative content, 
students may be less likely to do so. Similarly, students are 
unlikely  to  turn  to  SNSs  to  address  challenges  they  may 
face 
living 
independently for the first time, for fear of being judged.  
Our analysis demonstrates that some college students, given 
the  right  resources  within  the  network,  already  engage  in 
question  asking.  However,  they  do  this  privately,  and 
students excluded from seeing these exchanges are unlikely 
to benefit from this information. Thus, one possible socio-
technical intervention is the introduction of campus-specific 
SNSs,  where  people  can  share  answers  with  others  from 
similar  backgrounds;  these  may  be  especially  helpful  for 
incoming  first-generation  college  students.  In  order  to 
reduce  the  perceived  risk  of  judgment,  we  recommend 
reducing the audience groups students have to consider by 
using SNSs specifically focused on campus life, such as the 
SpartanConnect  tool  created  at  Michigan  State  University 
[12].  Such  student-centered  social  media  could  allow 
students  to  1)  post  privately  and/or  anonymously  or  2) 
make posted content visible to others in their network only 
if they have matching interests or characteristics.  
Another  recommendation  from  our  findings  is  that  post-
secondary 
introducing 
anonymous  user  platforms,  which  would  minimize  online 
reputation  concerns  [49]  and  potentially  allow  for  more 
candid  exchanges  of  questions  and  answers.  SNS  could 
allow  users  to  identify  themselves  as  planning  to  attend  a 
particular  college  and  to  make  their  college-related  posts 
public to other users who  also plan  to  attend that college. 
We  suggest  that  disadvantaged  college  students  stand  to 
benefit from private, interest-based groups on social media, 
such as Facebook groups for incoming first year students, 
where  students  would  be  able  to  post  without  fear  of 
judgment  from  others,  especially  people  in  their  social 
network. In these groups, students who identify with certain 
identity characteristics (e.g., first-generation, pre-med, or a 
graduating  class)  would  be  able  to  find  content  posted  by 
people in their school network.  
Increase Awareness of Social Benefit to Sharing 
Incoming  college  students  would  also  benefit  from 
increased  exposure  to  non-idealized,  realistic  portraits  of 
college  life.  However,  perceived  norms  held  by  current 
college  students  that  favor  interesting,  college-related 
illustrations  that  cast  their  life  in  a  positive  light  could 
prevent  incoming  college  students  from  gaining  access  to 
less  idealized  college-related  information  from  a  broad 
range of individuals in their social network.  One way that 
social media can address this constraint may be to plan and 
implement  social  media  interventions,  as  suggested  by 
scholars like Reynol Junco, who envisions “an attempt by 
student  affairs  professionals  to  implement  something  that 

institutions  might 

explore 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

will  lead  to  desired  positive  student  outcomes”  [50].  Our 
findings  empirically  strengthen  Junco’s  call  for  social 
media interventions, for the current social media ethos lacks 
a culture of sharing informal knowledge relevant to student 
success.  According  to  Junco,  student  affairs  members  can 
proactively serve as role models on social media and share 
content that could help first-generation and/or low-income 
college  students  gain  informal  knowledge.  Future  work 
could  explore  audience  receptiveness  to  social  media 
interventions  enacted  by  student  affairs  staff.  Junco 
proposes  using  tools  within  Facebook  or  Hootsuite  to 
measure  the  effectiveness  of  measures  taken  to  promote 
informal learning [50]. 
Our  study  has  some  limitations.  In  reading  through  our 
findings, readers should be aware of the fact that we spoke 
with underrepresented college students from disadvantaged 
backgrounds at one institution. Our method was designed to 
surface  relevant  themes  and  was  not  intended  to  produce 
generalizable  results.  We  would  expect  to  find  different 
patterns  of  how  students  from  disadvantaged  backgrounds 
engage  in  identity  work  at  non-residential  institutions  like 
community colleges or teaching-focused institutions, where 
students are more likely to live at home or off-campus. For 
students  in  these  institutions,  social  media  participation 
might serve a different function. Similarly, the institution in 
this  study  had  substantial  support  resources  to  ease 
students’ first year transitions. Students at institutions with 
fewer  resources  may  have  different  experiences  and  use 
social  media  to  different  ends.  Thus,  more  research  is 
needed  to  understand  first  year  college  transitions  for 
students at other institutions, such as those that have fewer 
resources for first year students or whose students live off 
campus  during  their  first  year,  as  community  college 
students often do. Future work in this area should also carry 
out a similar study with non first-generation or low-income 
first-year college students in order to identify how specific 
challenges apply to specific groups.   
CONCLUSION 
Our analysis explored how disadvantaged first-year college 
students  experienced becoming  a  college  student  and  how 
they  used  social  network  sites  “in  between”  two  liminal 
identity  roles:  transitioning  from  adolescents  living  with 
family members at home into independent college students 
at  the  beginning  of  the  emerging  adulthood  phase  [4]. 
Qualitative  data  collected  from  31  first-year  college 
students  in  transition  reveal  that  social  media  affordances 
have the capacity to support adaptation to a new role and its 
environment through three basic practices: 1) learning how 
to be college students by discovering roles and expectations 
due  to  association  of  ties  and  visibility,  2)  editing  and 
constructing  a  provisional  college  identity  online,  by 
presenting  unique 
their 
reconstructed  role  as  a  college  student,  and  3)  gaining 
access to geographically far social ties. Although social and 
technical barriers exist, first-generation and/or low-income 
first year college students can use social media to support 

identity  cues 

specific 

to 

transition  to  college  by  gathering  information  that  could 
shape aspects of their college identity. 
Helping  marginalized  students  attain  their  post-secondary 
goals  is  crucial.  This  study  extends  the  literature  by 
providing  empirical  support  for  how  college  students  use 
SNSs as a liminal space to conduct identity work during an 
important  life  transition  from  high  school  to  college.  We 
found that, although limitations exist, SNSs could support 
emerging  adults  by  providing  a  resource  to  imagine, 
construct, and strengthen college-relevant identities. Certain 
social media activities could enrich emerging adults’ ability 
to engage in successful transitions. As a result, social media 
should be considered as one of many factors that contribute 
to  young  peoples’  ability  to  successfully  embrace  their 
college-focused identities.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We  are  grateful  to  our  participants  for  sharing  their 
experiences.  This  research  was  produced  with  funding 
support from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.  
REFERENCES 
1.  Pew Research Center. 2014. The rising cost of not 

going to college. Retrieved July 23, 2015 from 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2014/02/11/the-rising-
cost-of-not-going-to-college/  

2.  Geri C. Tucker. 2014. First generation peers are 

providing academic, moral, and social support to a 
vulnerable population of students. The Chronicle of 
Higher Education. Retrieved July 22, 2015 from 
http://diverseeducation.com/article/61167/  

3.  Tawfiq Ammari and Sarita Y. Schoenebeck. 2015. 

Understanding and supporting fathers and fatherhood 
on social media sites. In Proceedings of the ACM 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI '15). Seoul, Korea. April 18-23, 2015. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702205 

4.  Jeffrey J. Arnett. 2000. Emerging adulthood: A theory 

of development from the late teens through the 
twenties. American Psychologist 55, 5: 469.  

5.  Roy F. Baumeister, Ellen Bratslavsky, Mark Muraven, 
and Dianne M. Tice. 1998. Ego depletion: is the active 
self a limited resource? Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology 74, 5: 1252. 

6.  Martha J. Bailey and Susan M. Dynarski. 2011. Gains 
and gaps: Changing inequality in US college entry and 
completion. National Bureau of Economic Research. 
7.  danah boyd. 2007. Why youth (heart) social network 
sites: The role of networked publics in teenage social 
life. MacArthur foundation series on digital learning–
Youth, identity, and digital media volume. 119-142. 
8.  danah boyd. 2010. Social network sites as networked 

publics: Affordances, dynamics, and implications. Zizi 
Papacharissi (ed.), A Networked Self. Routledge, New 
York, NY, 39–58. 

857

9.  Xianglei Chen. 2013. STEM Attrition: College 

Students’ Paths Into and Out of STEM Fields (NCES 
2014-001). National Center for Education Statistics, 
Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of 
Education. Washington, DC. 

10.  Jonathan E. Cook, Valerie Purdie-Vaughns, Julio 

Garcia, and Geoffrey L. Cohen. 2012. Chronic threat 
and contingent belonging: Protective benefits of values 
affirmation on identity development. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 102: 479-496. 

11.  Susan E. Cross and Hazel Rose Markus. 1994. Self-

schemas, possible selves, and competent performance. 
Journal of Educational Psychology 86: 423-438. 

12.  David C. DeAndrea, Nicole B. Ellison, Robert LaRose, 

Charles Steinfield, and Andrew Fiore. 2012. Serious 
social media: On the use of social media for improving 
students' adjustment to college. The Internet and 
Higher Education 15, 1: 15-23.  

13.  Carmen DeNavas-Walt, Bernadette D. Proctor, and 
Jessica, C. Smith. 2012. Income, poverty, and health 
insurance coverage in the United States: 2011. U.S. 
Department of Commerce. U.S. Government Printing 
Office. Washington, D. C.  

14.  Maeve Duggan, Nicole B. Ellison, Cliff Lampe, 

Amanda Lenhart, and Mary Madden. 2015. Social 
media update 2014. Pew Research Center. 

15.  Nicole B. Ellison. 2013. What is, and will be, the 

impact of social media on identity? Report 
commissioned by the UK Government Office for 
Science for a Foresight project on The Future of 
Identity. 

16.  Nicole B. Ellison and danah boyd. 2013. Sociality 

through social network sites. In The Oxford Handbook 
of Internet Studies, William H. Dutton (ed.). Oxford 
University Press, Oxford, 151-172. 

17.  Jennifer Engle and Vincent Tinto. 2008. Moving 

beyond access: college success for low-income, first-
generation students. Pell Institute for the Study of 
Opportunity in Higher Education. 

18.  Connie J. Gersick, Jean M. Bartunek, and Jane E. 

Dutton. 2000. Learning from academia: the importance 
of relationships in professional life. The Academy of 
Management Journal 43, 6: 1026-1044. 

19.  Ervin Goffman. 1959. The Presentation of Self in 

Everyday Life. Double Day, Garden City, N.Y. 
20.  Amy L. Gonzales and Jeffrey T. Hancock. 2011. 
Mirror, mirror on my Facebook wall: Effects of 
exposure to Facebook on self-esteem. 
Cyberpsychology, Behavior & Social Networking 14, 
1-2: 79-83. 

21.  Patricia Gurin, Biren A. Nagda, and Ximena Zuniga.  
2013. Dialogue Across Difference: Practice, Theory, 

SESSION: EDUCATION IN THE CLASSROOM AND BEYOND

and Research on Intergroup Dialogue. Russel Sage 
Foundation, New York, NY. 

22.  Oliver L. Haimson, Anne E. Bowser, Edward F. 
Melcer, & Elizabeth F. Churchill. 2015. Online 
inspiration and exploration in identity reinvention. In 
Proceedings of CHI 2015.  

23.  Eszter Hargittai. 2008. The digital reproduction of 

inequality. In Social Stratification, David Grusky (ed). 
Westview Press, Boulder, CO, 936-944.  
24.  Herminia Ibarra. 1999. Provisional selves: 

experimenting with image and identity in professional 
adaptation. Administrative Science Quarterly: 764-791.  

25.  Herminia Ibarra. 2005. Identity transitions: possible 
selves, liminality and the dynamics of career change: 
INSEAD. Working paper. 

26.  Reynol Junco. 2012. Too much face and not enough 
books: The relationship between multiple indices of 
Facebook use and academic performance. Computers 
in Human Behavior 28, 1: 187-198. 

27.  Reynol Junco. 2013. Inequalities in Facebook use. 
Computers in Human Behavior 29, 6: 2328-2336.  
28.  Reynol Junco, Dan Merson, and Daniel W. Salter.  

2010. The effect of gender, ethnicity, and income on 
college students' use of communication technologies. 
Cyber Psychology, Behavior, and Social Networking 
13, 6: 619-627.  

29.  Hazel R. Markus and Alana Conner. 2013. Clash! 8 

Cultural Conflicts That Make Us Who We Are. Hudson 
Street Press, New York, NY.  

30.  Hazel R. Markus and Paula Nurius. 1986. Possible 

selves. American Psychologist 41, 9: 954.  

31.  Joseph A. Maxwell. 2012. Qualitative Research 
Design: An Interactive Approach. (3rd ed). Sage 
Publications, Washington, DC. 

32.  Eugene, D. Mead. 1990. Effective Supervision: a Task-

Oriented Model for the Mental Professions. 
Brunner/Mazel, Philadelphia, PA.   

33.  Matthew B. Miles, Michael A. Huberman, and Johnny 
Saldaña. 2013. Qualitative Data Analysis: A Methods 
Sourcebook. Sage Publications, Washington, DC.  
34.  Pell Institute. Six year degree attainment rates for 

students enrolled in a post-secondary institution. 2011. 
Pell Institute Fact Sheet. Retrieved May 20, 2015 from 
http://www.pellinstitute.org/downloads/fact_sheets-6-
Year_DAR_for_Students_Post-
Secondary_Institution_121411.pdf.   

35.  Nurit Shnabel, Valerie Purdie-Vaughns, Jonathan E. 

Cook, Julio Garcia, and Geoffrey L. Cohen. 2013. 
Demystifying values-affirmation interventions: Writing 
about social belonging is a key to buffering against 
identity threat. Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin 39, 663-676. 

858

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

49.  Judith S Donath. 1999. Identity and deception in the 

virtual community. Communities in Cyberspace, 1996, 
29-59.  

50.  Reynol Junco. 2014. Engaging Students through Social 

Media: Evidence-Based Practices for Use in Student 
Affairs. John Wiley & Sons. 

 

 

36.  Shannon D. Smith and Judy B. Caruso. 2010. ECAR 

study of undergraduate students and information 
technology. EDUCAUSE Center for Applied Research, 
Boulder, CO.  

37.  David A. Snow and Leon Anderson. 1987. Identity 

work among the homeless: the verbal construction and 
avowal of personal identities. The American Journal of 
Sociology 92, 6: 1336-1371. 

38.  Nicole, M. Stephens, Tiffany, N. Brannon, Hazel R. 

Markus, and Jessica E. Nelson. 2015. Feeling at home 
in college: fortifying school-relevant selves to reduce 
social class disparities in higher education. Social 
Issues and Policy Review 9, 1: 1-24.  

39.  Terrell L. Strayhorn. 2012. College Students’ Sense of 

Belonging: a Key to Educational Success for All 
Students. Routledge, New York, NY.  

40.  Vincent Tinto. 1998. Learning communities and the 

reconstruction of remedial education in higher 
education. In Conference on Replacing Remediation in 
Higher Education at Stanford University. 

41.  Catalina L. Toma. 2010. Affirming the self through 

online profiles: beneficial effects of social networking 
sites. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1749-1752. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1753326. 

42.  Jeffrey W. Treem and Paul M. Leonardi. 2012. Social 
media use in organizations: Exploring the affordances 
of visibility, editability, persistence, and association. 
Communication Yearbook 36: 143-189.  

43.  John van Mannen and Edgar H. Schein. 1979. Toward 
a theory of organizational socialization. In Research in 
Organizational Behavior, Barry M. Staw (ed). 209-64. 

44.  Jessica Vitak and Nicole B. Ellison. 2013. ‘There’s a 

network out there you might as well tap’: Exploring the 
benefits of and barriers to exchanging informational 
and support-based resources on Facebook. New Media 
& Society 15, 2: 243-259.  

45.  Joseph B. Walther. 2011. Theories of computer- 

mediated communication and interpersonal relations. 
In  (4th. ed.),  Mark L. Knapp and John A. Daly (eds.). 
Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA. 

46.  Karl E. Weick and Frances Westley. 1999. 

Organizational learning: Affirming an oxymoron. 
Managing Organizations. 190-208. 

47.  Alice E. Marwick and danah boyd. 2010. I Tweet 

Honestly, I Tweet Passionately: Twitter Users, Context 
Collapse, and the Imagined Audience. New Media & 
Society. http://doi:10.1177/1461444810365313 

48.  Ilana Gershon. 2014. Selling Your Self in the United 

States. PoLAR: Political and Legal Anthropology 
Review 37, 2: 281-295.  

859

