CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

“Thanks for your interest in our Facebook group, but it's 

only for dads:” Social Roles of Stay-at-Home Dads   

Tawfiq Ammari, Sarita Schoenebeck 

School of Information 
University of Michigan 

{tawfiqam,yardi}@umich.edu 

ABSTRACT 
The number of stay-at-home dads (SAHDs) in the U.S. has 
risen  dramatically  over  the  past  30  years.  Despite  gaining 
social  acceptability,  SAHDs  still  experience  isolation  and 
judgment  in  their  offline  environments.  This  research 
explores  how  SAHDs  use  the  Internet  and  social  media 
related  to  their  roles  as  fathers.  We  conducted  interviews 
with  18  SAHDs  about  their  families,  their  identities,  and 
their  social  experiences.  We  find  that  they  turn  to  social 
media  to  gain  social  support  and  overcome  isolation  they 
experience offline. However, they engage in strategic self-
disclosure on particular platforms to avoid judgment related 
to being SAHDs. They rely on online platforms to give off 
both traditionally feminine and masculine impressions—as 
loving caregivers of their children while simultaneously as 
do-it-yourself  men  who  make  things  around  the  house. 
Through  creating  Facebook  groups  and  using  anonymous 
social  media  sites,  SAHDs  create  multidimensional  social 
networks  that  allow  them  to  cope  better  with  the  role 
change.  We  reflect  on  the  evolving  roles  of  SAHDs  in 
society,  and  put  forth  an  argument  for  greater  support  for 
diverse kinds of parenting online. 
Author Keywords 
Stay-at-Home Dads; Role Theory; Self-Presentation; Social 
Network Sites; Social Media  
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous. 
INTRODUCTION 
Historically  in  the  United  States,  mothers  have  held  the 
primary  role  of  homemaker  and  caretaker  in  the  home, 
while  fathers  have  worked  in  paid  employment  outside  of 
the  home  [43,54].  In  recent  decades,  this  imbalance  has 
shifted  and  mothers  have  been  employed  outside  of  the 
home in increasing numbers. At the same time, gender roles 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  the  author(s)  must  be 
honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or 
republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific  permission 
from 
Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW  '16,  February  27-March  02,  2016,  San  Francisco,  CA,  USA 
Copyright  is  held  by  the  owner/author(s).  Publication  rights  licensed  to 
ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819927 

fee.  Request  permissions 

and/or 

a 

1363

targeted 

share 

similar 

towards  mothers, 

are  also  beginning  to  shift,  with  fathers  doing  more 
housework and childcare than they previously used to [54]. 
Although father involvement is growing, societal norms lag 
in  a  variety  of  ways  (e.g.,  “mommy”  groups,  parenting 
advertisements 
etc.). 
Furthermore,  mothers  are  still  doing  more  overall  work 
inside  and  outside  of  the  home  [54].  This  problem  was 
highlighted  in  Hochschild  and  Machung’s  seminal  book, 
The  Second  Shift,  which  described  the  shiftwork  mothers 
took on related to homemaking and childrearing, in addition 
to  their  first  shift  in  the  workplace  [34].  However,  in  the 
book, they also share a story of a father finding himself out 
of place when taking his child to the park because all of the 
other  caretakers  in  the  park  are  either  stay-at-home  moms 
(SAHMs) or female domestic workers [34]. 
While the father described is still part of a minority group 
among  parents  in  the  U.S.,  there  are  currently  over  2 
million  SAHDs  and  the  number  continues  to  rise  [49]. 
Although  SAHDs 
responsibilities  as 
SAHMs—performing  domestic  work  and  child  rearing 
duties—SAHDs  face  distinct  challenges.  They  have  to 
balance  their  home  responsibilities  with  their  identities  as 
men  who  stay  at  home  with  their  children,  defying 
and 
traditional 
responsibilities 
affecting 
fatherhood,  such  as  paternal  leave,  vary  by  country.  Even 
within 
to  be  rather 
substantial  policy  differences  between  social  welfare 
systems  in  different  countries.  For  example,  Lister  [48] 
demonstrates  differences  arising  between 
the  more 
generous Nordic countries on the one hand and the UK and 
the U.S. on the other. Our focus is on the experiences of a 
largely middle and upper class population of SAHDs in the 
U.S.,  who  share  distinctive  experiences  and  goals  in  their 
roles as SAHDs. 
Recent  literature  has  described  how  parents  go  online  to 
find  social  support  and  to  overcome  judgment  they  might 
experience  in  their  offline  environments  [5,6,23,37,62]. 
However, much of that work has focused on mothers rather 
than fathers. Research that has addressed the role of fathers 
in  particular  examines  how  two  SAHDs  use  social  media, 
but the sample in the study was small [5]. We build on that 
work  here  to  understand  how  SAHDs  use  social  media 
related to their roles and identities as SAHDs. We explore 
the following research questions: 

the  western  world, 

[16,17,58,59,73]. 

stereotypes 

there 

tends 

about 

gender 

roles 

Policies 

RQ1: In what ways do SAHDs in the U.S. use social media 
related to their roles as SAHDs? 
RQ2: In what ways does social media support—or inhibit—
social roles and identities in the lives of SAHDs? 
RQ3: How do social media sites help SAHDs transition to 
their new roles? 
We discuss role theory and impression management in the 
context of SAHDs and their families. We also describe the 
“do-it-yourself”  language  used  by  fathers  to  embrace  and 
publicly  express  their  multiple  roles  and  identities.  This 
research  takes  a  first  step  at  understanding  how  social 
media supports SAHDs and contributes to a broader agenda 
of supporting diverse families offline and online. 
RELEVANT WORK 
Stay-at-Home Dads 
SAHDs  are  a  rapidly  growing  population  in  the  United 
States. The population of SAHDs nearly doubled from 1989 
to 2010 (from 1.1 million to 2.2 million) [49]. The jump has 
been attributed in part to high unemployment rates around 
the recession in the early 2000s, but the long-term growth 
has been attributed to an increase in fathers who stay home 
for the purpose of caring for their children [49]. Rochlen et 
al.  find  that  SAHDs  reported  higher  life  satisfaction  and 
parenting self-efficacy scores, and lower scores on metrics 
of  gender  roles  than  other  fathers  of  similar  age  [58]. 
Zimmerman [75] argued that SAHDs differed from SAHMs 
mainly  in  that  they  do  not  “socialize  with  other  stay-at-
home parents.” She noted that the lack of their socialization 
might be due to their relatively small numbers which makes 
finding nearby SAHDs difficult.  
Parenting  attitudes  are  moderated  not  only  by  parenting 
beliefs,  but  also  by  parents’  own  social  networks  [64]. 
Rochlen et al. [58], who had used SAHD online networks to 
recruit participants in their studies, noted that social support 
is  quite  important  for  SAHDs  and  these  fathers  might  not 
feel  as  much  support  from  mother  primary  caregivers  as 
they  would  from  fellow  SAHDs.  In  a  follow-up  study, 
Rochlen  et  al.  investigated  two  majors  areas:  (1)  reasons 
men  give  for  becoming  SAHDs  and  (2)  stigma  they 
experience in that role [59]. They found that 52% of fathers 
gave  “pragmatic”  or  work-related  reasons  which  typically 
related to father unemployment or higher earning mothers, 
while  a  smaller  proportion  (35%)  noted  chance,  childcare 
options,  values,  and  “better  fit”  as  reasons  for  being 
SAHDs.  In  their  second  line  of  inquiry,  they  found  that 
fathers  with  less  social  support  felt  more  stigmatized  than 
fathers  with  greater  social  support  [59].  While  SAHDs 
taking  part  in  Rochlen  et  al.’s  study  reported  that  friends 
and family generally supported them, they still felt judged 
by  extended  family  members  as  well  as  by  mothers  in 
parenting 
to 
playgroups.  They  also 
that  SAHDs  defined 
masculinity  in  “personal  and  flexible”  terms  but  reported 

taking  children 

functions 

related 

found 

like 

1364

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

take  on 

that  while  SAHDs 

feeling  pressure  to  be  breadwinners,  a  finding  echoed  in 
other SAHD studies as well [17,60,75].  
Research  suggests 
the 
traditionally  feminine  caretaking  role  [20],  they  are  still 
doing “masculine things” like maintaining cars and mowing 
the  grass  [17,60].  Doucet  [17]  termed  SAHDs’  work  at 
home as self-provisioning. In one example, she described a 
father  who 
is  proud  of  his  renovations  and  makes 
“homemade baby food” and award-winning cakes. She also 
argued that  SAHDs attempted to either  maintain part-time 
jobs or  work from home in order to maintain  traditionally 
masculine roles. 
Social Role Theory 
Social  role  theory  stipulates  that  people  follow  societally 
constructed stereotypes. Sarbin [61] argues that social roles 
represent  “the  part  one  is  assigned  to  play”  in  Goffman’s 
[24]  dramaturgical  tradition.  The  three  main  concepts  of 
social  roles  are:  (1)  social  position;  (2)  role  expectations 
and (3) role enactment [2]. The social position defines the 
person’s  “location  in  the  social  system,”  for  example; 
husband  and  wife  are  two  distinct  social  positions.  Role 
expectations define what people ought to do when assuming 
a  social  role.  They  are  constituted  through  societally 
constructed stereotypes. For example, men are expected to 
be  more agentic, and  women  more communal  [20]. These 
perceptions are linked to normatively held views of gender 
roles,  especially  the  boundary  between  the  domestic 
(caregiving females) and the professional (working males). 
Role  enactment  measures  the  alignment  between  role 
expectations and individual behavior. For example, does a 
male act as the role expectations suggest?  Role ambiguity 
occurs  when  people  cannot  determine  the  normative 
expectations of their supposed roles [7]. When people face 
role ambiguity, they cannot tell “what is desired [of them] 
and  how  to  do  it”  [7].  Role  ambiguity  affects  both  role 
expectations  which  become  unclear  as  well  as  role 
enactment which is difficult to measure. 
Social expectations change over time. Men in the colonial 
era in the U.S. used to take part in domestic work such as 
mending  leather  clothing  (e.g.,  shoes),  and  tasks  that 
required  “brute  force”  [14]  such  as  carrying  wood  and 
grounding  corn.  As 
increasingly 
industrialized,  the  work  typically  ascribed  to  men  moved 
outside the home and into the city [56], while women took 
on  more  domestic  responsibilities.  This  spurred 
the 
traditional  breadwinning  and  domestic  labor  divisions  that 
persist  today  [14].  Traditions  and  culture  are  important  in 
determining how fathers make sense of their roles [39,63]. 
Even  within  among  a  specific  cultural  group  of  “White, 
North  American,  middle-class”  fathers  [39],  employment 
differences lead to different perceptions and identities in the 
role 
(e.g.,  “stay-at-home”  versus 
“unemployed”) [63]. 
Eagly argues that the roles and stereotypes held by a society 
at  any  time  depend  not  on  the  cultural  traditions  of  the 

the  U.S.  became 

fathers  play 

that 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

society, but on the “contemporary division of labor between 
sexes”  [20].  The  “father-as-breadwinner”  norm  remains 
strongly linked to the stereotypical view of the male gender 
[42,56]  while  the  “mother-as-caregiver”  stereotype  is  also 
derived  from  mothers’  long-term  connection  between 
women and the domestic work [18]. However, gender roles 
are  established  and  reinforced  through  social  interaction 
[26].  Mothers  enact  their  gender  roles  by  producing,  and 
reproducing, the appropriate “gender display” [26] (cited in 
[72]). This might explain the lag between the rising level of 
fatherhood  engagement  today  and  the  persistent  societal 
view of fathers as under-engaged [42].  
Fathers Enacting Domestic Roles 
Recent research shows that while mothers still do more in 
the domestic sphere than fathers, fathers are closing the gap 
[44]. A study of families in the wake of the financial crisis 
of 2008 argued that the rise in number of SAHDs might be 
linked to economic changes which made men’s place in the 
labor  market  less  certain,  and  even  when  they  found 
employment, less stable [10]. Gorman-Murray’s [27] study 
of upper-middle class families in Sydney after the financial 
crisis  found  that  the  crisis  enabled  men  to  invest  less  in 
their work and more in the home as a “site of self-worth.” 
This  study  described  fathers  who  took  on  “do-it-yourself” 
(DIY) projects at home. These projects, including cooking 
and interior design, became a “creative outlet” for fathers. 
In one example, a father emphasized, “not only does he do 
the cooking—he built the kitchen!”  
Moisio  et  al.  [51]  argue  that  productive  consumption 
through  DIY  projects  provides  men,  especially  those  with 
lower social and cultural capital, with a conduit to achieve 
domestic  masculinism  [51].  Cowan  [14]  similarly  argues 
that  DIY  projects  have  not  traditionally  been  considered 
feminine,  even  when  dealing  with  traditionally  feminine 
activities. Women’s  magazines  would provide DIY advice 
for  women  as  a  last  refuge  in  the  “unfortunate”  case  that 
they  were  singlehandedly  responsible  for  domestic  work. 
On the other hand, even men with higher social and cultural 
capital were found to engage in domestic DIY projects as a 
masculine asset (e.g., suburban craftsman) [14]. This view 
was  also  echoed  in  Hochschild  and  Machung  when  a 
husband  and  wife  decided  on  a  division  of  labor  that 
allotted  most  of  the  domestic  work  to  the  wife  in  the 
“kitchen”  while  the  husband’s  domestic  domain  included 
the “downstairs” in “his” garage. Cleaning the garage while 
also  tinkering  in  it  allowed  the  husband  to  negotiate 
economic conditions and gender norms [34].   
Role Transition and Social Support 
Role transitions occur when people transition from one “set 
of  expected”  behaviors  to  another  set.  Another  way  role 
transitions  occur  is  when  when  one  occupies  the  same 
social  position  while  the  expected  social  roles  change  [2]. 
Becoming  a  mother  for  example,  is  a  considered  a  role 
transition [22] and can be a cause for role strain [55]. Blau 
[8] argued that in any “significant role change the integrity 

in 

of the self is jeopardized to some degree.” Allen and Vliert 
[2] refer to this stress as role strain. Role strain produces a 
sense  of  disequilibrium  or  disorder 
the  person 
undergoing role transition [61]. When having to cope with 
new  roles,  people  use  rhetorical  acts  to  disclose  their 
attempts  to  conform  to  the  role  [61].  Sarbin  gives  the 
example  of  the  first  female  coal  miner  in  an  Appalachian 
mine, traditionally a masculine bastion, and how she had to 
explicitly maintain rhetorical acts that would make her look 
more like a male coal miner [61].   
Johnson  and  Sarason  [36]  noted  that  social  support  is  an 
important aspect in coping with life changes. Such support 
allows people to better react to role transitions to eventually 
arrive  at  better  conclusions  as  they  go  through  role 
transitions.  Therefore,  social  support  is  considered  one  of 
the  moderators  of  role  transition  as  is  shown  in  the  role 
transition model suggested by Allen and Vliert [2] in Figure 
1. They  argue  that  social  support  and  a  person’s  network
structure  are  important  environmental  moderators  of  role 
transition in their model. 

Figure 1. Model for Role Transition Process from [2]. 

Social support helps people dealing with social role changes 
through  four  main  paths:  “(1)  explicit  recognition  of 
identities; (2) implicit recognition of identities; (3) pleasant 
social  interactions  as  an  increasingly  satisfying  dimension 
of  the  role;  and  (4)  aid  in  dealing  with  problematic  or 
stressful role situations” [30]. Social support through any of 
these paths can be included in the “moderators” component 
of  the  role  transition  model.  These  paths  allow  people  to 
transition  more  efficiently  to  new  social  roles  through 
limiting role strain, which moderates their reactions to role 
change. Having better consequences when transitioning to a 
new  role  is  also  served  by  having  moderators.  It  is 
important  to  note  that  social  support  is  reliant  on  one’s 
social network structure. 
Different Social Network Structures and Social Support 
Wellman  [71]  points  out  that  one’s  ties  are  not  always 
supportive. Most people are members of a number of social 
networks  embedded 
in  different  social  spheres.  The 
network  structures  people  are  embedded  in  matter.  Hirsch 
[32]  provides  empirical  support  to  the  importance  of 
multidimensional  networks  in  coping  with  role  transitions 
in his study of recently widowed women and women over 
the  age  of  30  who  went  back  to  college.  He  found  that 

1365

their 

former 

roles  as 

“women  with  multidimensional  friendships  could  enlarge 
those  spheres  of  activity  [that]  …  did  not  depend 
exclusively  on 
spouse  and 
homemaker” [28] thus allowing them to  transition to their 
new role more easily. Hirsch [31] argues that having lower 
density  social  networks  with  a  number  of  dense  clusters 
would allow one to more easily transition to newer roles.  
Since  women  have  increasingly  assumed  non-traditional 
roles  by  accessing  the  labor  market,  new  social  roles  for 
women  who  became  mothers  caused  role  strain  primarily 
due to role ambiguity [22]. Women now had to transition to 
being  mothers,  while  also  considering  how  that  role  has 
changed  with  new  economic  realities.  Richardson  and 
Kagan [57], cited in Hirsch and Jolly [30], argue that new 
mothers transitioned to their parenting role better when they 
had  support  from  less  dense  networks  that  were  able  and 
willing to “support the woman as a mother, wife, daughter, 
daughter-in-law;”  that  is,  when  new  mothers  were  able  to 
draw support from multiple dimensions of their networks as 
they transition to the new role of parenting.  
While dense overlapping networks can provide one with a 
greater  amount  of  support,  they  can  also  constrain  one’s 
role transition according to the norms held by the network 
[28,31].  Low-density,  multidimensional  networks  provide 
one  with  a  “variegated  repertoire  of  ties”  that  provide  a 
diverse set of roles within each dimension of their network. 
People  can  “shop  for”  help  from  different  parts  of  their 
network when transitioning to new roles [71]. Wilcox [74] 
offers an interesting example of the disadvantages that one 
might  face  when  receiving  support  from  densely  knit  kin 
networks.  He  studied  the  transition  of  women  recently 
separated.  Somewhat  paradoxically, 
family  members 
tended to be emotionally supportive, but at the same time, 
more 
their 
networks.  To  be  “more  adaptive  to  the  demands  of  a 
modern  industrial  society  that  is  undergoing  continuous 
social change and in which many of its personnel are likely 
to be highly mobile, both geographically and socially,” [45] 
one  should  be  able  to  access  different  resources  from 
multiple dimensional networks.  
Impression Management on Social Media 
To  examine  how  SAHDs  use  social  media,  we  draw  on 
literature on impression management and self-presentation, 
especially  as  they  relate  to  gender  and  parenting.  Eagley 
and  Wood  [19]  suggest  that  when  acting  in  front  of  an 
audience,  the  salience  of  “normative  standards”  increases 
with self-presentation goals. Leary defines self-presentation 
as a process in which a person controls how others perceive 
her  [46].  People  selectively  provide  information  and  react 
to  feedback  from  audiences  in  order  to  maintain  a  certain 
self-image [24].  
Social media sites provide people with a chance to engage 
in  selective  self-presentation  [70].  Social  media  site  users 
make use of the technological affordances of these sites in 
conjunction  with  established  social  norms  “guiding  online 

than  non-family  members 

judgmental, 

in 

1366

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

and 

network  management 

sharing” to determine what disclosures are more acceptable 
to share with their online audiences. When users engage in 
selective  self-presentation  on  social  media,  they  are  doing 
profile work [67]. Vitak [69] argued that audience size and 
diversity impacts users’ disclosure. Vitak and Kim [68] find 
that  Facebook  users  engage  in  self-censorship  through 
private  messages, 
by 
disaggregating  their  audiences  [69].  Users  their  study 
attempted  to  do  so  by  using  “advanced  privacy  settings 
such  as  Friend  Lists  and  [Facebook]  Private  Groups.”  to 
recreate  the  boundaries  between  social  group  clusters  in 
their  social  networks  offline.  Similarly,  Lampinen  et  al. 
[41]  show  that  individuals  make  use  of  different  social 
media sites and maintain separate profiles on the same site 
to  accomplish  self-presentation  goals.  However,  using 
advanced  privacy  settings  can  be  difficult  for  many  users 
[68,69]  who  might  prefer  to  use  the  less  technically 
demanding  lowest  common  denominator  strategy  [35]. 
Parenting issues can be controversial and subjective [1,12] 
and  parents  often  prefer  to  discuss  parenting  issues  with 
other like-minded parents to minimize the negative effects 
of context collapse [35].  Therefore, context collapse can be 
especially salient when it comes to discussing parenting.  
Posing  parenting  questions  to  Facebook  networks  allows 
parents to engage in social search behaviors rather than rely 
on  a  search  engine  like  Google  [3].  Mothers  use  social 
media  sites  to  talk  about  motherhood  and  share  pictures 
when  they  have  young  children  [37,53].  They  also  use 
anonymous  sites  when  discussing 
less  comfortable 
parenting and marital issues [62]. Fathers might not want to 
share  private  or  potentially  embarrassing  information  with 
close ties. For example, recently divorced fathers turned to 
Reddit  to  ask  for  parenting  advice  when  they  perceived 
potentially 
their  Facebook 
networks [5]. Fathers also used closed Facebook groups to 
share parenting problems that were deemed less appropriate 
to  share  on  their  Facebook  wall  [5].  Parents,  primarily 
mothers, had to  negotiate posts on  social  media sites  with 
extended members of the family to ensure that appropriate 
content  was  posted  about  the  family  [3].  We  explore  and 
extend these results in the context of SAHDs.  
METHODS 
We conducted 18 semi-structured interviews with SAHDs. 
All  interviews  were  conducted  with  SAHDs  in  the  U.S. 
Participants  were 
supporting 
organizations such as Dad2.0 Summit and The National At-
Home  Dad  Network.  We  also  contacted  SAHDs  who 
maintained blogs or public Facebook pages. We advertised 
a link describing the research project through Twitter, and 
when possible, contacted individuals who discussed being a 
SAHD  on  Twitter  via  Twitter.  Two  participants  were 
recruited through a hospital group for expecting fathers.  
Interviews  were  conducted  with  participants  in  nine  states 
across the East, the Midwest, and the West. One interview 
was conducted in person and the rest were conducted over 

responses  on 

judgmental 

recruited 

through 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

the  phone  (n=10)  or  Skype  (n=7).  The  shortest  interview 
lasted 28 minutes while the longest lasted 76 minutes. We 
stopped  conducting  interviews  when  we  reached  data 
saturation  and  started  hearing  similar  themes  from  our 
participants. 
Before the interview, participants were asked to complete a 
short survey that collected basic demographic information, 
current employment status, and partner employment status 
(when  applicable).  All  but  one  of  the  participants  was 
married.  All  SAHDs’  partners  were  working  full  time 
except for one (SAHD1). SAHD6 was a single father with 
full-custody  and  information  about  his  ex-partner  was  not 
available.  Five  SAHDs  had  part-time  jobs,  three  had  full-
time jobs (flexible time or self-employed), one was retired, 
and  two  were  applying  for  work  opportunities  at  the  time 
the interviews were conducted. All participants identified as 
SAHDs. Table 1 shows these data about the participants. If 
the  employment  field  listed  fathers  as  SAHD  only,  this 
means that they did not identify an employment status other 
than SAHD.  
The  interviews  began  with  questions  about  participants’ 
daily  routines  as  well  as  their  family  structure.  We  asked 
participants  to  describe  their  role  in  the  home.  Then  we 
asked participants about their Internet and social media use. 
If  the  participants  had  a  blog  or  other  public  presence 
online,  we  asked  about  their  motivations  for  starting  the 
blog  and  reactions  to  their  posts.  Finally,  we  asked 
participants  about  support  or  judgment  they  might  have 
experienced  as  SAHDs  both  offline  and  online.  All 
interviews  were transcribed and coded using NVivo.  Each 
of  the  transcripts  was  coded  using  an  inductive  process 
[13]. Themes emerging from the  first pass  were discussed 

between  the  authors  and  then  we  conducted  a  second 
coding  pass  of  the  transcripts.  Overarching  themes  are 
reported here.  
Limitations 
We  sampled  SAHDs  who  were  actively  engaged  in  their 
role as parents. Many were also actively engaged online in 
SAHD  communities.  As  a  result,  this  sample  does  not 
represent  all  SAHDs  and  more  importantly,  it  may  not 
represent a large number of fathers who are underemployed 
or in non-traditional blended families and are at home with 
children but do  not identify as SAHDs. We also  note that 
among  participants  in  our  study,  participants’  highest 
household income was in the $140,000-199,999 range and 
the  lowest  household  income  was  in  the  $40,000-64,999 
range.  Much  like  Rochlen  et  al.’s  sample  [58],  SAHDs  in 
our  sample  may  not  be  representative  of  the  household 
income  of  SAHDs  in  the  U.S.,  and  is  definitely  not 
representative  of  the  household  income  of  the  general 
population of fathers. Future work should also explore the 
experience on SAHDs in other parts of the world.  
RESULTS 
The results are organized around three major themes: how 
SAHDs  overcome  isolation  through  social  media,  how 
SAHDs  manage  roles  and  relationships,  and  SAHDs’ 
disclosure behaviors on social media.  
Overcoming Isolation and Judgment
SAHDs  experienced  a  great  deal  of  isolation  from  other 
adults,  especially  throughout  their  children’s  early  years. 
SAHD6 said that fathers “need[ed] adult time” and SAHD3 
noted that “it’s good to see somebody else … dealing with 
… a  similar  situation.”  For  some  fathers,  being  part  of
SAHM  groups  was  not  fulfilling.  They  thought  that 

Marital 
Status 
SAHD1  Married 
SAHD2  Married 
SAHD3  Married 
SAHD4  Married 
SAHD5  Married 
SAHD6  Divorced 
SAHD7  Married 

Degree   Employment  Partner 
Degree  
CO 
SC 
GS 
GS 
GS 
GS 
GS 
GS 
GS 
CO 
CO 
NA 
CO 
GS 

RT 
PT 
PT 
PT 
PT 
FT 
LW 

FT 
FT 
FT 
FT 
NA 
FT 

Employment 

Children 

Partner 

SAHM 

SAHD8  Married 
SAHD9  Married 
SAHD10  Married 
SAHD11  Married 
SAHD12  Married 

SC 
CO 
GS 
CO 
CO 

SAHD 

PT 
LW 
SAHD 

PT 

GS 
GS 
GS 
GS 
GS 

FT 
FT 
FT 
FT 
FT 

3 
1 
2 
3 
1 

# 

3 
1 
1 
2 
2 
2 
1 

Ages of 
children 

9, 6, 5 
7 
11 months 
7, 6 
15, 15 
21, 2 
1 
11, 3, 3 
months 
4 
8, 5 
6, 3.5, 3.5 
7 

Social Media Use 

*Related to Parenting

FB* 
FB*; FB Groups*; meetup* 
FB*; FB Groups* 
FB*; FB Groups* 
FB; FB Groups; Twitter 
FB; FB Groups; Twitter 
FB; Google+* 
FB*; FB Groups*; Reddit* 

FB*; FB Groups*; Pinterest* 
FB*; FB Groups*; Stack Exchange 
FB*; FB Groups*; Twitter* 
FB*; FB Groups*; Twitter; meetup* 
FB*; FB Groups*; Twitter; 
Pinterest* 
FB*; FB Groups* 
FB*; FB Groups* 
FB*; FB Groups* 

SAHD 

FT 

SAHD13  Married 
SAHD14  Married 
SAHD15  Married 
SAHD16  Married 
SAHD17  Married 
SAHD18  Married 
Table 1. Participant and partner demographics. SAH[D/M]=Stay-at-home-[dad/mom]. SC: Some College; GS: Graduate Degree; 
CO: Four-year Degree; MD: Medical Degree; RT: Retired; LW: Looking for Work; PT: Part-Time Work; FT: Full-Time Work. 

10, 8, 5, 3, 1 
21 months 
7, 10 
1.5 
8,7, one month FB*; Twitter*; meetup* 
10, 7, 4 
FB*; Twitter*; Google+* 

MD 
MD 
GS 
MD 
BA 
MBA 

GS 
GS 
CO 
CO 
SC 
GS 

FT 
FT 
FT 
FT 
FT 
FT 

SAHD 
SAHD 

5 
1 
2 
1 
3 
3 

FT 

SAHD 

1367

SAHMs  did  not  necessarily  view  SAHDs  as 
their 
counterparts;  rather,  SAHDs  were  viewed  as  fathers  who 
had to take care of the children for a limited period of time.   
But the whole purpose of  [creating a SAHD Facebook 
Page] is that I’ve noticed in the times that I’ve been a 
single SAHD, going places that is primarily [frequented 
by]  SAHMs…and  then  there’s  just  one  or  two  of  us 
dad…I never really feel all that comfortable. I feel like a 
lot of mothers just think that Daddy’s got the day off of 
work  and  they  don’t understand  that  we are  doing  the 
same thing they are. -SAHD6 

SAHDs also noted that  mothers  might  have  biases against 
them because they did not fit a specific stereotype. 

I’ve  noticed  that  a  lot  of  moms  have  this  prejudice 
towards the dad if the dad doesn’t fit the stereotype of 
what’s 
and 
successful…they  see  me  out with the  kids  so  their  first 
thoughts are I’m a deadbeat because I don’t have a job. 
-SAHD8 

considered 

super 

good 

looking 

Participants reported that they could not or did not want to 
take  part  in  parenting  communities  setup  with  SAHMs 
because  they  felt  stigmatized  and  unwelcome  in  these 
groups. In fact, being ostracized by SAHMs in parks, malls, 
and other areas where parents might go with their children 
was  one  of  the  topics  that  SAHDs  frequently  posted  and 
commented on in SAHD online spaces. SAHD4 recounted 
how  his  children  had  a  fight  in  the  park  and  some  of  the 
mothers  tried  to  intervene,  believing  that  he  could  not 
manage  the  situation.  SAHD14  echoed  this,  saying  that 
mothers  “quite  often  give  me  more  scrutiny  at  the  park.” 
SAHD15 reported that “at least offline, not overtly. I have 
occasionally  gotten  looks  [from  SAHMs]  if  I  take  [my 
child] up to the park or something in the middle of the day.” 
SAHD18 also experienced the same kind of treatment at the 
park.  SAHD18  moderates 
two  Facebook  groups  for 
SAHDs, one national, and one in his state. In both cases, he 
thought that the groups were important for providing social 
support  and  understanding  that  might  be  lacking  from 
mothers  who  do  not  deal  with  the  same  problems  that 
SAHDs have to deal with.  
SAHD Facebook Groups 
Facebook groups provided a safe space for SAHDs to ask 
questions  and  discuss  problems.  While  all  parents 
experience parenting challenges, many participants reported 
that they experienced less judgmental responses when they 
asked for help from other SAHDs. 

The stay-at-home dad [Facebook] group is just a place 
where  guys  have  a...We’ve  found  that  sometimes  dads 
have  trouble  asking  for  help,  so  if  you  can  go  into  a 
group  where  it’s  full  of  your  peers  and  you  know  that 
you’re  not  being  judged  for  asking  a  question  or  you 
need help with something, it’s a way that you get some 
parenting  advice  if  you’re  stuck,  or  you’re  potty 
training your son and he won’t go and you don’t know 

1368

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

how to fix it. So it’s a really good resource for stay-at-
home  dads  who  maybe  don’t  know  where  to  turn.  -
SAHD18 

SAHD18 managed a local SAHD Facebook group because 
he  found  it  difficult  to  join  other  stay-at-home  parents’ 
groups  in  the  area  when  his  family  first  moved.  SAHD18 
said that when he tried to join the groups, “[mothers in the 
group]  said  ‘No,’  because  I  was  a  man.  They  didn’t  feel 
comfortable  with  me  being  a  part  of  [of  the  group].” 
However, separating parenting groups by gender goes both 
ways;  he  noted  that  when  mothers  ask  to  join  the  SAHD 
Facebook  group,  he,  as  the  administrator  for  the  group, 
answers, “Thanks for your interest in [our Facebook] group, 
but it’s only for dads.” 
Even  within  SAHD  Facebook  groups,  the  boundaries  of 
appropriateness were fuzzy. SAHD18 described how some 
SAHDs  had  posted  about  a  date  with  their  daughters  on 
Valentine’s  Day.  Some  fathers  saw  such  a  post  as  a 
“creepy”  thing  to  share,  while  others  felt  that  this  was 
something both parents and children enjoyed and that there 
was  nothing  wrong  with 
it.  Despite  gender-specific 
Facebook  group  behaviors,  mothers  were  generally 
supportive  of  SAHDs  on  social  media  sites.  For  example, 
they were instrumental in introducing SAHDs to parenting 
groups online. One of SAHD3’s friends, who was a SAHM, 
introduced him to a new SAHD group on Facebook. Both 
SAHD4  and  SAHD9  started  blogging  about  their  lives  as 
SAHDs and joined SAHD groups after their female partners 
suggested  they  do  so.  SAHD9,  SAHD17,  and  SAHD  18 
noted that when they first started blogging about their new 
roles,  most  comments  on  their  entries  came  from  mothers 
who  were  quite  supportive.  SAHD17,  a  blogger,  said  that 
“early  on,  my  audience  was  mostly  women  and  mostly 
moms. And so they were pretty positive online.”  
However,  SAHDs  also  found  that  mothers  viewed  some 
online  parenting  discussions  negatively  and  at 
times 
responded  with  judgmental  attitudes.  SAHD15  blogged 
about his wife’s experience with postpartum depression and 
faced a lot of negative feedback from mothers who thought 
that  he  was  sharing  information  about  his  wife  that  he 
should have  kept confidential.  While  most of  the  negative 
commenters were arguing that it was not SAHD15’s place 
to discuss his wife’s postpartum depression, he thought that 
since  most  blog  posts  about  postpartum  depression  are  by 
mothers,  he  was  providing  some  much  needed  view  from 
the father’s point of view. 
Other Social Media Sites 
In  addition  to  Facebook,  SAHDs  used  other  social  media 
sites  like  Twitter  and  Pinterest.  SAHDs  used  Twitter  to 
reach  wider  audiences,  advertise  blog  posts,  or  to  auto-
populate  content  to  other  sites  (e.g.,  Facebook).  SAHD17 
commented on how Twitter was useful for connecting with 
other  SAHDs.  For  example,  SAHD17  commented  on 
another  SAHD’s  blog  post,  which  led  to  a  Twitter 
conversation  and  ultimately  meeting 
in  person  and 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

becoming  friends.  SAHD18  reported  taking  part  in  a 
“Twitter  party”  in  which  he  discussed  birthday  parties  for 
children from a SAHD perspective. Twitter parties usually 
centered around one topic organized around a hashtag.   
SAHDs used Pinterest to generate traffic to their blogs and 
to look for new projects to do themselves. SAHD13 would 
“do  a  blog  post  about  a  project  and  then  …post  it  to 
Pinterest,  and  then  if  I'm  looking  for  different  projects, 
sometimes I’ll go to Pinterest and say, “Hey, that’s kind of 
what I want to do.” Only SAHD8 reported using Reddit for 
parenting  purposes.  He  said  that  while  most  responses 
about  parenting  on  Reddit,  especially  the  more  popular 
ones,  were sarcastic and not  particularly  helpful, he  found 
some of them to be thoughtful. However, he noted that he 
had to look for them which was a time-consuming process.  
Managing Roles and Relationships 
Managing Relationships with Partners 
Most  SAHDs  reported  a  mix  of  financial  and  parenting 
philosophy  reasons  for  staying  at  home  with  children. 
SAHDs  felt  that  when  their  spouses  were  making  more 
money than they  were, if the family  wanted one parent  to 
stay  home,  it  would  make  more  sense  for  them  to  do  so. 
SAHD2  noted  that  his  wife  was  good  at  keeping  regular 
hours  (9-5)  at  work,  while  his  work  hours  were  not  as 
regular.  He  felt  that  in  order  to  stay  connected  with  his 
children, it would be better to be a SAHD. SAHD3 taught 
private music lessons, while his wife, a marketing manager, 
had less flexible hours. That he would stay home with their 
child was a “no brainer,” because otherwise, his wife would 
have  a  “five-year  or  six-year  hole  in  her  career.”  SAHD4 
echoed  this  reasoning.  He  stayed  home  while  his  partner 
held  a  regular  job  because  as  a  clinical  social  worker,  he 
could get substantial income as a part-time worker. Fathers 
who  had  flexible  working  environments,  which  allowed 
them  to  maintain  part-time  jobs  while  they  remained  at 
home  with  the  children,  shared  similar  stories.  Other 
SAHDs  thought  that  their  spouse’s  incomes  were  enough 
for the family and that paying for childcare services while 
both parents worked would not make financial sense.  
All  participants  in  our  sample  reported  that  they  were 
invested  in  caretaking  for  their  children.  SAHD1  thought 
that  this  was  his  chance  to  be  involved  in  his  children’s 
upbringing.  Having  retired,  SAHD1  thought  this  was  a 
good  chance  to  have  a  closer  relationship  with  children 
from  his  second  marriage.  SAHD2  “wanted  to  undo  the 
mistakes  of  my  father  and  my  step-father.”  SAHD15 
thought that his character was more suited than his wife’s to 
be a stay-at-home parent.  
Providing for the Family 
SAHDs used social media sites to articulate their new roles 
as stay-at-home parents. SAHD8 reported that he retweeted 
#AmazonFamily,  an  online  campaign  to  change  the  name 
of the service provided by Amazon Prime for parents from 
Amazon  Mom  to  Amazon  Family.  SAHD18  said  that  he 

thought he was providing his family with “another kind of 
currency  [because]  you’re  providing  emotional  support.” 
This was a message SAHD17 tried to articulate in response 
to a blog post intimating that any father who was “not [a] 
provider,  [was]  not  Christian.”  In  his  own  blog  post,  he 
discussed how SAHDs are providing for their families in a 
different  manner;  his  post  received  many  comments,  most 
of which were supportive.  
However,  SAHDs  also  had  to  contemplate  how  this  more 
egalitarian  role  as  SAHDs  was  different  from  that  of  the 
traditional breadwinner role. While they were happy in their 
new  roles,  SAHDs  in  our  sample  still  thought  that  not 
having  a 
job  was  a  rather 
significant change in expected social roles.  

traditional  breadwinning 

I guess, work gives you a lot of validation. Feeling like I 
was doing kind of like  what women do...It was a huge 
adjustment, just the old message. I grew up with work, 
you work, you work. I always worked full time…And to 
go from that to not working, I felt, I don’t know, it’s a 
sense of shame or something that I wasn’t doing what I 
should be doing. -SAHD4 

The SAHDs who were employed part-time usually did most 
of their work from home and had to balance childcare with 
their  work  schedules  from  home.  SAHD12  drew  on  his 
work  experience  as  an  architect  when  writing  about  his 
experiences as a SAHD on his blog:  

When I wrote my first blog post, I realized what I really 
wanted to write about was what it’s like trying to run an 
architecture  business  when  you  have  small  children 
tugging  at  your  elbow.  ‘Cause  that’s,  I  mean,  that’s 
where I’m in every day. -SAHD12 

While  SAHDs  were  proud  of  their  work  history  before 
being SAHDs, they considered what they did at home to be 
significant  and  important.  SAHD12  had  to  repeatedly 
remove  spam  posted  to  a  SAHD  Facebook  page  wall  he 
managed that contained content about making money while 
“in your underwear.” To him, such messages devalued what 
SAHDs were doing and framed them as lazy and unwilling 
to work.  

I think they’re reading the term that says, “stay-at-
home  dad”  and  they’re  taking  from  that  that  the 
people in the group are in some way, either lazy or 
unmotivated. And so, it’s the “get rich quick” kind 
of things that were posted up. -SAHD12 

SAHD18,  who  was  an  administrator  for  both  a  National 
Stay at  Home Network Facebook page and a  local SAHD 
Facebook  page,  noted  that  some  people  “find  a  stay-at-
home  dad  group  and  they  automatically  assume  that 
because you’re in a stay-at-home dads group, you  want to 
make  money  somehow.”  He  added  that  the  National  At-
home Dad Network provided SAHDs with resources about 
working  from  home,  but  they  did  not  allow  service 
providers to advertise on SAHD Facebook groups.  

1369

SAHDs  stressed  that  while  they  are  primary  caregivers  in 
the  family,  they  are  different  than  SAHMs.  A  number  of 
fathers noted that they wanted to discuss and participate in 
what  they  perceived  to  be  male-oriented  topics  and 
activities.  For  example,  SAHD17  discussed  soccer  online 
with one of the  fathers  who  followed his blog.  He added 
that  most  of  their  discussions  “usually  [were]  not  about 
parenting or kids at all, it’s about those other things that you 
talk  about  getting  caught  up  with  an  old  friend.”  SAHD6 
echoed this view:  

“I  find  that  [Facebook  groups]  becomes  an  arena 
for us to feel more like men. I think a lot of people 
look  down  on  stay-at-home  dads,  because  men  are 
typically  supposed  to  be  the  providers.  And  so,  we 
need  that  time  around  other  guys  that  understand 
…what we’re doing, and be able to just sit there and
talk  about  NASCAR,  or 
football,  or  anything 
manly.” -SAHD6 

Sharing and Disclosure on Social Media 
Selective Disclosure  
SAHDs  faced  challenges  when  discussing  their  roles  as 
stay-at-home  parents  with  their  family  and  close  friends. 
SAHD17  reported  that  using  SAHD  Facebook  groups 
allowed  fathers  to  “sort  of  tailor  [their]  response[s]  to  the 
audience”  receiving  it.  Therefore,  he  preferred  to  post  to 
SAHD  Facebook  groups  if  he  thought  that  family  in  his 
Facebook  network  might  misunderstand  the  “tone”  of  the 
post. 

And  the  idea  that  Facebook  posts…[are]  going  to  be 
read by 85-year-old Grandma and this dad group, say, 
is going to be read by these dads that understand what 
it’s like to have a kid crying and when you say, “Oh, I 
wanted to leave the kid outside and go back in my room 
and go to sleep.” -SAHD17 

Friending family members who were opposed to their roles 
as SAHDs created a difficult situation for participants. For 
example,  SAHD10  reported  that  his  mother-in-law  had 
reservations about his new role as a SAHD.  

I  am  not  [Facebook]  Friends  with  my  mother-in-
law…My  mother-in-law  would  love  to  be  Friends  with 
us  but  she  does  not  use  the  Internet  productively.  She 
will  send...She  will  vent  on  email  and  on  any  private 
message  that  she  can.  So  unfortunately,  we  cannot 
really connect with her on the Internet because she just 
really uses it very badly. -SAHD10 

SAHD17’s  mother  was  opposed  to  his  role  as  a  stay-at-
home parent, feeling that the father was supposed to be the 
breadwinner in the family. As a result, he preferred to only 
discuss SAHD-related topics when they could talk face-to-
face rather than on  his  Facebook network.  SAHD8  had to 
manage  his  mother-in-law  posting  a  number  of  comments 
pertaining  to  his  being  a  SAHD  that  he  perceived  to  be 
negative.  SAHD8  would  usually  delete  the  comment  and 

1370

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

respond  to  his  mother-in-law  through  private  Facebook 
messages. 

reported 

that 

looking 

“To  me,  posting  a  comment,  especially  a  negative 
one, is basically public shaming of somebody and I 
don’t  really  agree  with  that.  I  just  delete  those 
comments  and  say,  “Hey,  text  me  or  message  me 
privately for stuff like this!” -SAHD8 
tried 

to  dissuade  other  people  from 

they  were 

He 
liking  or 
commenting on his mother-in-laws comments by “turning it 
into  a  satire  piece.”  SAHD9,  a  blogger,  faced  a  similar 
problem.  His  mother-in-law  and  a  close  friend  contacted 
him directly when they thought that posts on his blog were 
personal  criticisms  of  their  parenting  philosophies.  He 
reported that he needed to explain to them the nature of the 
post, and that it was a reflection of his own upbringing and 
parenting lessons he was learning as a SAHD. 
SAHD6  posted  pictures  of  his  daughter  on  his  Facebook 
page that a SAHM in his Facebook network commented on, 
saying that they were sexually suggestive. SAHD6 thought 
that the comment was unacceptable, sent a private message 
to  the  mother  to  that  effect  and  blocked  her  from  his 
Facebook  wall  (and  eventually  unfriended  her).  For 
SAHD6,  the  mother’s  comment  represented  public  rebuke 
of  his  parenting  style,  something  he  was  not  prepared  to 
accept. 
Managing Privacy 
Two  SAHDs 
for 
employment  opportunities  at  the  time  the  interviews  were 
conducted.  Both  SAHDs  lost  their  jobs  after  the  2008 
financial crisis. Both said that they liked SAHDs, but were 
seeking  employment  for  financial  reasons.  This  was 
especially  true  for  SAHD10,  whose  children  were  now  in 
school, which enabled him to return to work. He used Stack 
Exchange  (SE)  regularly  to  hone  his  programming  skills 
and  shared  his  SE  profile  with  potential  employers.  He 
noted  that  if  he  were  to  post  “something  controversial” 
about  parenting  to  Stack  Exchange,  he  would  probably 
create  a  different  account.  He  later  added  that  most 
parenting  questions  were  potentially  controversial  and 
complex. SAHD7 echoed this sentiment about his Facebook 
use. He said that while he had been considering setting up a 
SAHD  Facebook  page  for  fathers  in  his  area,  he  decided 
against the idea. SAHD7 thought that managing this group 
might  affect  his  chances  of  obtaining  employment  in  the 
future  since  someone  could  probably  “search  [for]…[and] 
find that [Facebook group].”  
SAHDs had to contend with privacy issues online in areas 
other  than  future  employment.  While  SAHD13  used  his 
blog to document the DIY projects he was working on with 
his children, he made a “conscious decision on the blog not 
to  use  the  kids’  name  or  to  show  their  faces.”  SAHD13 
explained that while he did post pictures of his children on 
his personal Facebook page,  he did not post their pictures 
and  did  not  name  them  on  the  blog  for  safety  reasons. 
SAHD6 posted about his daughter to the Facebook page he 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

was moderating. However, SAHD6 noted that he would not 
post all pictures of his daughter to the SAHD page. Some 
pictures  were  deemed  only  appropriate  “for  friends  only, 
like  close  friends.”  As  an  example,  SAHD6  said  that 
instead  of  going  on  a  date  for  Valentine’s  Day,  he 
organized an event  with  his  daughter that he posted about 
on  the  SAHD  Facebook  group  because  “dads  who  have 
daughters  understand...That  was  a  big  moment  that  I 
wanted to share.”  
“Do-it-yourself” Projects 
SAHDs  posted  online  about  projects  they  are  doing  at 
home,  especially  when  their  children  were  part  of  these 
projects. Some SAHDs told us that they blogged or posted 
about “DIY” projects they did, sometimes along with their 
children. SAHD15 thought that the DIY aspect of parenting 
as  a  stay-at-home  parent  was  important,  regardless  of  the 
nature  of  the  projects.  As  he  and  his  wife  were  trying  to 
choose a name for his daddy blog, he landed on the name 
“Daddy Do-it-yourself.” He explained that the blog did not 
have  a  specific  agenda  to  start  with  but  that  he  “posted 
everything from trying to pick out the right car seat [to] a 
few recipes” thus presenting a “snapshot into his life” as a 
stay-at-home dad.   
SAHD13 argued that since he had a lower earning potential 
than his wife, he would try to contribute to house finances 
through “projects” to make the family more self-sufficient. 

I’m not out there earning a paycheck so to be able to 
bake  bread,  or  have  a  garden,  and…  food  that  we 
grow…kind  of  be  more  self-sufficient  so  that  my 
family is provided for in that way. -SAHD13 

His blog presented him both with a chance to communicate 
work on these projects with other enthusiasts and to engage 
in adult conversation.  

Being  a  stay-at-home  dad,  I  am  not  in  an  office 
where  I’m  talking  with  adults  all  the  time...The 
people I’m communicating with are children. So [the 
blog] was kind of a way for me to have a little bit of 
communication with adults and I learn at the same 
time. -SAHD13 

SAHD2 posted statuses and photos about how his son and 
his  son’s  friend  were  helping  him  remodel  the  bathroom. 
The Facebook posts documented the progress in the project 
as well as his child’s involvement in it along with him.  
“When we  were remodeling the bathroom and [my 
son’s]  friend…was  over,  and  we  got  them  to  paint 
the  bathroom.  It  was  the  first  coat…[so,  they] 
painted  the  first  coat  in  our  newly  remodeled 
bathroom, and I showed pictures of that, pictures of 
[son]  and  [son’s  friend]  in  their  painting  clothes. 
And  they  were  all  smiles.  And  I  thanked  them 
publicly.” -SAHD2 

SAHD8  worked  on  DIY  projects  for  crafts  to  sell  on  his 
Etsy profile. He shared posts about him and his 3-year-old 
working  together  on  some  of  these  projects.  SAHD8  was 

also  taking  classes  in  a  local  culinary  school,  and  worked 
with his child on new meals in the kitchen. He posted many 
of these pictures on his personal Facebook page as well.  
SAHD18 liked to blog about cooking. He said that though 
he did not like cooking, especially at the beginning of  his 
time as a SAHD, he started seeing it as another way to be 
creative. Sharing it on his blog was intended to help other 
SAHDs  learn  how  to  also  enjoy  cooking  as  a  creative 
endeavor.  He  also  posted  about  DIY  projects  that  were 
appropriate  for  children,  such  as  a  post  about  creating  a 
Thor’s hammer  from recycled  materials that can easily be 
found in the house.   He argued that, in addition  to saving 
money on an expensive toy, this project provided him with 
an  opportunity  to  have  quality  time  with  his  child.  It  also 
allowed  him  to  draw  on  some  of  his  skills  from  being  an 
arts teacher before becoming a SAHD.  
DISCUSSION 
Our  results  show  that  SAHDs  engage  in  a  number  of 
strategic behaviors online to overcome judgment, find other 
SAHDs,  and  to  navigate  disclosure  and  privacy  goals. 
Participants  report  being  able  to  navigate  some  of  the 
judgment through selective disclosure on particular sites, a 
phenomenon  observed  in  prior  studies  of  families  and 
judgment [4]. They also join Facebook groups for SAHDs, 
contrasting  results  from  Zimmerman  [75]  who  found  that 
SAHDs  did  not  take  part  in  SAHD  socialization  events,  a 
difference  that  might  be  due  to  the  increasing  number  of 
SAHDs  today  [49].  Strategic  use  of  social  media  (e.g., 
using  Facebook  groups)  allowed  SAHDs  to  create  more 
variegated network structures, thus  better  moderating their 
transition  to  the  role  of  SAHD.  We  draw  on  Hirsch  and 
Jolly’s four main social support paths for dealing with role 
changes  [30]  to  explicate  social  media’s  successes  at 
supporting SAHDs, and opportunities for further support.  
Explicit Recognition of Masculine and SAHD Roles 
SAHDs  used  social  media  sites  to  create  “social  textures” 
[29] through which they could form a community in which 
both their roles as men and SAHDs are respected. SAHDs 
use  social  network  sites  like  Facebook,  Twitter,  and 
Pinterest, which allow them to create public or semi-public 
profiles  that  can  be  traversed  and  searched  by  other  users 
[9].  These  findings  echo  prior  findings  about  strategic 
management  of  self-disclosure  on  social  media  sites 
[4,5,15,41,68].  SAHDs  can  find  other  SAHDs  in  their 
geographic  area  as  well  as  those  who  might  share  similar 
interests  or  parenting  philosophies.  This  allows  them  to 
better  transition  to  their  new  role  as  primary  caregivers 
through explicitly recognizing this role change. Hirsch [33] 
describes explicit role recognition when people give direct, 
clear signals to others about their performance in a specific 
role, such as “you’re a great father.”  SAHDs support each 
other by providing such explicit recognition of their role as 
primary  caregivers,  often  through  positive  feedback  on 
pictures or statuses about relationships with children.  

1371

time 

identity 

the  same 

Implicit Recognition of Masculine and SAHD Roles 
SAHDs  also  use  social  media  sites  to  provide  implicit 
recognition of each other in both primary caregiver role as 
well  as  traditionally  masculine  roles.  SAHDs  acted  as 
“stance-taking”  entities  “taking  a  position  between”  [25] 
identifying with traditional male roles (e.g., displaying DIY 
projects)  while  at 
identifying  with 
traditionally  female  roles  (e.g.,  primary  caregiver  role). 
Participants used social media sites to write about their DIY 
projects.  In  this  case,  they  may  have  been  drawing  on  a 
DIY 
to  express  masculinity,  a  phenomenon 
observed  in  prior  work  [17,27,51,58].  By  engaging  in 
projects  with  their  children  and  sharing  these  activities 
online,  SAHDs  highlight  that  they  can  be  good  fathers 
[5,38].  Sharing  on  social  media  also  allows  SAHDs  to 
engage  in  self-affirmation  through  emphasizing  both  their 
identities  as  caregivers  and  as  agentic  males  [66].  This 
echoes  Doucet’s  [17]  finding  that  SAHDs  were  proud  of 
their  creative  products  (including  domestic  activities  like 
cooking) if the creative process allowed them to identify as 
self-provisioning in the home.  
Lindtner  [47]  argues  that  identifying  as  a  DIY  maker,  a 
traditionally masculine activity, not only provides one with 
an  identity  relating  to  methods  of  production,  but  also  a 
“way of being and acting in the world through which other 
aspects of life were tackled. For instance, being a maker did 
not  mean  that  one  could  not  be  a  parent.  Rather  it  meant 
being  a  parent  differently,  committed  to  teaching  one’s 
child  to  act  in  the  world  in  a  hands-on  and  engaged 
manner.” By employing strategic self-presentation on social 
media  sites,  SAHDs  can  portray  both  masculine  and 
feminine  roles  and  identities  to  online  audiences.  Posting 
about  their  DIY  projects  allows  SAHDs  to  emphasize 
“rhetorical acts” which might reduce their role strain [61]. 
Pleasurable Interactions and Dealing with Problems 
Facebook  groups  in  particular  enable  SAHDs  to  target 
specific questions to other SAHDs who have shared similar 
or relevant experiences. SAHDs asked for advice when they 
faced  problems  in  their  new  social  roles  as  SAHDs.  They 
also shared pleasurable experiences like the Valentine Day 
date  with  their  daughters  or  discussing  sports  with  other 
SAHDs.  Our  results  echo  prior  work  of  fathers’  use  of 
social  media  [5]  that  discussed  the  importance  of  having 
Facebook  groups  specifically  for  fathers.  Such  groups 
allowed  fathers  to  discuss  sensitive  information  that  they 
would  otherwise  be  unlikely  to  share  with  others  (e.g., 
marital  concerns).  As  the  image  of  fatherhood,  and 
especially  SAHDs,  is  in  flux,  and  as  more  men  have  to 
make  sense  of  their  new  roles;  quite  different  from  long-
held  and  still  salient  image  of  primary  breadwinner  and 
family leader, social media sites act as moderators for their 
role transitions.  
Social Support and Context Collapse 
SAHDs had to navigate self-disclosure behaviors on social 
media  sites  to  minimize  judgment  from  extended  family, 
employers,  and  broader  networks.  For  example,  SAHDs 

1372

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

study 

in  our 

[74].  SAHDs 

had  to  contend  with  negative  comments  from  extended 
family members, often by choosing to disclose less online. 
Ammari  et  al.  [3]  described  how  parents  manage 
disclosures  about  their  children  on  social  media.  In  their 
work,  fathers  were  particularly  sensitive  to  content  that 
might have be perceived as sexually suggestive, especially 
of  their  daughters.  These  results  echo  prior  work  showing 
that  stigmatized  identities  tend  to  be  kept  private  [60,75]. 
Facebook  networks  tend  to  mirror  and  reinforce  offline 
social  networks  [21,40]  which  might  be  too  dense  for 
SAHDs to “shop for help” [71] in transitioning to the role.  
However,  controlling  who  becomes  a  member  of  their 
Facebook groups can support SAHDs in better transitioning 
towards  their  new  roles.  Women  transitioning  into  new 
roles  outside  of  their  traditional  domestic  role  were  better 
able to cope with the change when they were members of 
multidimensional  networks  loosely  connected  to  their 
family members [32]. Women transitioning to being single 
after  marital  separation  intimated  that  their  close-knit 
network members were more judgmental than more distant 
members 
relied  on 
multidimensional  networks  consisting  of  offline  meetings 
with  other  SAHDs,  online  social  networks  on  Facebook 
[21,40],  support  from  SAHMs  following  their  blogs,  and 
creating  Facebook  groups 
that  were  explicitly  and 
exclusively  for  SAHDs  in  order  to  moderate  their  role 
transition. As the title of the paper suggests, fathers feel that 
it  is  important  to  control  who  might  be  members  of  the 
Facebook  groups.  They  thought  this  might  allow  them  to 
ask  for  advice  and  discuss  problems  without  feeling 
stigmatized. These findings echo results from Ammari et al. 
[4]  that  show  how  parents  of  children  with  special  needs 
found  their  families  to  be  more  judgmental  than  other 
members  of  their  networks  who  were  also  parents  of 
children  with  special  needs  themselves.  In  Ammari  and 
Schoenebeck  [5],  fathers  also  intimated  that  they  shared 
more  personal  problems  on  private  Facebook  groups  with 
other fathers.  
SAHDs also expanded their social networks by using other 
social  media  sites  (e.g.,  Twitter,  Pinterest,  Twitter, 
StackExchange). Morris et al. [52] argue that people tend to 
use  Q&A  sites  that  are  more  anonymous  than  social 
networking  sites  (e.g.,  Facebook)  when  asking  “overly 
personal  questions”  (e.g.,  about  dating,  parenting,  etc.). 
Such questions are not deemed acceptable to share on their 
Facebook  Walls.  Fathers  also  use  more  anonymous  sites 
like Reddit when facing more stigmatized cultural positions 
(e.g.,  divorce,  being  single  parents)  to  ask  questions  and 
seek  advice  [5].  In  this  study,  SAHD8  turned  to  Reddit 
when  asking  questions  about  his  new  role  as  a  SAHD. 
Similarly,  SAHDs  looking  for  work  also  managed  their 
self-presentation  related  to  being  a  SAHD  so  that  they 
would not risk  future employment opportunities.  SAHD10 
noted  that  he  would  consider  asking  questions  about 
parenting as a SAHD on StackExchange only if he used a 
throwaway account. Those facing socially stigmatized roles 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

them 

to  maintain  masculine  roles 

have  used  throwaway  accounts  in  other  contexts.  For 
example,  De  Choudhury  and  De  [11]  show  how  those 
facing  mental  health  problems  use  throwaway  Reddit 
accounts for anonymity purposes.   
Having  such  multidimensional  networks  helped  SAHDs 
transition to more domestic roles as opposed to traditionally 
breadwinning  male-centric  roles  while  at  the  same  time 
allowing 
through 
engaging  in  traditional  masculine  activities  such  as  taking 
part  in  sports  events,  discussing  sports  and  cars,  and 
describing DIY projects. This allowed them to make sense 
of  both  their  role  change  to  parenthood  as  well  as  a 
dynamically  changing  and  ambiguous  role  expectation  as 
SAHDs.  These  multidimensional  social  networks  also 
provided  SAHDs  with  social  support  and  shielded  them 
from  family  criticism  such  as  that  from  mothers  and 
mothers-in-law. 
Finally,  our  data  reveal  a  lack  of  norms  about  what  is 
appropriate  for  SAHDs  to  disclose  on  social  media,  a 
finding that echoes Ammari and Schoenebeck’s [5] study of 
fathers’  use  of  social  media.  McLaughlin  and  Vitak  [50] 
argue  that  online  sharing  norms  provide  the  basis  to 
acceptable  posts  on  social  media  and  those  that  call  for 
sanctions. Lack of norms about what is appropriate to share 
had  a  chilling  effect  on  what  SAHDs  shared  on  their 
Facebook  networks,  pushing  them  to  rely  on  Facebook 
groups  specific  to  SAHDs.  As  a  result,  Facebook  groups 
provide a safe online space for SAHDs to discuss parenting 
problems  they  face,  but  they  also  constrict  the  population 
that  might  provide  answers  to  such  problems.  More 
critically, opportunities for advocacy and social change are 
lost  when  SAHDs  retreat  to  closed  groups  to  share  about 
their  lives.  Stavrosito  and  Sundar  [65]  argue  that  mother 
blogs empower women and allow them to maintain a sense 
of belonging and agency; we observe similar patterns with 
SAHDs  and  encourage  a  research  agenda  to  further 
empowerment and acceptance of SAHDs.  
CONCLUSION 
SAHDs  are  a  growing  demographic  in  the  U.S.  today  but 
little  is  known  about  their  Internet  and  social  media  use 
related to their roles. We find that they turn to social media 
to overcome isolation and judgment they might experience 
in other contexts. They also turn to social media to display 
their  identities  as  loving  caregivers  as  well  as  their 
identities as do-it-yourself men who produce things around 
the house. This work surfaces a tension SAHDs experience 
between  embracing  what  have  been  traditionally  feminine 
roles  with  expressing  their  male  identities  to  online 
audiences.  Though  being  a  SAHD  is  becoming  more 
acceptable in the U.S. today, SAHDs still experience stigma 
and judgment both online and offline. SAHDs make use of 
a  number  of 
to  create  and  maintain 
multidimensional  networks  enabling  them  to  better  cope 
with  the  role  transition.  We  argue  that  social  media  sites 
provide  a  rich  but  underutilized  opportunity  to  better 

strategies 

1373

thank 

the  National  Science  Foundation 

support  SAHDs  as  well  as  to  increase  societal  acceptance 
and appreciation of diverse parenting roles and identities. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We 
(HCC 
#1318143)  for  support.  Any  opinion,  findings,  and 
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material 
are  those  of  the  authors  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  the 
views of the National Science Foundation. 
REFERENCES 
1. Virginia  D.  Abernethy.  1973.  Social  network  and
response to the maternal role. International Journal of
Sociology of the Family, 86–92.

2. Vernon L. Allen and Evert Van de Vliert. 1984. A role
theoretical  perspective  on  transitional  processes.  In
Role  transitions.  Vernon  L.  Allen  and  Evert  van  de
Vliert (eds).  Springer, 3–18.

3. Tawfiq Ammari, Priya Kumar, Cliff Lampe, and Sarita
Schoenebeck.  2015.  Managing  Children’s  Online
Identities:  How  Parents  Decide  What  to  Disclose
About Their Children Online. Proceedings of the 33rd
Annual  ACM  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in
Computing Systems (CHI’15), 1895–1904.

4. Tawfiq  Ammari,  Meredith  Ringel  Morris,  and  Sarita
Yardi  Schoenebeck.  2014.  Accessing  Social  Support
and  Overcoming  Judgment  on  Social  Media  among
Parents of Children with Special Needs. Proc. ICWSM.
5. Tawfiq  Ammari  and  Sarita  Schoenebeck.  2015.
Understanding and Supporting Fathers and Fatherhood
on Social Media Sites. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
ACM  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing
Systems (CHI’15), 1905–1914.

6. Tawfiq  Ammari  and  Sarita  Schoenebeck.  2015.
Networked  Empowerment  on  Facebook  Groups  for
Parents  of  Children  with  Special  Needs.  Proceedings
of  the  33rd  Annual  ACM  Conference  on  Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’15), 2805–2814.

7. Bruce  Jesse  Biddle.  1979.  Role  theory:  expectations,

identities, and behaviors. Academic Press.

8. Zena  S.  Blau.  1973.  Old  age  in  a  changing  society.

New Viewpoints.

9. Danah  M.  Boyd  and  Nicole  B.  Ellison.  2007.  Social
Network  Sites:  Definition,  History,  and  Scholarship.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 13, 1,
210–230.

10. Noelle  Chesley.  2011.  Stay-at-Home  Fathers  and
Breadwinning Mothers Gender, Couple Dynamics, and
Social Change. Gender & Society 25, 5, 642–664.

11. Munmun  De  Choudhury  and  Sushovan  De.  2014.
Mental  health  discourse  on  reddit:  Self-disclosure,
social support, and anonymity. Proc. ICWSM.

12. Moncrieff  M.  Cochran  and  Jane  Anthony  Brassard.
social

1979.  Child  development  and  personal 
networks. Child development, 601–616.

13. J.  Corbin  and  A.  Strauss.  2008.  Basics  of  qualitative
research:  techniques  and  procedures  for  developing
grounded theory. Sage.

14.  Ruth  Schwartz  Cowan.  1983.  More  work  for  mother: 
The  ironies  of  household  technology  from  the  open 
hearth to the microwave. Basic Books.   

15.  Joan  Morris  DiMicco  and  David  R.  Millen.  2007. 
Identity management: multiple presentations of self in 
facebook. Proceedings of the 2007 international ACM 
conference  on  Supporting  group  work  (GROUP’07), 
383–386.  

16.  Andrea  Doucet  and  Laura  Merla.  2007.  Stay-at-home 
fathering: A strategy for balancing work and home in 
Canadian and Belgian families. Community, Work and 
Family 10, 4, 455–473. 

17.  Andrea Doucet. 2004. “ It’s Almost Like I Have a Job, 
but I Don’t Get Paid”: Fathers at Home Reconfiguring 
Work, Care, and Masculinity. Fathering: A Journal of 
Theory, Research, and Practice about Men as Fathers 
2, 3, 277–303. 

similarities:  A 

18.  Alice  H.  Eagly,  Wendy  Wood,  and  Amanda  B. 
Diekman.  2000.  Social  role  theory  of  sex  differences 
The 
and 
developmental social psychology of gender, 123–174. 
19.  Alice  H.  Eagly  and  Wendy  Wood.  1991.  Explaining 
sex  differences  in  social  behavior:  A  meta-analytic 
perspective. Personality and social psychology bulletin 
17, 3, 306–315. 

appraisal. 

current 

20.  Alice  H.  Eagly.  1987.  Sex  differences  in  social 
interpretation.  Lawrence 

behavior:  A  social-role 
Erlbaum Associates. 

sites. 

21.  Nicole B. Ellison, Charles Steinfield, and Cliff Lampe. 
2007.  The  benefits  of  Facebook  “friends:”  Social 
capital  and  college  students’  use  of  online  social 
Journal  of  Computer-Mediated 
network 
Communication 12, 4, 1143–1168. 

22.  Mary-Joan  Gerson,  Judith  L.  Alpert,  and  Mary  Sue 
from 

Richardson.  1984.  Mothering:  The  view 
psychological research. Signs, 434–453. 

23.  Lorna  Gibson  and  Vicki  L.  Hanson.  2013.  Digital 
motherhood: how does technology help new mothers? 
Proceedings  of  the  SIGCHI  Conference  on  Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’13), 313–322.  

24.  Erving  Goffman.  1959.  The  presentation  of  self  in 

everyday life. Anchor Books 

25.  Erving Goffman. 1961. Asylums: Essays on the social 
situation of mental patients and other inmates. Anchor 
Books.  

26.  Erving Goffman. 1979. Gender advertisements. Harper 

and Row. 

27.  Andrew  Gorman-Murray.  2011.  Economic  crises  and 
emotional  fallout:  Work,  home  and  men’s  senses  of 
belonging  in  post-GFC  Sydney.  Emotion,  Space  and 
Society 4, 4, 211–220. 

28.  Benjamin  Gottlieb  H.  1981.  Preventive  Interventions 
Involving  Social  Networks  and  Social  Support.  In 
Social  networks  and  social  support.  Benjamin  H. 
Gottlieb (ed.). Sage. 201–232. 

29.  Richard HR Harper. 2010. Texture: human expression 

in the age of communications overload. MIT Press. 

1374

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

30.  Barton  J.  Hirsch  and  E.  Ann  Jolly.  1984.  Role 
transitions  and  social  networks:  Social  support  for 
multiple  roles.  In  Role  Transitions.  Vernon  L.  Allen 
and Evert van de Vliert (eds). Springer, 39–51.  

31.  Barton  J.  Hirsch.  1979.  Psychological  dimensions  of 
social  networks:  A  multimethod  analysis.  American 
Journal of Community Psychology 7, 3, 263–277. 

32.  Barton  J.  Hirsch.  1980.  Natural  support  systems  and 
coping  with  major  life  changes.  American  Journal  of 
Community Psychology 8, 2, 159–172. 

33.  Barton J. Hirsch. 1981. Social networks and the coping 
process:  Creating  personal  communities.  In  Social 
networks  and  social  support.  Benjamin  H.  Gottlieb 
(ed.). Sage.149–170. 

34.  Arlie  Russell  Hochschild  and  Anne  Machung.  1989. 

The Second Shift. Penguin Books. 

35.  Bernie Hogan. 2010. The presentation of self in the age 
of  social  media:  Distinguishing  performances  and 
exhibitions  online.  Bulletin  of  Science,  Technology  & 
Society 30, 6: 377-386. 

36.  James  H.  Johnson  and  Irwin  G.  Sarason.  1979. 
Moderator  Variables  in  Life  Stress  Research.  DTIC 
Document.  

37.  Priya  Kumar  and  Sarita  Schoenebeck.  2015.  The 
Modern  Day  Baby  Book:  Enacting  Good  Mothering 
and Stewarding Privacy on Facebook.  Proceedings of 
the  ACM  Conference  on  Computer  Supported 
Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW’15), 
1302-1312 

38.  Michael  E.  Lamb,  Joseph  H.  Pleck,  Eric  L.  Charnov, 
and  James  A.  Levine.  1985.  Paternal  behavior  in 
humans. American zoologist, 883–894. 

39.  Michael  E.  Lamb.  2010.  The  Role  of  the  Father  in 

Child Development. John Wiley & Sons. 

40.  Cliff  Lampe,  Nicole  Ellison,  and  Charles  Steinfield. 
2006. A Face (book) in the crowd: Social searching vs. 
social  browsing.  Proceedings  of 
the  2006  20th 
anniversary  conference  on  Computer  supported 
cooperative work (CSCW’06), 167–170. 

41.  Airi  Lampinen,  Vilma  Lehtinen,  Asko  Lehmuskallio, 
and  Sakari  Tamminen.  2011.  We’re  in  it  together: 
interpersonal  management  of  disclosure  in  social 
the  SIGCHI 
network 
conference  on  human  factors  in  computing  systems 
(CHI’11), 3217–3226. 

services.  Proceedings  of 

42.  Ralph  LaRossa.  1988.  Fatherhood  and  social  change. 

Family relations, 451–457. 

43.  Ralph  LaRossa.  1997.  The  modernization  of 
fatherhood:  A  social  and  political  history.  University 
of Chicago Press.  

44.  Beth A. Latshaw. 2011. Is fatherhood a full-time job? 
Mixed  methods  insights  into  measuring  stay-at-home 
fatherhood. Fathering: A Journal of Theory, Research, 
and Practice about Men as Fathers 9, 2, 125–149. 

45.  Edward  O.  Laumann.  1973.  Bonds  of  pluralism:  the 
form and substance of urban social networks. J. Wiley. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

46.  Mark  R.  Leary.  1995.  Self-presentation:  Impression 
management  and  interpersonal  behavior.  Brown  & 
Benchmark Publishers. 

47.  Silvia Lindtner. 2014. Hackerspaces and the Internet of 
Things 
in  China:  How  makers  are  reinventing 
industrial  production,  innovation,  and  the  self.  China 
Information 28, 2, 145–167. 

48.  Ruth  Lister.  2009.  A  Nordic  nirvana?  Gender, 
citizenship,  and  social  justice  in  the  Nordic  welfare 
states. Social Politics: International Studies in Gender, 
State & Society 16, 2, 242–278. 

49.  Gretchen Livingston. 2014. Growing Number of Dads 
Home with the Kids. Pew Research Center’s Social & 
Demographic Trends Project.  

50.  Caitlin  McLaughlin  and  Jessica  Vitak.  2012.  Norm 
evolution  and  violation  on  Facebook.  New  Media  & 
Society 14, 2, 299–315. 

51.  Risto Moisio, Eric J.  Arnould, and James W. Gentry. 
2013.  Productive  consumption  in  the  class-mediated 
construction  of  domestic  masculinity:  Do-It-Yourself 
(DIY)  home  improvement  in  men’s  identity  work. 
Journal of Consumer Research 40, 2, 298–316. 

52.  Meredith  Ringel  Morris,  Jaime  Teevan,  and  Katrina 
Panovich. 2010. A Comparison of Information Seeking 
Using  Search  Engines  and  Social  Networks.  Proc. 
ICWSM. 

53.  Meredith Ringel Morris. 2014. Social Networking Site 
Use by Mothers of Young Children. Proceedings of the 
17th  ACM  Conference  on  Computer  Supported 
Cooperative  Work  &  Social  Computing,  (CSCW’14) 
1272–1282. 

54.  Kim  Parker  and  Wendy  Wang.  Modern  Parenthood. 
Pew Research Center’s Social & Demographic Trends 
Project. 

55.  Leonard  I.  Pearlin  and  Carmi  Schooler.  1978.  The 
structure  of  coping.  Journal  of  health  and  social 
behavior, 2–21. 

56.  Joseph H. Pleck. 2010. Paternal Involvement: Revised 
conceptualization  and  theoretical  linkages  with  child 
outcomes.  In  The  role  of 
in  child 
development, Michael E. Lamb (ed.). Wiley, Hoboken, 
NJ, 58-93. 

57.  Mary Sue Richardson and Lillian Kagan. 1979. Social 

father 

the 

Support and the Transition to Parenthood. 

58.  Aaron  B.  Rochlen,  Ryan  A.  McKelley,  Marie-Anne 
Suizzo,  and  Vanessa  Scaringi.  2008.  Predictors  of 
relationship satisfaction, psychological well-being, and 
life 
fathers. 
Psychology of Men & Masculinity 9, 1, 17. 

stay-at-home 

satisfaction 

59.  Aaron B. Rochlen, Ryan A. McKelley, and Tiffany A. 
Whittaker.  2010.  Stay-at-home  fathers’  reasons  for 
entering 
stigma  experiences:  A 
preliminary report.  Psychology of Men  & Masculinity 
11, 4, 279. 

role  and 

among 

60.  Aaron  B.  Rochlen,  Marie-Anne  Suizzo,  Ryan  A. 
McKelley,  and  Vanessa  Scaringi.  2008.  “  I’m  just 
providing for my family”: A qualitative study of stay-

the 

1375

at-home fathers. Psychology of Men  & Masculinity 9, 
4, 193. 

61.  Theodore  R.  Sarbin.  1984.  Role  transition  as  social 
drama. In Role Transitions, Vernon L. Allen and Evert 
van de Vliert (eds). Springer, 21–37.  

62.  Sarita  Yardi  Schoenebeck.  2013.  The  Secret  Life  of 
Online  Moms:  Anonymity  and  Disinhibition  on 
YouBeMom. com. ICWSM. 

63.  Rudy  Ray  Seward  and  Leslie  Stanley-Stevens.  2014. 
Fathers,  fathering,  and  fatherhood  across  cultures.  In 
Parenting Across Cultures. Springer, 459–474.  

64.  Steven B. Sheldon. 2002. Parents’ social networks and 
beliefs  as  predictors  of  parent  involvement.  The 
Elementary School Journal, 301–316. 

65.  Carmen Stavrositu and S. Shyam Sundar. 2012. Does 
blogging  empower  women?  Exploring  the  role  of 
agency  and  community.  Journal  of  Computer-
Mediated Communication 17, 4, 369–386. 

66.  Catalina  L.  Toma.  2010.  Affirming  the  self  through 
online profiles: beneficial effects of social networking 
sites. Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human 
factors in computing systems (CHI’10), 1749–1752.  

67.  Suvi Uski and Airi Lampinen. 2014. Social norms and 
self-presentation on social network sites: Profile work 
in action. New Media & Society, 1461444814543164. 

68.  Jessica  Vitak  and  Jinyoung  Kim.  2014.  You  can’t 
block  people  offline:  examining  how  facebook’s 
affordances shape the disclosure process. Proceedings 
of  the  17th  ACM  conference  on  Computer  supported 
cooperative  work  &  social  computing  (CSCW’14), 
461–474.  

69.  Jessica  Vitak.  2012.  The  impact  of  context  collapse 
and privacy on social network site disclosures. Journal 
of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 56, 4, 451–470. 

70.  Joseph B. Walther, Brandon Van Der  Heide, Artemio 
Ramirez Jr, Judee K. Burgoon, and Jorge Peña. 2015. 
Interpersonal  and  Hyperpersonal  Dimensions  of 
The 
Computer-Mediated 
Handbook  of 
the  Psychology  of  Communication 
Technology, Shyam Sundar (ed.). Wiley, 3-22. 

Communication. 

71.  Barry Wellman. 1981. Applying Network Analysis to 
the  Study  of  Support.  In  Social  networks  and  social 
support. Benjamin H. Gottlieb (ed.). Sage. 171–200. 

72.  Candace West and Don H.  Zimmerman. 1987. Doing 

In 

Gender. Gender & Society 1, 2, 125–151.  

73.  Naomi  Rosh  White.  1994.  About  fathers:  masculinity 
and  the  social  construction  of  fatherhood.  Journal  of 
sociology 30, 2, 119–131. 

74.  Brian L. Wilcox. 1981. Social support in adjusting to 
marital  disruption:  A  network  analysis.  In  Social 
networks  and  social  support.  Benjamin  H.  Gottlieb 
(ed.). Sage.  97–115. 

75.  Toni  Schindler  Zimmerman.  2000.  Marital  equality 
and  satisfaction  in  stay-at-home  mother  and  stay-at-
home  father  families.  Contemporary  Family  Therapy 
22, 3, 337–354. 

