CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Playful Backstalking and Serious Impression 

Management: How Young Adults Reflect on their Past 

Identities on Facebook 

Sarita Schoenebeck1, Nicole B. Ellison1, Lindsay Blackwell1, Joseph B. Bayer2, Emily B. Falk3
3School for Communication
1School of Information, 2Department of Communication Studies
University of Pennsylvania

University of Michigan

{yardi,enicole,lblackw,joebayer}@umich.edu

falk@asc.upenn.edu

ABSTRACT 
Parents,  educators,  and  policymakers  have  expressed 
concern  about  the  future  implications  of  young  people’s 
sharing  practices  on  social  media  sites.  However,  little  is 
known about how young people themselves feel about their 
online  behaviors  being  preserved  and  resurfaced  later  in 
adulthood.  We  conducted  semi-structured  interviews  with 
28  college-going,  primarily  female,  young  adults  about 
their  use  of  social  media  and  their  transition  from 
adolescence into young adulthood. We find that participants 
recognize  archival  value  in  their  own  Facebook  histories, 
despite  sometimes  perceiving 
to  be 
embarrassing.  They  experience  tensions  between  meeting 
their  current  self-presentational  goals  and  maintaining  the 
these 
authenticity  of  historical  content.  To  reconcile 
tensions, 
impression 
management practices, such as curating past content. They 
also  engage  in  “backstalking”  behaviors,  in  which  they 
view  and  engage  with  other  users’  Facebook  histories—
openly  with  close  ties  and  discreetly  with  weak  ties.  We 
consider 
lens  of 
emerging adulthood and discuss the theoretical implications 
of our findings, especially in light of emerging applications 
which intentionally resurface digital traces. 

ludic  engagement 

these  histories 

retrospective 

engage 

through 

the 

they 

in 

this 

Author Keywords 
Teenagers; adolescence; Facebook; impression management; 
emerging adulthood; reminiscence; archives; persistence. 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: User 
Interfaces - Interaction styles.

INTRODUCTION 
Many teenagers today socialize online, actively connecting 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that  copies  bear  this  notice  and  the  full 
citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others 
than  the  author(s)  must  be  honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy 
otherwise,  or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02...$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819923

[16], 

social  capital  building 

and communicating with peers on social media sites. Social 
media can offer a range of benefits for children and teens, 
including 
relationship 
maintenance [17], information sharing [1,20,32], friendship 
formation  [9],  and  social  support  [32,54].  Despite  these 
benefits, teen social  media  use has  incited concern among 
many  parents,  educators,  and  policymakers  [9,14,19].  At 
the heart of these concerns is the fear that children share too 
much about themselves online, potentially risking their own 
safety,  development,  and  future  career  opportunities  (e.g., 
[2,53]).  Many  K-12  schools  now  incorporate  curricula 
about  “digital  footprints”  which  encourage  children  and 
teenagers to be cautious about  what they share online and 
with whom [59].
To date, research on teen social media use has focused on 
adults’ and teens’ perspectives on teens’ social media use in 
the  present  [9,11,20,27,37,38]—that  is,  how  do  teens  use 
social  media  and  with  whom,  and  how  do  they  manage 
impressions? Little research has taken a retrospective look 
at teens’ social media use from their perspective as young 
adults: that is, how do young adults feel when they reflect 
on  their  social  media  use  from  when  they  were  teens? 
While adults may worry about teen social media use, teens 
themselves  are  most  impacted  by  their  own  social  media 
use,  whether  present  or  past.  Further,  teens’  decision-
making  skills  tend  to  be  underdeveloped,  leading  them  to 
engage in risky behaviors that they might later regret (e.g., 
risky driving) [35,49]. The research questions we explore in 
this work are:   

1. How do young adults describe the ways in which their

Facebook use has evolved over time?

2. How  do  young  adults  feel  about  their  Facebook  data
into

being  preserved,  especially  as 
adulthood?

they  mature 

3. How  do  young  adults  look  back  on  their  Facebook

Friends’ past content, and why do they do so?

To  address  these  questions,  we  investigate  teen  Facebook 
use  using  a  retrospective  approach  [43].  We  chose 
Facebook  because 
feature  provides  a 
naturalistic environment that enables young adults to reflect 
on  their  own  teen  behavior  and  because  it  has  larger 
penetration than other social media sites. We invited young 

its  Timeline 

1475

find 

adults—a sample of college students at a large university in 
the U.S.—to tell us about how they currently use Facebook 
and  other  social  media  sites,  as  well  as  how  their  use  has 
evolved over time. During interviews, we asked participants 
to log in to their Facebook profiles and to look back on their 
Timelines, beginning with when they first joined Facebook. 
We 
that  college-going  young  adults  express 
embarrassment  about  their  social  media  behaviors  from 
their teen years, though they nonetheless find value in their 
past behaviors being preserved. This work contributes to a 
growing  body  of  scholarly  literature  on  reminiscence  and 
reflection online, provides empirical evidence about young 
adults’  retrospective  assessments  of  their  past  online 
activities, and describes how they reconcile past and present 
identities 
through  playful  and  nostalgic  backstalking 
behaviors as a part of their emerging adulthood.  

RELATED WORK 
We describe temporality on social  media sites, impression 
management,  and  changes  in  Facebook’s  affordances  over 
time.  Throughout,  we  highlight  Facebook’s  persistence, 
which enables reflection on past experiences.  

identity  exhibitions,”  rather 

Temporality Online 
Existing  work  on  social  media  platforms  often  privileges 
their  “newness”  [24].  Content  posted  to  social  media 
typically  depicts  the  current  moment,  resulting  in  “an 
environment  in  which  users  focus  on  the  present”  [57]. 
Harper  et  al.  (2012)  suggest  that  this  present-focused 
identity performance inhibits users’ ability to manage their 
identities  over  time  [24].  However,  as  Zhao  and  Lindley 
(2014)  note,  the  persistence  afforded  by  these  platforms 
allows an individual user to “accumulate content, including 
status  updates,  pictures  and  videos,”  which  can  become 
personally  meaningful  over  time  [57].  The  persistence  of 
personal data, in addition to its visibility, searchability, and 
reviewability  [58],  allows  platforms  like  Facebook  to 
become  “long-term 
than 
ephemeral spaces [54,58]. 
Zhao  and  Lindley  (2014)  demonstrate 
that  although 
Facebook  does  not  function  as  a  complete  collection  of 
personal  artifacts  (in  the  way  that  a  folder  of  photos  or  a 
mobile phone’s camera roll may), it nonetheless serves an 
important  archival  function  for  its  users,  who  view  their 
personal archives on Facebook as “more selective, easier to 
browse,  and  encountered  more  often”  than  photo  storage 
alternatives [57]. Zhao et al. (2013) describe how Facebook 
users  experience  three  different  regions  on  the  site:  a 
performative  region  for  managing  impressions  and  recent 
activity,  an  exhibition 
term  self-
presentation,  and  a  personal  region  for  archival  purposes 
[58].  Social  media  profiles,  like  scrapbooks  and  photo 
albums,  are  “deeply  personal  texts”  which  help  us  to 
archive 
document 
relationships, and remember meaningful events [22]. Much 
like scrapbooks and photo albums, sites like Facebook and 

information, 

important 

personal 

region 

for 

long 

1476

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Twitter  allow  their  users  to  document,  review,  and  search 
for  “diverse  streams”  of  persistently  available  personal 
artifacts;  thus,  social  media  sites  “could  be  analyzed  as 
digital  carryovers  of  these  traditions”  [22].  Kaun  and 
Stiernstedt  (2014)  take  a  historical  approach  in  their 
interpretation  of  temporality  on  Facebook,  arguing  that 
media 
technologies  have  “long  been  considered  of 
importance  for the general  structuration and experience of 
time”  [29].  They  propose  the  concept  of  “social  media 
time”  to  describe  how  users  might  experience  and  make 
sense of time on social media sites [29]. 
Archived  digital  data  offer  a  number  of  valuable  features, 
such as enabling a digital baby book for young parents [31] 
or  supporting  reminiscence  through  memory  triggers  [46]. 
Parents value digital legacies, and are critical of the notion 
that  content  like  family  photos  should  decay  or  disappear 
over  time  [23].  Indeed,  research  suggests  that  people 
experience  benefits  from  looking  back  on  their  past 
activities.  A  series  of  experiments  by  Zhang  et  al.  (2014) 
revealed  that  people  underestimate  how  much  they  will 
enjoy  rediscovering  their  past  experiences,  especially  the 
mundane  (as  compared  with  extraordinary  ones)  [56]. 
Designers, too, have explored how people might rediscover 
these past experiences. Odom et al. created a system called 
Photobox,  which  occasionally  prints  a  randomly-selected 
photo  from  a  Flickr  user’s  own  collection  [44]  to  trigger 
memories  over  time.  Cosley  et  al.  created  a  system  called 
Pensieve,  which  supports  reminiscence  by 
triggering 
memories via digital traces [13,46].  
Lindley  (2015)  suggests  that  the  perceived  rush  of  digital 
time  reflects  a  speeding  up  of  everyday  life  and  rhythms 
and  calls  for  further  CSCW  research  to  explore  the 
collective  and  entangled  nature  of  time  and  technology 
[34].  As  applications  like  Timehop  (an  application  which 
resurfaces users’ prior social media content to them in the 
present) and Facebook’s more recent “On this Day” (which 
resurfaces a Facebook user’s content from the same date in 
a prior year) gain popularity, understanding the relationship 
between 
technology,  and  users’  social  media 
experiences  is  a  critical  area  of  research.  Our  work 
contributes to this research agenda, with a particular focus 
on teens and young adults.  

time, 

Impression Management on Social Media 
The  visibility  and  persistence  of  content  on  Facebook 
impacts what users decide to disclose on the site [54]. The 
interactive  affordances  of  Facebook  (such  as  “liking”  and 
commenting) also impact sharing behaviors, especially with 
respect  to  impression  management  [6,32,58].  Impression 
management describes users’  decisions about  what to post 
about themselves in order to convey a particular impression 
to  others.  Goffman  distinguishes  between  expressions  that 
are  purposefully 
impression 
information, which is unintentionally “given off” [21]—an 
important  distinction  which  enables  us  to  consider  both 
explicit communication acts (e.g., the specific content of a 

“given” 

identity 

and 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

post) and the ways in which these acts may be interpreted 
by  others.  Extensive  scholarship  has  described  impression 
management strategies on social media sites (e.g., in online 
dating [18]). However, the majority of this prior work has 
focused  on  how  people  manage 
the 
present—that  is,  what  should  they  share  to  their  online 
audiences  now?  This  paper 
impression 
management  as  both  a  current  consideration  and  a 
retrospective  practice—that  is,  how  should  users  manage 
impressions “given off” by content they shared in the past?  

impressions 

in 

investigates 

Teen Social Media Use 
The  perils  of  disclosing  too  much  information  online  are 
widely  discussed  in  popular  media,  in  what  some  have 
dubbed the “oversharing age” [15]. Facebook users dislike 
people sharing too much about themselves [50] and employ 
a variety of strategies to manage self-disclosure risks [54]. 
Users also perceive disclosures made privately on Facebook 
to be more intimate than those made publicly, and perceive 
public  Facebook  disclosures  about  sensitive  topics  to  be 
less  appropriate  [6].  Particular  concern  is  expressed  for 
children  and  teens,  whose  decision-making  skills  are  not 
fully  developed  and  who  thus  may  overshare  online  in  a 
variety of ways [40]. Indeed, several studies have surfaced 
different  kinds  of  risky  behaviors  (e.g.,  revealing  a  home 
address or telephone number) teens have enacted on social 
media sites [33,35]. However, other research suggests that 
although teens behave in diverse ways, some teens are more 
aware of their own privacy than adults perceive them to be 
[10].  Teens  use  a  number  of  privacy-management 
strategies, 
settings, 
managing audiences, and employing social steganography, 
or  the  practice  of  using  secret  messages  to  conceal 
conversations  with  friends  when  socializing  in  public 
spaces (e.g., “hiding in plain sight”) [11,42]. Research that 
has been conducted by talking directly with teens suggests 
they  do  in  fact  maintain  control  over  a  variety  of  their 
online  activities 
is 
inextricably integrated with how the site’s affordances and 
norms have changed over time. Among teens in particular, 
social behavior on Facebook prompts the sharing of jokes, 
memes,  and  other  content 
[9,11,26,35].  However, 
controlling  the  visibility  of  disclosures  on  Facebook  and 
other  social  media  sites  requires  managing  not  only  one’s 
own privacy settings and content, but also the activities of 
one’s  Friends  [42],  a  theme  we  explore  throughout  this 
work.  

like  changing  platform  privacy 

[10,11].  Teens’  Facebook  use 

An Overview of Facebook 
To  contextualize  participants’  evolving  Facebook  use,  we 
give  a  cursory  overview  of  Facebook’s  development  as  it 
relates  to  our  research.  We  focused  on  Facebook  in  this 
work because it is the site that participants had been using 
the  longest  and  most  actively  from  their  adolescence 
through the period of data collection.  

1477

Facebook  launched  in  2004  and  opened  to  high  school 
students  in  October  of  2005.  In  September  of  2006, 
Facebook opened to anyone aged 13 or over. Though teens 
and young adults have remained a core demographic, adult 
and  older  adult  users  have  increased  rapidly.  Currently, 
over 70% of all Internet users are on Facebook, though use 
skews toward younger adults ages 18-49 [60]. Over 90% of 
teens  have  a  Facebook  profile,  though  some  evidence 
suggests that their interest in Facebook is waning relative to 
their use of other sites like Instagram and Snapchat [36].   
In  September  2006,  Facebook  introduced  the  News  Feed, 
which  offered  a  single  stream  in  which  Friends’1  activity 
could  be  viewed.  Some  users  protested  the  new  changes, 
which  prompted  Facebook  to  introduce  privacy  controls 
that  allowed  users  to  determine  what  was  shared  on  the 
News  Feed  and  with  whom.  The  News  Feed  introduced  a 
way  for  information  to  spread  quickly  through  one’s 
network [4,51]. In February 2009, Facebook introduced the 
“Like” button, allowing users to interact with others’ posts 
on the site. Recent evidence suggests that users “like” and 
comment on their Friends’ content fairly regularly, but are 
less likely to post their own content as frequently  [50].  
Facebook Timeline, introduced in September 2011, allowed 
users  to  move  quickly  and  chronologically  through  their 
own  historical  content  to  revisit  past  posts  and  relive 
memories. Timeline also enabled users to visit other users’ 
historical  content,  both  to  learn  about  new  Friends  and  to 
relive  memories  with  existing  Friends.  Timeline  lowered 
the  social and technical barriers to perusing past activities 
on the site, though some research suggests that transitioning 
to the Timeline format was stressful for users because of the 
perceived loss of control [55]. 

METHODS 
We  conducted  semi-structured  interviews  with  28  young 
adults  in  March  and  April  of  2014.  All  participants  were 
college students at a large university in the U.S. Participants 
were  part  of  a  broader  research  study  exploring  the 
relationship between social media use and emotion among 
college  students.  As  part  of  this  study,  we  recruited  a 
random  sample  of  154  undergraduate  students  via  the 
Registrar’s  Office.  To  be  eligible,  participants  were 
required to be 18 years or older, own a smartphone, have a 
United  States  phone  number,  and  use  social  media  on  a 
daily basis. We invited a sub-sample of 57 participants from 
the  broader  study  to  participate  in  the  interview  study. 
These  participants  were  selected  randomly  from  within 
buckets  of  self-reported  social  media  use  (very  active  to 
minimally active). 35 participants expressed interest and 28 
participated  in  the  interview.  24  participants  were  female 
and four were male (females constituted 66% of the sample 
in  the  broader  study),  and  ages  ranged  from  18-22.  The 
                                                           
1We  capitalize  “friend”  when  referring  to  a  friendship  on 
Facebook.  

dates  that  participants  joined  Facebook  were:  2006  (n=1), 
2007 (n=6), 2008 (n=9), 2009 (n=9), and 2010 (n=3); their 
ages at the time of joining ranged from 13-17. 
The  first  and  second  authors  conducted  face-to-face 
interviews  on  campus.  This  study  was  approved  by  our 
institution’s  IRB.  Participants  completed  paper  consent 
forms at the time of the interview in addition to web-based 
consent  forms  at  the  beginning  of  the  larger  study. 
Participants received $25 upon completion of the interview.  
We used a retrospective interviewing technique, which asks 
participants  to  recall  and  reflect  on  past  experiences  [43]. 
Retrospective  interviews  have  been  used  in  a  number  of 
contexts,  often  health-related  (e.g.,  [8]).  The  technique  is 
subject  to  recall  bias  [28];  however,  in  many  cases  this  is 
built into the study design (e.g., understanding how people 
think now about their past behavior). Efforts to validate the 
method  have  shown  that  people  are  able  to  report  past 
experiences  with  some  accuracy  [7,39,45].  The  interview 
protocol began with a warm-up question about what social 
media  sites  participants  use  and  how  they  use  them.  We 
then  asked  if  their  use  had  changed  over  time,  and  if  so, 
how. The interview protocol focused on Facebook, though 
we  also  asked  about  other  social  media  platforms  to 
understand participants’ broader experiences online.  
The  first  half  of  the  interview  protocol  focused  on 
participants’  present  behaviors.  We  asked  participants  to 
tell  us  about  how  they  used  Facebook  at  the  time  of  the 
interview, what kinds of content they tended to share, and 
what  kinds of content their Friends shared. As part of our 
broader  study  goals,  we  asked  about  the  relationship 
between emotion and Facebook behavior, such as whether 
specific emotions prompted Facebook activity. The second 
half  of 
their 
retrospective uses of the site.  We asked participants to tell 
us  about  whether  they  ever  looked  back  at  old  Facebook 
content—their own or others’. We then invited participants 
to log in to Facebook and look through their Timelines to 
revisit  prior  content.  Participants  first  viewed  their  oldest 
visible Facebook post, then more recent years, up until the 
present day. We asked participants to tell us how they felt 
when  looking  through  their  Timeline  content,  as  well  as 
how  they  felt  about  the  experience  of  looking  through  it 
with us as a part of the interview process.  
Interviews  were  audio-recorded  and  transcribed  verbatim. 
The research team read through the interview transcripts to 
identify and correct errors and met to develop a preliminary 
codebook.  We  conducted  an  initial  coding  pass,  in  which 
two transcripts were coded by four members of the research 
team in order to further develop the codebook. After coding 
a sample of transcripts, the research team met to refine the 
codebook and to discuss and clarify any ambiguous coding 
instances  [48].  After  revising  the  codebook  to  reconcile 
ambiguities, we recoded the initial transcripts with the final 
codebook and then coded the remainder of the  transcripts. 
We  used  a  constant  comparison  method  to  code  the  data, 

the  protocol  asked  participants  about 

1478

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

observing  similarities  and  differences  in  the  interview 
transcripts as we coded [12]. Each member of the research 
team  coded  half  of  the  interviews,  such  that  all  28 
interviews were coded at least twice by two different team 
members.  We  took  this  approach  to  ensure  rigor  and 
thoroughness in the coding.  Transcripts were unitized such 
that  each  question  and  answer  pair  was  considered  a  unit. 
The  codebook  contained  50  total  codes,  focused  on  social 
media uses, relationships, mood and emotions, and change 
in  use  over  time.  The  research  team  then  analyzed  select 
codes related to looking back at one’s own profile, looking 
back  at  others’  profiles,  data  persistence,  archival  value, 
close  and  weak  ties,  and  development  and  changes  over 
time.  Codes  were  synthesized  into  themes  and  discussed 
among  the  research  team.  Key  themes,  based  on  our 
research questions above, are described in the next section. 
Participant quotes have been edited slightly for length and 
readability.  
A  note  on  terminology:  we  use  the  term  “teenager”  or 
“teen” frequently throughout the paper to indicate ages 13-
17,  a  range  used  by  Pew  and  other  resources  [36,37].  We 
occasionally  employ  the  term  “adolescent”  to  refer  to  the 
developmental  stage  related  to  puberty,  decision-making, 
and  maturity  [40].  Participants  often  talked  about  their 
development  stages  as  phases (e.g.,  middle  school  to  high 
school to college). In cases  when they did so,  we use this 
language  to  reflect  their  stories.  We  use  the  term  “young 
adults”  to  refer  to  ages  18-25,  a  period  characterized  as 
“emerging adulthood” in the literature [3].  

RESULTS 
Results  are  organized  around  three  overarching  themes: 
participants’ perceptions of changes in their own Facebook 
use over time, the archival value of Facebook, and practices 
of  looking  back  on  Facebook  histories.  Throughout,  we 
consider  these  themes  in  the  context  of  users’  transitions 
from adolescence to young adulthood.  

Changes in Facebook Use over Time 
Research question 1 asked how Facebook use evolves over 
time,  as  participants  transitioned  from  teens  to  young 
adults.  Participants  reported  a  number  of  changes  in  how 
they  used  Facebook  when  they  first  joined  as  teens 
compared  to  their  present  day  practices.  Participants 
reported posting prolifically as teens, sharing updates about 
mundane  topics  of  their  daily  lives,  song  lyrics,  and  large 
albums  of  photos.  Other  behaviors,  like  playing  Farmville 
and  similar  Facebook  games,  were  popular.  P18  felt  that 
teen Facebook users used to “post stuff just to post stuff,” 
but that now, a few years later, they posted content that they 
anticipated  would  receive  “likes”  or  would  be  otherwise 
appreciated  by  their  Facebook  networks.  P4  said  that  her 
use  of  the  site  was  now  more  passive;  instead  of  actively 
posting, she preferred  mostly to look at content posted by 
others. Many of our participants reported that they currently 
posted only the best or most important content: 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

I would, you know, post just to post on Facebook—
whereas  now,  I  only  post  if  I  actually  have 
something to say. –P2  

Participants reported changes in peer norms around the 
types of content perceived as appropriate to share. For 
example, as a teen, P24 actively shared chain-letter type 
posts (where a user tags Friends in a post that asks them 
to take a quiz, make a comment, or reveal some identity 
trait). P24 reported that she shared these posts because 
her  Friends  were  doing  so;  when  they  stopped  posting 
them,  so  did  she.  As  teens,  our  participants  also 
frequently posted song lyrics. P1 told us: 

I  stopped  posting  angsty  song  lyrics  as  my  status, 
which  is  probably  what  everyone  did  when  they 
were  in  high  school—and  uh,  tried  to  start  posting 
more relevant things to my life, or like clever witty 
things that I thought people would enjoy. –P1  

Many participants looked back at these prior posts with 
some  embarrassment;  although  they  posted  song  lyrics 
as  teens,  they  reported  they  would  not  do  so  now. 
Participants  also  shared  photos  extensively  as  teens, 
often 
indiscriminately  uploading  entire  albums  of 
photos: 

When  I  was  younger,  that  was  more  of  a  thing… 
people would have whole albums of “just me, here’s 
me” with, like, Photo Booth on a MacBook. You’d 
just  sit  there  and  take  like  50  pictures  of  only 
yourself, but then upload all of them… which was so 
weird. Now, that’s totally frowned upon. If you post 
an  entire  album  of,  like,  you  sitting  on  your 
computer doing the webcam thing, then like people 
will be like, “wow, what a dork!” –P18 

in 

longer  shared  bulk  photos 

Participants  no 
this 
indiscriminant  way.  Many  said  that  although  they  might 
still take many pictures, as before, they would choose only 
the best one to post on Facebook. In some cases, changes in 
the  platform’s  functionality  and  increased  mobile  access 
may  have  shaped  these  behaviors.  P23  noted  that  her 
adoption of a smartphone had spurred her to post just one or 
a few photos directly from the phone, rather than uploading 
photos  from  a  camera  to  a  computer  and  then  curating  an 
entire album around an event or a theme. 
Participants reported that throughout their adolescence they 
learned  what  types  of  Facebook  use  were  perceived  to  be 
appropriate  or  not,  either  by  observing  the  kinds  of  peer 
behaviors described above or through feedback from adults.  
P2’s  mother,  for  example,  reacted  negatively  to  a  post  P2 
wrote as a teen which included crass language. “Getting in 
trouble”  discouraged  P2 
inappropriate 
language. These social learning influences suggest that both 
bottom-up  peer  norms,  as  well  as 
top-down  adult 
instruction  (from  parents  and  others),  influenced  how 
participants’ use evolved over time. 

from  posting 

P5  also  associated  changes  in  his  Facebook  use  over  time 
with  his  own  maturity.  He  told  us  that  although  he 
sometimes used to participate in inflammatory discussions 
with  peers,  he  was  now  more  aware  of  the  effect  of  his 
words on others: “Now, I don’t … because I know there’s 
no positive outcome.” When asked if her Facebook profile 
was  an  accurate  reflection  of  herself,  P18  felt  it  was  and 
that  it  demonstrated  the  strides  she  had  made  in  her 
personal  development:  “It  definitely  shows  how  [I’ve] 
changed.”  P1  expressed  discomfort  with  her  current 
interactions  with  old  friends  from  high  school,  which  she 
said  felt  like  moving  backwards  in  her  own  development. 
She  was  trying  to  “become  a  passable  adult,  become  a 
better person, learn how to interact with people better,” and 
felt  that  interacting  with  old  acquaintances  was  counter-
productive with regard to those efforts.  

Friending Behaviors 
When  participants  first  joined  the  site  as  teens,  they 
reported that having many Facebook Friends was “a sign of 
popularity” (P14). Many participants noted that they added 
significantly  fewer  new  Facebook  Friends  now  than  they 
did  in  their  early  use  of  the  site.  Though  the  transition  to 
college  provided  an  increase  in  potential  new  Facebook 
Friends, participants told us they were now more purposeful 
in their friending behaviors, and placed greater emphasis on 
the  quality  of  the  relationship  than  on  the  quantity  of 
Friends they could accumulate: 

So it’s not just anyone and everyone who is on the 
team,  but  people  I  really  think  I  actually  interact 
with on a regular basis. –P11  

In contrast to prior use—which P17 characterized as, “oh, I 
met them once, I’ll add them”—participants now preferred 
to  limit  their  Facebook  networks  to  only  the  individuals 
they  wanted  to  interact  with.  For  instance,  P20  no  longer 
felt obligated to add Facebook Friends she “probably would 
never talk to again.” 
Furthermore,  participants  reported  culling  their  networks 
over time, especially during the transition from high school 
to  college.  During 
time,  participants  felt  more 
comfortable unfriending people with whom they had never 
been  close,  although  they  were  hesitant  to  unfriend  these 
peers when they attended the same high school.  

this 

Everyone  was  kind  of  friends  with  everyone  so… 
we would all Friend each other and everything. But 
like during  high  school I’d be like,  “oh I shouldn’t 
really unfriend you because I see you every day, you 
know, so we kinda interact.” –P27 

Participants  asserted 
that  having  many  Friends  was 
important when they first joined Facebook; as young adults, 
they now prioritized friendship quality.  
Participants  also  typically  reported  a  different  kind  of 
transition  in  their  Facebook  Friendships  with  family 
members.  Specifically,  while  many  participants  tolerated 

1479

(or  sometimes  rejected)  Friend  requests  from  family 
members  as  teens,  for  the  most  part  young  adults  now 
celebrated connecting with family members on Facebook: 
It’s  definitely  evolved  from  me  not  wanting  my 
mom  to  see  my  Facebook  to  my  mom  being  a  big 
part [of it]. –P2 

Archival Value:  A Modern-Day Time Capsule 
Research  question  2  asked  how  young  adults  feel  about 
their  Facebook  data  being  archived.  Participants  valued 
Facebook’s  archival  properties  for  a  variety  of  reasons. 
Many participants viewed their personal Facebook histories 
as  a  more  organized  and  curated  photo  storage  platform 
than  alternatives  like  their  personal  computers  or  mobile 
phones.  P1  emphasized  that  Facebook  allowed  her  to 
organize  and  search  photos  more  easily  than  on  her 
personal  archives.  Specifically,  she  found  it  easier  to  find 
specific  content  by  navigating  through  her  Facebook 
timeline than by searching for the same file on her personal 
computer. P8 also felt it was easier to revisit old photos on 
Facebook  as  opposed  to  other  photo  storage  platforms, 
because  she  puts  only  “the  best  ones  up.”  Because 
participants  chose  the  best  photos  to  share  on  Facebook 
among  numerous  outtakes,  they  turned  to  Facebook  as  a 
record  of  cherished  photos.  P20  appreciated  having 
carefully curated artifacts from her past readily available for 
review: “It’s nice to have a documentation of things you did 
in  the  past,  so  you  can  remember  better.”  Because 
Facebook  captured  and  saved  the  social  context  of  the 
photo, such as naming others in the photos and the specific 
feedback  received  from  Friends,  participants  turned  to 
Facebook  to  relive  and  reminisce  about  these  social 
experiences. P13 felt photos posted to Facebook were more 
meaningful  than  photos  stored  in  other  locations,  because 
Facebook  photos  were  specifically  meant  to  be  kept  and 
shared as a memory with friends:  

It’s kind of almost saying, like, “I want to show that 
I was with these people.” And I want us to have that 
memory  somewhere,  rather  than  just  keeping  it  on 
my  phone…  because  it’s  something  to  be  shared 
with those people. –P13 

P16  described  Facebook  as  a  “modern-day  time  capsule.” 
For  many  participants,  Facebook  served  as  a  valuable 
personal  archive  simply  because  of  the  frequency  and 
prolificacy  of  its  use.  For  example,  P15  said,  “I  have  just 
invested  so  much  of  my  life  on  Facebook…  all  of  my 
memories are there.”  
Participants considered looking back at their own personal 
histories to be a nostalgic activity. For P21, looking back on 
her personal history was “a lot easier now with the Timeline 
review, where I [can] just see all my posts from a specific 
year  or  specific  month.”  Several  participants  noted  that 
Facebook Timelines made it easy to  simply “scroll down” 
to  revisit  their  histories.  P5  reported  doing  this  during 
downtime:  “sometimes if I’m bored, I’ll look through and 

1480

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

about 

her 

but 

older 

pictures, 

kind  of  reminisce.”  However,  looking  back  on  personal 
Facebook histories was a source of embarrassment for some 
participants.  For  example,  P18  said  she  was  not 
embarrassed 
felt 
uncomfortable looking at her prior statuses because she was 
so  “dramatic”  then.  Other  participants  felt  that  reviewing 
their  own  Facebook  histories  was  a  useful  activity  in 
assessing  their  personal  development.  P21  appreciated 
having “physical proof” of her development, which she said 
was “one of the things that I like about Facebook.”  
The act of reviewing one’s own or others’ historical content 
was  not  exclusive  to  Facebook.  Although  we  did  not  ask 
about  Myspace  or  other  earlier  social  media  sites,  some 
participants  did  bring  up  their  use  of  Myspace  while  they 
were  in  middle school (grades 6-8 or 6-9 in the  U.S.). P2 
described  browsing  Myspace  (spelled  “MySpace”  at  the 
time) in high school, where she and her peers would revisit 
their  (now  abandoned)  profiles  to  review  photos  from 
middle school:  

 [The]  really  funny  thing  is  we  all  were  into 
Myspace in middle school. So if you can remember 
your Myspace password, and go on and  see all the 
middle  school  photos.  Oh  my  gosh,  we  did  that  in 
my junior year of high school, and it was horrific—
but I couldn’t delete it. –P2  

Some  participants  used  Timehop  to  observe  past  social 
media  behaviors  as  well.  The  desire  to  preserve  this 
content, despite potential embarrassment, again highlighted 
users’ perceptions of Facebook and other social media sites 
as valuable personal archives.  

“Backstalking”  or  Reviewing  Others’  Facebook 
Histories 
Our third research question asked about the kinds of social 
practices  young  adults  engaged  in  with  respect  to  other 
Facebook  users’  histories,  and  how  they  felt  about  these 
practices. In addition to looking back on their own archives, 
participants also looked back on others’ Facebook histories 
to  observe  how  their  friends  had  developed  and  changed 
over  time.  These  retrospective  behaviors  were  done  in  a 
variety of ways, including scrolling down the timeline of a 
new  Facebook  Friend,  using  the  Timeline  to  search  for  a 
particular date, or clicking on a profile picture and using the 
left arrow key to quickly navigate to a user’s oldest posted 
profile  photo.  Many  participants  referred  to  their  behavior 
as “Facebook stalking” or “backstalking,” which describes 
the  behavior  of  looking  back  on  other  Facebook  users’ 
histories.  Some  participants  also  actively  “liked”  or 
commented  on  old  content,  to  resurface  it  to  the  top  of 
others’ News Feeds as a form of playful embarrassment. In 
our sample, 25 out of the 28 participants reported that they 
looked  back  on  other  people’s  Facebook  histories,  though 
the  terms  they  used  varied  from  “Facebook  stalking”  to 
“backstalking” to “creeping.” Reasons for doing this ranged 
from  learning  about  new  friends  or  catching  up  with 
existing  ones  (n=17  reported  doing  this),  resurfacing 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

content for play (n=13), or resurfacing content for nostalgia 
(n=13).  The  motivation  for  these  behaviors,  and  the 
activities themselves (e.g., whether or not they left a digital 
trace  of  their  activities)  differed  based  on  whether  the 
Facebook  Friend  was  a  weak  or  strong  tie,  which  we 
explore further in the next sections.  

Backstalking Weak Ties 
Participants  backstalked  weak  ties  to  learn  about  new 
Friends  or  acquaintances,  as  well  as  potential  romantic 
interests.  P1  suggested 
that  backstalking  allowed  a 
Facebook user to “learn more about [a person], or just feel 
like  you  know  them  more…  to  familiarize  yourself.”  P2 
added that if there was romantic interest in a new Facebook 
Friend, “you want to know what other girls were posting on 
his Facebook.” Because Facebook made it so easy to revisit 
these histories, P13 felt backstalking allows users to better 
understand a Friend’s past, “and then you can see a lot more 
into their life than perhaps they would permit you to see.” 
Backstalking  a  weak  tie  carried  stigma  with  it,  and  was 
perceived  as  not  socially  acceptable  (though  nearly  all 
participants  admitted 
this 
behavior). This perception also influenced how participants 
felt about their own Facebook histories:  

to  privately  engaging 

in 

In  terms  of  me  having  to  be  worried  about  people 
finding these and being like “oh my god, you were 
so  weird”…  that’s  not  really  a  thing.  ‘Cause  that 
takes  a  lot  of  time,  to  scroll  through  someone’s 
entire  profile.  You  were  so  weird,  for  spending  an 
hour looking through my profile. I wouldn’t say I’m 
worried  about  it.  When  I  look  at  [my  old  content], 
it’s kind of like ugh, like ‘yikes!’ [But] if someone 
finds  it  I’ll  just  be  like,  ‘yeah,  I  had  a  thing  with 
song  lyrics  as  my  status  when  I  was  15  years  old. 
Get over it.’ –P18 

Both  P13  and  P14  referred  to  looking  back  on  others’ 
histories  as  “creepy.”  While  most  participants  engaged  in 
backstalking behaviors, they went to great lengths to ensure 
that  it  was  not  obvious  to  others.  As  P1  told  us  after 
accidentally  “liking”  a  band  member’s  picture  from  four 
years prior: “I forgot you’re not supposed to “like” it when 
you’re  Facebook  stalking.”  Some  participants  said  they 
only backstalked on their computers, to avoid accidentally 
“liking” old content on their mobile phones.  

Backstalking Strong Ties 
Conversely,  backstalking  the  Facebook  histories  of  strong 
ties  was  a  socially  acceptable  phenomenon  that  was  very 
popular  among  participants  at  the  time  of  the  interviews. 
For  example,  P2  said  that  looking  at  her  boyfriend’s 
Facebook  page  allowed  her  to  feel  closer  to  him,  by 
revisiting what his life was like before they had even met: 
“Even  though  you  weren’t  there  when  those  posts  were 
made… you’ve seen them, so now like it’s kind of like part 
of you was there at those times.” 

1481

Participants also actively “liked” or commented on friends’ 
old content to resurface it to current Facebook Friends. This 
type of historic resurfacing was of two varieties: nostalgia 
and  play.  To  engage  in  nostalgic  behaviors,  participants 
“liked”  or  commented  on  previous  content  as  a  form  of 
reminiscence  and 
social  grooming.  This  nostalgic 
backstalking  was  sometimes  conducted  as  a  co-located 
social activity, where participants gathered around a screen 
and browsed historical content together.  

We’ll  be  like,  “When  did  that  happen?”  And  we’ll 
try and go back. In 2012, I went to this concert with 
my  best  friend.  This  past  November  was  the 
anniversary  of  when  we  went,  and  we  were  like, 
“Oh, my gosh, we should go back.”  And we clicked 
and found the day and looked at our posts because 
we were excited. –P13  

The  second  type  of  backstalking—play—involved  finding 
old,  potentially  embarrassing,  photos  in  a  close  friend’s 
history and then intentionally “liking” or commenting on it 
to resurface the photo to the News Feed. P5 said:  

I don’t know, [we] just look at them [and] if I found 
one that’s particularly funny, the big trend now is to 
comment on it, which bumps it up to the top of the 
News Feed so that everybody can see it. This is you 
in eighth  grade. Like, this really  funny picture  will 
bump up to the top. –P5  

These resurfacing behaviors typically occurred among close 
friends,  as  well  as  team  members,  fraternity  or  sorority 
members, or other peer groups. For example, P11 said:  
One  of  the  dance  team  members  actually  reposted 
something on my wall, an older picture when I was 
in  a  show,  and  it  was  very  amusing  to  see  the 
response of my new friends looking at an older thing 
of me. –P11  

However, participants only engaged in these kinds of ludic 
resurfacing  behaviors  with  close  friends.  In  addition,  only 
legitimately  harmful  or 
content 
distressing  was  resurfaced, 
this  activity  was 
sometimes intended to “get a rise” out of a friend:  

that  would  not  be 

though 

Like  there  is  kind  of  a  thing  where  if  you  want  to 
just  get  a  rise  out  of  your  friends,  you  can  go  and 
backstalk them and look through all their super old 
stuff from  when they  were awkward and in  middle 
school—and just like sort of “like” it so that it shows 
up  in  your  community.  I’ll  do  that  to  my  friends 
sometimes. –P18 

Resurfacing potentially embarrassing content was typically 
intended as a playful act between two individuals. This act 
surfaced archival content to a new (and broader) audience, 
in a ludic reinforcement of existing social bonds.  

Impression management over time 
Because  of  the  popularity  of  revisiting  or  resurfacing  old 
content,  some  participants  engaged  in  active  impression 
management  strategies  to  protect  their  historical  content. 
Proactive  measures,  like  deletion  and  restrictions  on  post 
visibility,  helped  users  hide  potentially  embarrassing 
content.  P25  described  untagging  herself  in  photos  posted 
by  other  users;  for  example,  she  might  untag  unflattering 
photos or photos with “awful lighting.” P6 had changed her 
privacy  settings  so  that  other  users  could  not  see  her  old 
photos: “I don’t really feel like my friends need to go back 
and  see  these.”  By  making  photos  private  instead  of 
deleting them the site, P6 ensured that her Facebook profile 
retained  its  value  as  a  personal  archive.  Users  who  did 
delete  some  early  posts  did  so  because  they  felt  content 
posted during the earlier years of their Facebook use was no 
longer an accurate representation:  

If  it  [isn’t  a]  reflection  on  who  I  am  today,  I 
sometimes  go  back  and  delete  different  posts,  and 
stuff  that  just  [doesn’t]  seem  consistent  with  my 
personality anymore. –P21 

In  general,  however,  participants  did  not  do  extensive 
hiding  or  deleting  of  content,  reporting  that  these  earlier 
posts were simply part of who they were. P18 said: “Yeah, 
it’s  embarrassing,  but  that’s  also  who  I  was.”  Most 
participants  felt  that  even  if  their  older  content  was 
embarrassing,  they  were  adolescents  at  the  time  it  was 
posted  and  it  was  therefore  unlikely  that  anyone  would 
judge them  for that content  now. Some users intentionally 
choose  not  to  delete  potentially  embarrassing  content 
because doing so would seem insincere: 

I don’t go through and delete stuff that I’ve written, 
‘cause then, like, people have seen it for how many 
years?  Going  back  and  deleting  it  now  is  not 
gonna—it would be pointless. I’ll open up to the fact 
that whatever stupid thing I said, I did say. –P17 

Thus,  while  participants  generally  accepted  their  past 
content as part of who they were, they nonetheless engaged 
in  some  behaviors  to  curate  past  and  present  content  to 
ensure 
their  Facebook  profiles  were  accurate 
representations  of  how  they  perceived  themselves  in  the 
present.  Most  participants  felt  their  overall  Facebook 
profiles  were  generally  accurate  representations,  albeit 
selective and subject to social pressures: 

that 

I guess to a certain extent the identity you have on 
Facebook is always a little bit constructed. So like, 
you  only—people  only  see  what  you  want  them  to 
see. But in terms of me tracking, like, what I wanted 
people to see, that’s pretty accurate. –P18 

Participants  reported  that  a  downside  to  this  constructed 
nature  of  posts,  especially  as  they  transitioned  into  young 
adulthood, is that they did not feel that Facebook provided 
them with a completely accurate, holistic representation of 
their identities:  

1482

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

[On  Facebook]  I  want  to  always  seem  like  I’m 
happy and everything is  great and  things are  going 
great and I’m healthy and yeah everything’s perfect. 
But it’s actually not like that but that’s what I like to 
present,  which  is  sad  ‘cause  like  back  when  I  was 
younger,  Facebook  was  just  like  me  and  now…  I 
think  because  I’m  also  Friends  with  professional 
friends, or like I need them to still think I’m a good 
professional  person,  so  I  started  becoming  more 
careful with things that I posted and stuff. –P1 

Because  Facebook  use  had  shifted  away  from  everyday 
documentation of daily life, participants felt they no longer 
had  access  to  their  friends’  “real”  lives,  as  a  number  of 
them  reported,  but 
instead  carefully-constructed  self-
representations of one another. 

to  themselves  and 

DISCUSSION 
A  key  affordance  of  Facebook  is  persistence  [25,52]—the 
fact that content can continue to be viewed for many years 
after  it  is  initially  shared.  The  introduction  of  Facebook’s 
in  2011  renders  users’  past  content  more 
Timeline 
accessible,  both 
to  others;  many 
participants  saw  their  Facebook  profiles  as  a  personal 
archive, echoing prior work [57,58]. Rather than having to 
click  the  “Show  Older  Posts”  link  at  the  bottom  of  each 
loaded page—an action that served as both a technical and 
social barrier—Facebook users can now easily revisit years 
of  past  experiences  with  just  one  click.  This  provides 
researchers  with  the  unique  opportunity  to  investigate 
young  adults’ 
their  digitally-archived 
adolescence,  as  well  as  changes  in  their  social  media  use 
which occur in tandem with their social development.  

impressions  of 

Tensions  between  Current  Self-Presentational  Goals 
and Maintaining the Authenticity of Past Content 
Most  impression  management  studies  have  treated  the 
theory  of  impression  management  as  a  present-focused 
practice; that is, people present themselves in ways that will 
be well-received by their current audience. Goffman’s own 
examples  of  impression  management  focus  on  facial 
expressions in the present—in a performance on stage or a 
teacher  speaking  in  front  of  his  students.  These  behaviors 
may  involve  selective  self-disclosure  practices,  managing 
appearances,  conforming  to  norms,  or  presenting  an 
idealized version of the self [18,30]. However, few studies 
of  impression  management,  especially  in  online  spaces, 
have  focused  on  what  we  call  retrospective  impression 
management.  That  is,  in  what  ways  do  people  try  to 
retroactively manage their online identity information, even 
after  those  identities  have  already  been  performed  to  an 
audience who was present at the time of the performance?  
We argue that features like Facebook’s Timeline  shift and 
often expand the audience for self-presentational messages, 
thus 
retrospective 
impression  management.  Social  media  users  make 
decisions about what to share based on their understanding 

introducing  new 

tensions  around 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

of  their  audience  at  a  particular  time  and  life  stage;  for 
instance,  teenagers  posting  to  a  primarily  high  school 
network. However, when that content is resurfaced later to 
a  new  audience  of  primarily  college  peers,  as  well  as 
extended  family  and  other  networks,  users  must  balance 
maintaining the authenticity of past behaviors with current 
self-presentational  goals.  In  prior  work,  scholars  have 
drawn  on  the  idea  of  context  collapse  to  describe  the 
challenges  associated  with  managing  multiple  audiences 
online; here we see evidence of temporal context collapse, 
in which social media users must not only navigate multiple 
audiences in the present, but also multiple audiences across 
time  periods.  This  is  particularly  challenging  for  our 
participants  because  expectations  about  appropriate 
Facebook use have evolved over time, in parallel with their 
transition  through  major  developmental  life  stages.  Below 
we  discuss  how  these  tensions  are  reconciled  through 
playful backstalking behaviors in emerging adulthood.   

Reconciling Impression Management Tensions through 
Play in Emerging Adulthood 
We  observed  two  strategies  for  managing  these  self-
presentational tensions: first, a small number of participants 
chose to delete old content or, in the case of one participant, 
to set old content as visible to “Only Me.” The majority of 
our  participants,  however,  did  not  remove  or  hide  past 
content,  instead  choosing  to  intentionally  preserve  their 
prior  activity—even  if  it  was  embarrassing—to  maintain 
the  historical  integrity  of  their  online  presence.  For  our 
participants, maintaining authenticity required that they not 
edit  past  content,  because  doing  so  would  be  a 
misrepresentation  of  who  they  once  were.  However,  they 
did not describe doing the opposite: deleting past content to 
maintain authenticity to current self-presentational goals.  
Many  of  the  central  properties  of  adolescence—such  as 
identity  play  and  exploration  [41]—require  that  teens  be 
able  to  try  on  a  given  identity,  then  shed  it  and  leave  it 
behind  them.  We  observe  here  that  while  young  adults 
describe  significant  changes  in  how  they  behave  from 
adolescence  to  young  adulthood,  they  do  not  necessarily 
wish to discard or obscure those former identities. Indeed, 
some  online  communities  maintain  norms  against  deleting 
content that is negatively received by others, an activity that 
is  colloquially  known  as  a  “dirty  delete”  [61].  Our  results 
suggest 
their  adolescent 
Facebook  histories  to  be  valuable  archives,  and  use 
Facebook as a platform for playful reminiscence with close 
friends.  In  this  way,  Facebook  may  also  provide  a 
mechanism  for  childlike  play  while  still  allowing  users  to 
put forth a mature self-presentation.   
We  draw  on  Arnett’s  notion  of  “emerging  adulthood”  to 
interpret  and  explain  these  activities  [3].  He  describes  the 
period between 18 and 25 as one in which individuals are in 
a  liminal  space  between  childhood  and  adulthood.  During 
this  time,  emerging  adults  play  with  and  explore  different 
worldviews,  careers,  and  relationships  in  a  space  that  is 

that  young  adults  consider 

toward  posting  only 

somewhat  protected  from  adult  concerns,  yet  with  more 
freedom  than  teenage  years  spent  living  at  home.  Arnett 
stresses  the  importance  of  experimenting  with  different 
roles  during  this  period  of  emerging  adulthood,  a  process 
that is enabled by the postponement of major life changes 
like  marriage  [3].  We  believe  some  of  the  Facebook 
practices  our  participants  report  support  this  development 
process  by  allowing  them  to  present  current,  “adult” 
identities  while  still  engaging  with  and  collectively  re-
living  moments  of  unfiltered,  playful,  and  candid 
adolescent identity expressions.    
Facebook offers a potential playground for self-expression 
and peer feedback—yet our participants seemed reluctant to 
post playful content on Facebook in the present day, instead 
gravitating 
important  events  or 
polished photos rather than all of their day-to-day moments. 
Revisiting  digital  traces  which  reflected  their  adolescence 
through  backstalking  may  provide  young  adults  with  a 
socially appropriate opportunity to engage in play with their 
own  histories,  while  still  protecting  their  present-day 
impression  management  goals.  In  this  sense,  Facebook 
offers  users  a  way  to  engage  with  their  past—and  less 
filtered—online  selves,  while  also  crafting  personae  that 
reflect  present  and  sometimes  aspirational  future  selves. 
Backstalking behaviors also differed based on whether a tie 
was close or not; these distinct behaviors on Facebook may 
have allowed emerging adults to rekindle strong bonds with 
close friends through collective reminiscing online.  
Zhao and Lindley (2014) describe how social network sites 
act  as  archives  by  enabling  users  to  curate  content,  store 
data,  and  provide  frequent  access,  [52],  results  that  are 
echoed in our findings. Many of our participants managed 
the  transition  from  adolescence  to  young  adulthood  (and, 
simultaneously, from high school to college) by cultivating 
a  smaller  and  more  deliberate  Facebook  network  and  by 
actively  presenting  what  they  perceived  to  be  a  more 
polished online self-representation. Over time, participants 
reported  becoming  more  selective  about  their  Facebook 
activities, with regard to both the content they share and the 
Friends they add. For them, Facebook has evolved from a 
platform  for  indiscriminately  sharing  everyday  moments 
and quotidian content to a carefully selected assemblage of 
important 
photographs. 
Expectations  of  putting  forth  a  polished  self  might  help 
explain  why  today’s  teenagers  turn  to  other  sites.  Recent 
research  supports  this  hypothesis,  suggesting  that  young 
adults  turn  to  ephemeral  sites  like  Snapchat  to  overcome 
self-presentation concerns they experience on Facebook [5].  

best 

announcements 

and 

Technological Literacy and Digital Traces 
Changes  in  technological  affordances  subtly  impacted 
participants’ perceptions of their own and others’ Facebook 
histories.  We  argue  that  Facebook’s  evolving  affordances 
require new kinds of literacy which enable users to discern 
the  temporal  nuances  of  digital  traces.  For  example, 
participants who reviewed old statuses, such as song lyrics 

1483

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

present-day utterances, and the ways in which users manage 
the  visibility  of  this  content  to  achieve  current  self-
presentational  goals  while  also  maintaining  the  archival 
value  of  this  content.  These  processes  are  likely  to  be  of 
particular importance during times of identity shift, such as 
adolescence and emerging adulthood.  

likely 

to  represent 

Limitations 
This  research  was  conducted  with  a  subsample  of  young 
adults  who  are  not 
the  broader 
population in the U.S. Our study oversampled females; this 
was a result of response bias (we recruited both males and 
females  for 
the  study).  In  future  work,  we  would 
oversample males in the recruitment. Focusing on students 
at a four-year  university also limits our ability to describe 
the experiences of young adults who do not go to college or 
who 
through  college.  For 
instance,  these  populations  may  experience  different  risks 
than  those  described  by  our  participants.  A  college-going 
population  may  have  been  better  educated  about 
appropriate  online  behavior.  Future  work  could  extend 
these results with a large-scale survey study of young adults 
to  more  closely  reflect  the  demographics  and  family 
structures of the U.S.  

take  non-traditional  paths 

CONCLUSION 
Drawing on interview data with 28 young adults, this study 
investigates  how  young  adults  reflect  on  their  historical 
Facebook use. Young adults describe a number of changes 
in  their  Facebook  use  over  time,  including  having  fewer 
Friends, posting fewer statuses (e.g., music lyrics), posting 
fewer photos, and generally being more careful about what 
they  post.  They  perceive  archival  value  in  their  Facebook 
histories, and often choose not to delete content—even if it 
is embarrassing—in order to preserve authenticity. Many of 
our  participants  “backstalked”  the  Timelines  of  other 
Facebook users, though they only did this openly with close 
friends. We discuss the concept of retrospective impression 
management,  which  describes  how  young  adults  manage 
past  content  to  better  align  with  their  present-day  self-
presentational  goals.  This  research  becomes  especially 
crucial  with  the  rise  of  applications  like  Timehop  and  On 
This  Day,  which  intentionally  resurface  historical  digital 
content in the present day. Future work should explore how 
social media users can be better supported in curating their 
online identities and archived data.   

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We thank the University of Michigan MCubed Program for 
support.  We  also  thank  the  National  Science  Foundation 
(HCC #1318143) for support. Any opinions,  findings, and 
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material 
are  those  of  the  authors  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  the 
views  of  the  National  Science  Foundation.  We  thank 
Tsubasa Morioka for her assistance in data analysis. 

tensions  around 

from 2007, could see they had received no “likes” on those 
posts. However, this was not necessarily because their posts 
were  not  well-received;  it  was  simply  because  the  “like” 
functionality  was  not  introduced  until  February  2009. 
Without  detailed  knowledge  of  Facebook’s 
technical 
history, Facebook users may reflect on their Timelines and 
see  a  series  of  posts  that  did  not  receive  attention  from 
Friends. These posts may have been socially appropriate at 
the time of posting (e.g., music lyrics, large photo albums), 
but now seem inappropriate. Specifically, they may violate 
current users’ expectations that people only share the most 
important content, and that any shared content will receive 
attention in the form of likes and comments.  
Thus, an important technical affordance for Facebook is to 
maintain the temporal integrity of user posts. A post which 
was  written  in  2007  is  stamped  with  the  date  of  its 
authorship,  providing  important  context  for  how  the  post 
should  be  interpreted  in  the  present  day.  However,  some 
Facebook literacy is required to appropriately leverage this 
affordance—for  instance,  novice  users  may  simply  not 
notice the  time stamp associated  with a post  which shows 
up  in  their  feed.  Increased  Facebook  literacy  can  also 
mitigate 
temporal  context  collapse 
(multiple  audiences  across  life  stages)  and  retrospective 
impression  management  (ensuring  that  past  digital  traces 
are  aligned  with  present-day  self-presentational  goals).  As 
prior  digital  traces  are  increasingly  resurfaced  on  social 
media  sites  via  applications  like  Timehop,  social  media 
users will need to develop a new kind of literacy: the ability 
to discern the temporality of content they consume. Social 
media site designers should also forefront temporality as a 
design  constraint  to  support  social  media  users’  online 
experiences. 
Practices around management of historical personal content 
take on increased importance when we consider how these 
digital 
impression  formation  processes. 
Ramirez et al. [47] consider various strategies for reducing 
uncertainty  about  others  using  online  information.  They 
note  that  “extractive  strategies”—such  as  searching  for 
content produced in the past either about or by the target—
can be especially powerful, because “these postings reflect 
statements enacted in social settings, in many cases without 
the suspicion that they would in fact be stored for years for 
public  consumption  outside  of  the  group  for  which  they 
were originally intended” and thus “may offer particularly 
valuable insights to information seekers” [47]. This framing 
suggests  that  historical  Facebook  content  may  hold  more 
weight  than  present  proclamations  with  regard  to  the 
veracity of users’ identity claims. Third-party confirmation 
(via  comments  by  Friends,  for  instance)  has  important 
implications for impression formation processes, given that 
third-party  information  is  largely  immune  to  manipulation 
and  thus  given  more  weight  by  information-seekers  [47].  
Although our data do not speak to this topic in depth, future 
research could explore the extent to which historical social 
media content is perceived to be more or less accurate than 

impact 

traces 

1484

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

REFERENCES 
1.  Alessandro Acquisti and Ralph Gross. 2006. Imagined 

Communities: Awareness, Information Sharing, and 
Privacy on the Facebook. In Privacy Enhancing 
Technologies, George Danezis and Philippe Golle (eds.). 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 36–58.  

2.  Ben Agger. 2015. Oversharing: Presentations of Self in 

the Internet Age. Routledge, New York. 

3.  Jeffrey Jensen Arnett. 2000. Emerging adulthood: A 
theory of development from the late teens through the 
twenties. American Psychologist 55, 5, 469–480. 
http://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.55.5.469 

4.  Eytan Bakshy, Itamar Rosenn, Cameron Marlow, and 
Lada Adamic. 2012. The Role of Social Networks in 
Information Diffusion. Proceedings of the 21st 
International Conference on World Wide Web, ACM, 
519–528. http://doi.org/10.1145/2187836.2187907 

5.  Joseph Bayer, Nicole Ellison, Sarita Schoenebeck, and 
Emily Falk. 2015. Sharing “Moments” on Snapchat for 
Short-Term Well-Being. Presented at the Annual 
Conference for the International Communication 
Association. 

6.  Natalya N. Bazarova. 2012. Public Intimacy: Disclosure 

Interpretation and Social Judgments on Facebook. 
Journal of Communication 62, 5, 815–832. 
http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-2466.2012.01664.x 

7.  L. R. Berney and D. B. Blane. 1997. Collecting 

retrospective data: Accuracy of recall after 50 years 
judged against historical records. Social Science & 
Medicine 45, 10, 1519–1525. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/S0277-9536(97)00088-9 

8.  A. Bifulco, G. W. Brown, and T. O. Harris. 1994. 

Childhood Experience of Care and Abuse (CECA): A 
Retrospective Interview Measure. Journal of Child 
Psychology and Psychiatry 35, 8, 1419–1435. 
http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7610.1994.tb01284.x 

9.  danah boyd. 2014. It’s Complicated: The Social Lives of 

Networked Teens. Yale University Press, New Haven, 
CT, USA. 

10. danah boyd, Eszter Hargittai, Jason Schultz, and John 

Palfrey. 2011. Why parents help their children lie to 
Facebook about age: Unintended consequences of the 
“Children”s Online Privacy Protection Act’. First 
Monday 16, 11. 

11. danah boyd and Alice Marwick. 2011. Social 

Steganography: Privacy in Networked Publics. Annual 
Conference for the International Communication 
Association. 

12. Juliet Corbin and Anselm Strauss. 2008. Basics of 

Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for 
Developing Grounded Theory. SAGE. 

13. Dan Cosley, Victoria Schwanda Sosik, Johnathon 

Schultz, Soyoung Lee, and Tejaswi Peesapatic. 2012. 

Experiences With Designing Tools for Everyday 
Reminiscing. HCI 27, 1-2, 175–198. 

14. Caitlin Dewey. 2015. Inside Tumblr’s teen suicide 

epidemic. The Washington Post. Retrieved March 3, 
2015 from http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-
intersect/wp/2015/02/24/inside-tumblrs-teen-suicide-
epidemic/ 

15. Caitlin Dewey. Growing up in the oversharing age - IOL 

SciTech. Independent Online. Retrieved February 16, 
2015 from 
http://www.iol.co.za/scitech/technology/internet/growin
g-up-in-the-oversharing-age-1.1816192#.VOH-
F_nF98E 

16. Nicole B Ellison. 2006. The Benefits of Facebook 

“Friends”: Social Capital and College Students’ Use of 
Online Social Network Sites Literature Review Social 
Capital(cid:3031): Online and Offline. Media. 

17. Nicole B. Ellison, Jessica Vitak, Rebecca Gray, and 
Cliff Lampe. 2014. Cultivating Social Resources on 
Social Network Sites: Facebook Relationship 
Maintenance Behaviors and Their Role in Social Capital 
Processes. Journal of Computer-Mediated 
Communication 19, 4, 855–870. 
http://doi.org/10.1111/jcc4.12078 

18. Nicole Ellison, Rebecca Heino, and Jennifer Gibbs. 

2006. Managing Impressions Online: Self-Presentation 
Processes in the Online Dating Environment. Journal of 
Computer-Mediated Communication 11, 2, 415–441. 
http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1083-6101.2006.00020.x 
19. Sam Fiorella. Cyber-Bullying, Social Media, and 

Parental Responsibility. The Huffington Post. Retrieved 
March 3, 2015 from 
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/sam-fiorella/cyber-
bullying-social-media-and-parental-
responsibility_b_4112802.html 

20. Andrea Forte, Michael Dickard, Rachel Magee, and 
Denise E. Agosto. 2014. What Do Teens Ask Their 
Online Social Networks?: Social Search Practices 
Among High School Students. Proceedings of the 17th 
ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work & Social Computing, ACM, 28–37. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2531602.2531723 

21. E Goffman. 1956. The Presentation of Self in Everyday 

Life. Doubleday, New York, NY. 

22. Katie Day Good. 2013. From scrapbook to Facebook: A 
history of personal media assemblage and archives. New 
Media & Society 15, 4, 557–573. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/1461444812458432 

23. Rebecca Gulotta, William Odom, Jodi Forlizzi, and 

Haakon Faste. 2013. Digital Artifacts As Legacy: 
Exploring the Lifespan and Value of Digital Data. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 

1485

Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, 1813–1822. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2466240 

24. Richard Harper, Eryn Whitworth, and Ruth Page. 2012. 

Fixity: Identity, time and durée on Facebook. 
Association of Internet Researchers (2012). 

25. Bernie Hogan and Anabel Quan-Haase. 2010. 

Persistence and Change in Social Media. Bulletin of 
Science, Technology & Society 30, 5, 309–315. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/0270467610380012 

26. Grace C. Huang, Daniel Soto, Kayo Fujimoto, and 

Thomas W. Valente. 2014. The Interplay of Friendship 
Networks and Social Networking Sites: Longitudinal 
Analysis of Selection and Influence Effects on 
Adolescent Smoking and Alcohol Use. American 
Journal of Public Health 104, 8: e51–e59. 
http://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2014.302038 

27. Mizuko Ito, Heather A. Horst, Judd Antin, et al. 2013. 
Hanging Out, Messing Around, and Geeking Out: Kids 
Living and Learning with New Media. The MIT Press, 
Cambridge, Mass. 

28. Jean Côté, K. Anders Ericsson, and Madelyn P. Law. 

2005. Tracing the Development of Athletes Using 
Retrospective Interview Methods: A Proposed Interview 
and Validation Procedure for Reported Information. 
Journal of Applied Sport Psychology 17, 1, 1–19. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/10413200590907531 

29. Anne Kaun and Fredrik Stiernstedt. 2014. Facebook 
time: Technological and institutional affordances for 
media memories. New Media & Society 16, 7, 1154–
1168. http://doi.org/10.1177/1461444814544001 

30. Nicole C. Krämer and Stephan Winter. 2008. 

Impression management 2.0: The relationship of self-
esteem, extraversion, self-efficacy, and self-presentation 
within social networking sites. Journal of Media 
Psychology: Theories, Methods, and Applications 20, 3, 
106–116. http://doi.org/10.1027/1864-1105.20.3.106 

31. Priya Kumar and Sarita Schoenebeck. 2015. The 

Modern Day Baby Book: Enacting “Good Mothering” 
through Sharing Baby Photos on Facebook. Proceedings 
of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work & Social Computing, ACM, 1302–
1312. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2675133.2675149 
32. Cliff Lampe, Rebecca Gray, Andrew T. Fiore, and 

Nicole Ellison. 2014. Help is on the Way: Patterns of 
Responses to Resource Requests on Facebook. 
Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing, 
ACM, 3–15. http://doi.org/10.1145/2531602.2531720 

33. Albert Kienfie Liau, Angeline Khoo, and Peng Hwaang. 

2005. Factors Influencing Adolescents Engagement in 
Risky Internet Behavior. CyberPsychology & Behavior 
8, 6, 513–520. http://doi.org/10.1089/cpb.2005.8.513 

1486

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

34. Siân E. Lindley. 2015. Making Time. Proceedings of the 

18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work & Social Computing, ACM, 1442–
1452. http://doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675157 

35. Sonia Livingstone and Ellen Helsper. 2010. Balancing 
opportunities and risks in teenagers’ use of the internet: 
the role of online skills and internet self-efficacy. New 
Media & Society 12, 2, 309–329. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/1461444809342697 

36. Mary Madden. Teens Haven’t Abandoned Facebook 

(Yet). Pew Research Center’s Internet & American Life 
Project. Retrieved January 2, 2015 from 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2013/08/15/teens-havent-
abandoned-facebook-yet/ 

37. Mary Madden, Amanda Lenhart, Maeve Duggan, 

Sandra Cortesi, and Urs Gasser. Teens and Technology 
2013. Pew Research Center’s Internet & American Life 
Project. http://www.pewinternet.org/2013/03/13/teens-
and-technology-2013/ 

38. Mary Madden, Sandra Cortesi, Urs Gasser, Amanda 

Lenhart, and Maeve Duggan. 2012. Parents, Teens, and 
Online Privacy. Pew Internet & American Life Project. 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2012/11/20/parents-teens-
and-online-privacy/ 

39. Stephen A. Maisto, Linda C. Sobell, A. Mitch Cooper, 

and Mark B. Sobell. 1982. Comparison of two 
techniques to obtain retrospective reports of drinking 
behavior from alcohol abusers. Addictive Behaviors 7, 1, 
33–38. http://doi.org/10.1016/0306-4603(82)90022-3 

40. Leon Mann, Ros Harmoni, and Colin Power. 1989. 

Adolescent decision-making: the development of 
competence. Journal of Adolescence 12, 3, 265–278. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/0140-1971(89)90077-8 

41. James Marcia. 1980. Identity in adolescence. Handbook 

of adolescent psychology 9, 159–187. 

42. Alice E. Marwick and danah boyd. 2014. Networked 

privacy: How teenagers negotiate context in social 
media. New Media & Society, 1461444814543995. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/1461444814543995 

43. Sandra Metts, Susan Sprecher, and William Cupach. 

1993. Retrospective Self-Reports. In Studying 
Interpersonal Interaction. Guilford Press. 

44. William Odom, Mark Selby, Abigail Sellen, David Kirk, 
Richard Banks, and Tim Regan. 2012. Photobox: On the 
Design of a Slow Technology. Proceedings of the 
Designing Interactive Systems Conference, ACM, 665–
668. http://doi.org/10.1145/2317956.2318055 

45. Helen Orvaschel, Joaquim Puig-Antich, William 

Chambers, Mary Ann Tabrizi, and Robert Johnson. 
1982. Retrospective Assessment of Prepubertal Major 
Depression with the Kiddie-SADS-E. Journal of the 
American Academy of Child Psychiatry 21, 4, 392–397. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/S0002-7138(09)60944-4 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

46. S. Tejaswi Peesapati, Victoria Schwanda, Johnathon 
Schultz, Matt Lepage, So-yae Jeong, and Dan Cosley. 
2010. Pensieve: Supporting Everyday Reminiscence. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, 2027–2036. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753635 

47. Artemio Ramirez, Joseph B. Walther, Judee K. 

Burgoon, and Michael Sunnafrank. 2002. Information-
Seeking Strategies, Uncertainty, and Computer-
Mediated Communication. Human Communication 
Research 28, 2: 213–228. http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-
2958.2002.tb00804.x 

48. Irving Seidman. 2005. Interviewing As Qualitative 

Research. Teachers College Press. 

49. Yuichi Shoda, Walter Mischel, and Philip K. Peake. 

1990. Predicting adolescent cognitive and self-
regulatory competencies from preschool delay of 
gratification: Identifying diagnostic conditions. 
Developmental Psychology 26, 6, 978–986. 
http://doi.org/10.1037/0012-1649.26.6.978 

50. Aaron Smith. 6 new facts about Facebook. Pew 

Research Center. Retrieved January 5, 2015 from 
http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2014/02/03/6-
new-facts-about-facebook/ 

51. Eric Sun, Itamar Rosenn, Cameron A. Marlow, and 

Thomas M. Lento. 2009. Gesundheit! Modeling 
Contagion through Facebook News Feed. Third 
International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social 
Media. Retrieved from 
https://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/ICWSM/09/paper/vi
ew/185 

52. Jeffrey W. Treem and Paul M. Leonardi. 2012. Social 

Media Use in Organizations: Exploring the Affordances 
of Visibility, Editability, Persistence, and Association. 
Communication Yearbook 36, 143–189. 

53. Sherry Turkle. 2011. Alone Together: Why We Expect 

More from Technology and Less from Each Other. Basic 
Books. 

54. Jessica Vitak and Jinyoung Kim. 2014. “You Can’t 
Block People Offline”: Examining How Facebook’s 

 
 

Affordances Shape the Disclosure Process. Proceedings 
of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work & Social Computing, ACM, 461–
474. http://doi.org/10.1145/2531602.2531672 

55. Pamela Wisniewski, Heng Xu, and Yunan Chen. 2014. 

Understanding User Adaptation Strategies for the 
Launching of Facebook Timeline. Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, ACM, 2421–2430. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557363 

56. Ting Zhang, Tami Kim, Alison Wood Brooks, 

Francesca Gino, and Michael I. Norton. 2014. A 
“Present” for the Future The Unexpected Value of 
Rediscovery. Psychological Science, 
0956797614542274. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/0956797614542274 

57. Xuan Zhao and Siân E. Lindley. 2014. Curation through 

use: understanding the personal value of social media. 
ACM Press, 2431–2440. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557291 

58. Xuan Zhao, Niloufar Salehi, Sasha Naranjit, Sara 

Alwaalan, Stephen Voida, and Dan Cosley. 2013. The 
Many Faces of Facebook: Experiencing Social Media 
As Performance, Exhibition, and Personal Archive. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, 1–10. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2470656 

59. Digital Citizenship. Common Sense Media. Retrieved 

March 3, 2015 from 
https://www.commonsensemedia.org/educators/scope-
and-sequence 

60. Social Networking Fact Sheet. Pew Research Center’s 
Internet & American Life Project. Retrieved March 4, 
2015 from http://www.pewinternet.org/fact-
sheets/social-networking-fact-sheet/ 

61. Dirty Delete. Urban Dictionary. Retrieved April 17, 

2015 from 
http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=Dirty
+Delete 

 

1487

