CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

 “This has to be the cats” - Personal Data Legibility in 

Networked Sensing Systems 

Peter Tolmie, Andy Crabtree, Tom Rodden 

and James Colley 

School of Computer Science 
University of Nottingham 

United Kingdom 

Ewa Luger 

Microsoft Research 

Cambridge 

United Kingdom 

a-ewluge@microsoft.com 

{First.Last name}@nottingham.ac.uk 

in 

that 

this, 

turn,  poses  a  privacy 

ABSTRACT 
Notions  like  ‘Big  Data’  and  the  ‘Internet  of  Things’  turn 
upon  anticipated  harvesting  of  personal  data  through 
ubiquitous computing and networked sensing systems. It is 
largely presumed that understandings of people’s everyday 
interactions will be relatively easy to ‘read off’ of such data 
and 
threat.  An 
ethnographic study of how people account for sensed data 
to  third  parties  uncovers  serious  challenges  to  such  ideas. 
The  study  reveals  that  the  legibility  of  sensor  data  turns 
upon  various  orders  of  situated  reasoning  involved  in 
articulating the data and making it accountable. Articulation 
work  is  indispensable  to  personal  data  sharing  and  raises 
real requirements for networked sensing systems premised 
on the harvesting of personal data.  
Author Keywords 
Networked  sensing  systems,  personal  data,  privacy, 
articulation work, accountability, ethnography. 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.3  Group  and  Organisation 
Supported Cooperative Work. 
INTRODUCTION 
Digital  applications  and  services  increasingly  rely  on 
personal data. Indeed some authors go so far as to suggest 
that we are in the middle of a “personal data gold rush” [8], 
with  advertisers,  Internet  services,  and  governments  alike 
all accumulating increasing amounts of personal data about 
us.  The  accumulation  of  personal  data  is  not  passing 
without  notice.  An  ongoing  ‘drip’  of  stories  invoking 
inappropriate  uses  of  personal  data  accompanied  by 
national security ‘leaks’ have attracted broad media interest 
and  have  in  turn  engendered  widespread  societal  concern 
and debate about privacy.  

Interfaces;  Computer 

Permission to make digital or hard  copies of all or part of  this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  th e  author(s)  must  be 
honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or 
republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific  permission 
from 
Permissions@acm.org.  
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA  
Copyright  is  held  by  the  owner/author(s).  Publication  rights  licensed  to 
ACM.  
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00   
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819992 

fee.  Request  permissions 

and/or 

a 

491

Our  interests  with  regard  to  personal  data  and  privacy  are 
circumscribed  by  a  concern  with  large  scale  personal  data 
harvesting driven by ubiquitous computing and networked 
sensing  systems;  interests  that  are  otherwise  encapsulated 
by slogans such as ‘Big Data’ and the ‘Internet of Things’. 
Big Data analysis has proved to be remarkably effective at 
revealing  patterns  or  clusters  that  correlate  to  human 
behavior - credit card transactions patterns that predict the 
likelihood  of divorce  [2]  or  lifestyle  measures  that  predict 
the  likelihood  of  death  within  five  years  [6],  for  example, 
not mention the correlations that increasingly drive digital 
marketing [10]. The existence of large data sets has led to a 
strong business interest in the use of statistical techniques to 
predict future behavior across a broad set of domains [17]. 
The power of predictive analytics associated with Big Data 
has  also  fuelled  a  growing  interest  in  the  development  of 
richer  pictures  of  human  behaviour  through  fine-grained 
data  collection  enabled  by  the  Internet  of  Things.  The 
promise  here  is  the  ability  to  build  an  extremely  detailed 
picture  of  human  behavior 
the 
predominant  approach  of  clustering  and  correlation.  As 
Pentland [13] puts it, 

that  moves  beyond 

from  … 

“It's not about the things you post on Facebook, and it's not about 
your searches on Google, which is what most people think about 
… This  sort  of  Big  Data  comes 
the  little  data
breadcrumbs that you leave behind you as you move around in 
the world. What those breadcrumbs tell is the story of your life. It 
tells  what  you've  chosen  to  do.  That's  very  different  than  what 
you  put  on  Facebook.  What  you  put  on  Facebook  is  what  you 
would like to tell people … We are moving from the reasoning of 
the  enlightenment  about  classes  and  markets  to  fine  grain 
understanding of individual interactions and systems built on fine 
grain data sharing.” 

the 

that 

assumption 

concomitant 

Our  interest  in  personal  data  and  privacy  is  in  the 
breadcrumbs that are often captured without us realising it 
and 
fine  grain 
understanding  of  interaction,  and  with  it  our  lives,  can  be 
had from sharing these. We explore the assumption through 
an ethnographic study of a networked multi-sensor package 
deployed in three homes in the UK. The study reveals that 
personal  data  generated  through  this  networked  sensing 
system is opaque when considered in isolation. This means 
that fine grain understandings of interaction cannot be ‘read 
off’ the data alone. Rather, the real world, real time sense or 
legibility of the data trades on ‘articulation work’ [16], the 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

to 

the  data 

in  which 

sensor  data 

third  parties  and 

work  is  required  to  derive  fine-grain  understandings  of 
interaction  and  to  build  systems  on  this  basis.  Our  study 
elaborates  the  various  orders  of  reasoning  implicated  in 
the 
articulating 
methodological  ways 
is  made 
accountable.  This,  in  turn,  raises  requirements  for  the 
support  of  articulation  work  and 
the  design  of 
communication, visualisation, annotation, and collaborative 
data management tools. 
THE STUDY 
Building on prior deployments of network and sensor-based 
technology in domestic environments [1, 3, 4, 12, 19], this 
study reports on efforts to develop a prototype platform for 
capturing a diverse collection of data in the home to support 
an open and scalable ‘multi-sided market platform’ capable 
of  serving  both  the  needs  of  residents  and  future  service 
providers.  The  platform  aims  to  consolidate  data  from 
sensors,  which  can  be  embedded  into  household  items,  as 
well as from a range of Internet-enabled devices [9].  
A  key  issue  in  developing  this  platform  is  to  understand 
how  people  might  live  with  fine  grain  data  collection  and 
orient to and understand sharing it. To that end, a range of 
sensors  were  deployed  over  a  2  month  period  in  3 
households  to  permit  initial  investigation  of  the  matter 
through  detailed  ethnographic  work.  The  deployed  sensor 
package  contained  AEON  Z-Wave  Multi-sensors 
to 
monitor  temperature,  humidity,  light  levels  and  motion; 
wireless  solar  power  temperature  sensors;  and  a  current 
transformer  sensor  to  monitor  the  rate  of  electricity 
consumption for the property. Additionally, a Raspberry Pi 
with a Z-Wave daughterboard was installed to receive and 
store  data  from  the  wireless  sensors,  and  some  simple 
visualisation techniques were used to display sensor data to 
participants on a basic time-rate graph (Fig.1).  

to 

that 

lack 

these 

the  necessary 

practical  indispensability  of  which  impacts  understandings 
of  privacy  in  a  domestic  context.  Far  from  opening  up 
personal data on an unprecedented scale, networked sensing 
systems  appear 
transparency. 
Mechanisms are required then to support articulation of the 
data, which may reflexively enable privacy management.  
We elaborate key features of articulation work, particularly 
how  the  intelligibility  of  personal  data  turns  upon  an 
understanding  of  the  domestic  routine  and  the  taken  for 
granted orderliness of domestic life. While derived from a 
domestic  context  we  would  argue 
issues 
generalise  to  other  contexts.  After  all,  it  is  not  only  the 
home  that  is  characterised  by  routines  and  an  underlying 
social  order  that  shapes  what  goes  on,  and  what  may  be 
recorded, about a setting and its activities. 
Articulation  work  is  of  course  an  often-cited  concept  in 
CSCW,  at  least  in  early  work  in  the  field,  and  key  to 
Schmidt  and  Bannon’s  elaboration  of  what  makes  CSCW 
distinctive  [16].  They  attribute  the  concept  to  Anselm 
Strauss  and  his  studies  of  work  and  organisation.  Strauss 
describes articulation work as a “supra-type of work” which 
involves “the accountability of actions” [18]. To appreciate 
what he is driving at here, Strauss construes of the “totality 
of work tasks” in an organisation as making up the “arc of 
work”.  The  arc  is  “not  automatically  articulated,  actors 
must  do  that”.  Actors  are  thus  “rendered  accountable”  for 
accomplishing  the  tasks  they  are  responsible  for  and 
“reporting” the accomplishment to others. The “reporting” 
is an overhead (a supra-type of work) that is not the work 
itself (the job as it were) but key to its coordination within 
the overall arc.  
Articulation  work  speaks  then  to  the  work  of  “reporting” 
what has been done - where in the work we are now, what 
has  been  done,  what  needs  to  be  done  next,  etc.  –  i.e.,  to 
making  the  work  accountable  to  others  so  that  they  can 
“see” where in they work they are and “mesh” their actions 
into the work in a coordinated manner. Accountability thus 
speaks to the manifold ways in which people make action 
observable and reportable. Schmidt and Bannon extend the 
concept of articulation work beyond “formal organisational 
structures” to any cooperative arrangement: 

“The  conception  of  cooperative  work  suggested  here  does  not 
assume or entail specific forms of interaction such as mode and 
frequency  of  communication,  comradely  feelings,  equality  of 
status, formation of a distinct group identity, etc. or even specific 
organisational  settings.  Indeed,  we  do  not  want  to  restrict  the 
scope  of  CSCW  to  cooperative  work  relations  that  are  defined 
and bounded in legal terms, i.e. in terms of formal organisational 
structures. Cooperative work is constituted by interdependence in 
work …  Thus, the boundaries of cooperative work networks are 
defined  by  actual  cooperative  behavior  and  are  not  necessarily 
congruent with the boundaries of formal organisations.” [16] 

Our  study  suggests  that  insofar  as  some  arrangement  of 
cooperative work is necessarily implicated in the harvesting 
of  personal  data  [5],  whether  it  involves  end-users  and 
service providers or as in our case researchers, articulation 

 

Figure 1. Displaying Sensor Data 

The  sensors  were  deployed  in  four  principal  areas  within 
the  home:  bathrooms,  kitchens,  main  living  areas,  and 
bedrooms.  The  energy  consumption  sensor  was  located 
wherever the electricity meter was situated. The Raspberry 
Pi was placed where it could best capture the output from 

492

SESSION: MANAGING PERSONAL DATA

to  find 

terms  of  both 

routine  and  disposable 

the  various  sensors  wirelessly,  something  that  itself  led  to 
re-positioning  of  sensors 
the  best  possible 
positioning.  
Because  of  the  anticipated  sensitivity  of  the  data  it  was 
decided  to  deploy  the  sensor  packages  in  the  homes  of 
project  members.  These  are  real  homes  nonetheless, 
possessed  of  and  exhibiting 
the  ordinary  day-to-day 
business and routine concerns of domestic life that can be 
found  elsewhere  irrespective  of  the  particular  project 
members  involved.  The  households  were  predominantly 
professional in character. In one lived a couple where one 
was retired and the other semi-retired. In another, a family 
with one daughter still living at home and one of the adults 
retired. And the third, a family with two younger children, 
of 10 and 7 years old.  
In each of these homes the participants were not computing 
experts – the project was interdisciplinary in character, not 
only  involving  computer  scientists  -  though  two  of  them 
had  previously  purchased  off-the-shelf  sensors  out  of 
personal  interest.  None  of  the  participants  therefore  had 
anything beyond what might be termed a ‘lay expertise’ in 
using  sensor-based  technology.  It  should  also  be  stressed 
that  each  of  the  households  involved,  despite  their  broad 
professional character, were quite distinct from one another 
in 
income. 
Additionally,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  households 
involved  were  not  those  of  the  researchers  who  played  a 
part in the installation of the senor packages or gathering of 
the  ethnographic  data.  So  none  of  them  had  any  special 
relationship  with  the  ethnographers  that  might  have  made 
them  orient  to  the  ethnographers  as  anything  other  than 
strangers  with  a  relevant  interest,  the  interest  in  this  case 
being that of conducting research. 
The  studies  of  the  deployments  were  phased  across  a 
number  of  steps.  Before  any  observational  work  was 
undertaken  members  from  each  of  the  households  were 
interviewed in order to get a general sense of the layout of 
their  home,  the  people  who  lived  within  it  and  their 
preoccupations,  and  the  kinds  of  routines  that  tended  to 
shape  domestic  life.  The  interviews  were  recorded  and 
followed up by deployment of the sensor package and data 
logger. At about the same time an ethnographer visited each 
household  and  met  all  of  the  inhabitants  and  conducted  a 
brief  tour  of  the  house  to  get  a  sense  of  the  kinds  of 
locations  sensors  would  be  positioned  in  and  the  kinds  of 
activities  that  tended  to  unfold  there.  The  tours  were 
videoed and the participants were also encouraged to keep 
online diaries in which they could record significant events 
within  the  household,  such  as  people  visiting  or  members 
being  away,  etc.,  so  that  shifts  in  patterns  within  the  data 
might be inspected for and correlated with those events.  
After the deployment had been in place for 3 to 4 weeks an 
ethnographer revisited the houses and used the visualization 
tool (Fig. 1) to talk through the data and capture on video 
the  participants’  accounts  of  it.  In  doing  this,  it  was 

the  household  and  how  both 

understood  that  the  intended  purpose  of  collecting  sensor 
data was to share it with third parties. ‘Talking through the 
data’ thus provided an opportunity to investigate something 
of  what  is  involved  in  sharing  personal  data  with  third 
parties  (us)  and,  importantly,  what  sharing  turns  upon.  A 
further visit was conducted after another 4 weeks to assess 
whether  or  not  the  prior  visit  had  resulted  in  participants 
changing  their  domestic  activities,  and  then  the  sensor 
package  was  removed.  Analysis  of  these  materials  was 
undertaken  using  an  ethnomethodological  approach  [7]  to 
explicate the accountable features of personal data sharing. 
Below we look at the ways in which the data gathered by 
the  sensors  could  be  seen  as  revealing  certain  orderly 
characteristics  of 
the 
participants  in  the  study  and  the  researchers  working  with 
them sought to arrive at accounts of the data in these terms. 
A  critical  point  here  is  the  apparent  gap  between  what  is 
captured by the sensors and what is necessary to render the 
data  locally  and  socially  meaningful.  We  then  examine 
more closely the work participants engaged in to make the 
data  accountable  and  how  this  is  possessed  of  certain 
methodological features, before looking at what all of this 
might mean for design. 
FINDINGS 
In  this  section  we  work  through  the  study  findings  to 
examine just how people reason about sensor data and how 
reasoned accounts of that data are reflexively produced. We 
begin  with  relatively  basic  reasoning  about  some  gross 
spatio-temporal features of the home, about the people who 
inhabit  the  home,  the  way  those  people  usually  go  about 
doing things, and about the kinds of events that ordinarily 
unfold  within  people’s  homes.  This 
is  followed  by 
consideration of how these matters are taken to speak more 
broadly  to  how  the  home  is  constituted  as  a  ‘socially 
organised’  affair,  such  as  what  is  understood  to  be  the 
home’s  routine,  how  that  routine  might  be  breached  in 
various  ways,  and  how  the  social  order  of  the  home  is 
oriented  to  ultimately  as  a  moral  order,  through  and 
through.  These  various  considerations  are  elaborated 
through a handful of perspicuous examples, but it should be 
understood  that  all  of  the  great  many  accounts  offered  by 
the participants in bridging the gap between sensor data and 
its local and social meaning speak to one or more of these 
matters in some way. 
Reasoning about place 
It  is  no  great  surprise  that  the  spatial  configuration  of 
people’s homes is oriented to as a meaningful configuration 
that  carries  with  it  common-sense  understandings  and 
expectations  regarding  just  how  that  space  is  organised. 
Thus it is equally no surprise to find that a certain amount 
of how sensor-based data gets reasoned about is attached to 
those understandings and expectations. Here we have a case 
in point: 

493

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Connie:  (Inspecting  output  from  the  motion  sensors  over 
the Christmas period). December 28th, 29th, lots of motion 
activity. Samantha and the family were all here.  
Connie  notices  motion  in  the  upstairs  bathroom.  She 
suggests that all the other bathrooms were probably being 
used so she might have gone upstairs instead.   
Connie: I might have used it. 
Andrew: To run away from them. 
Connie: Yeah, probably (laughs) yeah; taking refuge. 
Connie:  I  took  a  shower  around  11o’clock  that  day,  as  I 
had  come  down  in  the  morning  to  cook.  Then  I  got 
changed. So I was using the bathroom a lot that day. 

What is visible to the sensor here, and made manifest in the 
graphical representation, is motion of a certain duration on 
particular days at particular times; additional data includes 
the location of the motion sensor through the way its input 
is  labeled  by  the  Raspberry  Pi  collating  the  data.  By 
contrast, the husband and wife who are talking through the 
data  with  the  researcher  are  actively  making  comparisons 
with other things they can see on the graph, such that they 
might  appropriately  describe  what  they  are  seeing  as  ‘lots 
of  motion  activity’  and  even  exceptional  activity  in  the 
upstairs bathroom.  
In searching for how to account for this they come up with 
the general gloss that this was a period over which family 
members were present in the house, rather than it just being 
the  two  of  them.  Seeing  that  a  measure  of  the  motion 
activity is visible in the upstairs bathroom Connie comes up 
with an account for this regarding other bathrooms being in 
use.  This  makes  manifest  an  understanding  that  a)  the 
upstairs bathroom is not usually used at that time of day and 
b) that this therefore needs to be accounted for. The account 
itself  turns  upon  already  having  explained  that  there  are 
exceptional  numbers  of  people  in  the  home  and  it  is 
understood  that  unusual  numbers  of  people  using  the 
bathroom  at  the  same  time  might  appropriately  lead  to 
using other bathrooms that are not usually used. There is an 
added  half-joking  interchange  about  escaping  the  other 
people  present  in  the  house,  which  rides  upon  that  also 
being seen as a morally defensible course of action. Finally, 
Connie  elaborates  and  underscores  the  account  further  by 
presenting rationales for why she was ‘using the bathroom a 
lot that day’.  
So some clustered peaks on a graph have provided for the 
following: a) seeing that they need to be accounted for; b) 
seeing  what  surrounding  situational  circumstances  might 
have  provided  for  them  (understood  to  be  people  moving 
around);  c)  seeing  how  the  peaks  are  associated  with 
specific  locations  (in  this  case  an  upstairs  bathroom);  d) 
seeing  that  this  requires  a  more  specific  account  than  the 
general account so far provided; e) coming up with such an 
account  that  trades  upon  what  anyone  knows  about 
bathrooms  and  their  use,  and  what  might  reasonably  be 
done if one bathroom is in use but another one is available; 
f)  seeing  that  there  are  additional,  elaborative  accounts 
available  regarding  what  anyone  knows  about  how 

is  wrapped 

bathrooms  might  be  used  to  get  some  time  away  from 
people in a crowded house (because who could reasonably 
object to you going to the bathroom?); g) recognising that 
this  is  a  somewhat  fragile  account  that  presents  a  certain 
attitude  towards  family  members  that  not  everyone  might 
deem appropriate, and thus providing a further elaborative 
account regarding what anyone knows about having to fit in 
ablutions  around  a  charged  domestic  schedule  occasioned 
by ‘having visitors’.  
Thus the peaks on the graph are accounted for, but note just 
how  much  social  understanding 
the 
accounting  and  how  much  it  trades  upon  a  body  of 
common-sense  knowledge  about  bathrooms  and  how  they 
might  be  used.  The  gap  between  what  is  available  to  the 
sensor in terms of motion x at time y in location z and this 
exercise of social understanding is startling. 
Reasoning about time 
It is equally the case that an ordinary way of understanding 
what kinds of phenomena might be indicated by sensor data 
is to open up to inspection just when things occurred and to 
seek to account for them in terms of the temporal order of 
the  home.  This  is,  of  course,  a  feature  of  the  reasoning 
visible in the preceding example, where exceptional use of 
the upstairs bathroom turned upon seeing  the time. Below 
we can see a similar order of understanding, but this time 
regarding how bathroom use is wholly unexceptional: 

in 

Connie and Andrew are looking at the humidity data. They 
see regular ‘spikes’ on 23/24th January at about 9.00am. 
Connie says that that’s right, as they often have a shower 
after breakfast.   
Andrew:  I  bet  you  can  tell  the  difference  in  showers 
between you and me, because of the amount of shower. I 
shower for a lot longer than you do. 
Connie: And at a higher temperature. 
Andrew: I bet the humidity comes up there. 
Connie: But you weren’t there on the 23rd of January. 
Andrew: Oh that’s right. There’s only one of those. There’s 
you. 
Connie: I must have thought thank goodness, I’m going to 
have a really long nice shower (laughs). 

Here  the  sensor  is  seeing  different  quantified  measures  of 
humidity at different times on different days and the sensor 
is recognised as one associated with a particular bathroom. 
The  representation  of  this  shows  different  levels  of 
humidity over time and therefore makes it is possible to see 
‘spikes’ (and troughs). The first step towards an account for 
the household members here lies in seeing an unexplicated 
connection between ‘spikes’ in humidity in a bathroom and 
the possibility of equating that to someone having a shower. 
Thus place is an integral feature of members’ reasoning, but 
timing  is  also  crucial  because  it  allows  them  to  determine 
that a shower at this time amounts to business-as-usual. 
Time is crucial in interesting ways, for wrapped up in this 
account is seeing that the time – 9.00am – is subsequent to 
them  having  breakfast:  the  account  here  is  not  that  they 
usually have showers at 9.00am; it’s that they usually have 

494

SESSION: MANAGING PERSONAL DATA

showers after breakfast. It is also interesting how calendar 
time comes to play a part in their reasoning. Andrew makes 
the proposition that they should be able to see which one of 
them is showering in the data by seeing different spikes in 
humidity, and Connie concurs with this. However, Connie 
then  points  out  that  the  day  they  are  looking  at  is  a  day 
when Andrew wasn’t there. This then presents the need for 
another account because suddenly what was seen as normal 
comes  to  have  the  character  of  an  exception:  Connie  has 
managed to provoke a similar peak all on her own. Thus she 
jokingly  suggests  she  must  have  decided  to  have  a  longer 
shower  as  he  wasn’t  there,  an  account  that  is  both 
appropriate and inappropriate, and therein lies the joke.  
So what we have here regarding matters of time is members 
using  its  availability  in  the  data  as  a  resource  for 
discovering the routine and for discovering ways in which 
the  routine  might  be  seen  to  vary  but  nevertheless  be 
explicable.  This  isn’t  something  that  just  falls  out  of  the 
measurements  coming  from  the  sensor.  It  takes  local 
understanding  of  the  ‘patterned’  character  of  their  lives  to 
see  this  in  the  data.  More  importantly  still,  it  takes  local 
competence to be able to see how apparent anomalies in the 
data still amount to wholly ordinary courses of action. 
Reasoning about people 
Something  else  that  becomes  visible  in  the  way  people 
account for the data relates to what they know, as members 
of the household, of one another’s routine doings and who 
might therefore be responsible for some particular piece of 
data looking the way it does. Indeed, we have already seen 
certain  aspects  of  this  kind  of  reasoning  in  the  preceding 
examples  regarding  just  who  might  be  responsible  for 
unusual  activity  in  a  bathroom  at  a  time  when  there  are 
guests  and  whose  data  might  look  like  what  as  a 
consequence of how long they routinely stay in the shower. 
Consider also the following: 

Becky is looking at the temperature and humidity data in 
the kitchen. There are clear places where the figures are 
rising:  Yes,  it  goes  up  when  he’s  boiling  things  …  days 
when  Ron  does  the  stews  or  soups.    If  he  was  frying  or 
baking it goes up. You can see when Ron comes home. 

So what’s visible to a sensor in this case is rising and falling 
temperatures  and  amounts  of  humidity  in  the  air,  together 
with the times such fluctuations occur, the extent to which 
they continue at certain levels for certain amounts of time, 
and (perhaps) the extent to which these things coincide with 
one  another.  Allowing  for  the  coded-in  indicator  of  the 
location of these particular sensors one can imagine that the 
sensor output might also provide for some crude allocations 
of  possible  activity,  such  as  cooking,  given  that  there  are 
only so many things that are likely to be productive of heat 
and  humidity  in  a  kitchen.  Note  here,  however,  that  the 
household  member  sees  more  than  this:  she  sees  who  is 
doing  the  cooking  and  how  cooking  fits  in  with  Ron’s 
presence in the house and his routines.  

locally  accountable  matters, 

None of this is visible in the output of the sensors; even a 
simple  algorithm  that  might  recognise  ‘cooking’  as  an 
activity does not see the ‘who’ of the matter. Thus we can 
see  here  how  members  are  able  to  account  for the data in 
terms  of  what  they  know  of  one  another.  That  they  are 
predisposed to see the person in the data, such that it is not 
just  about  cooking  or  showering  or  going  to  the  loo,  but 
about just who is doing these things as intelligible features 
of  the  organisation  of  their  home.  Furthermore,  insofar  as 
these  are 
turning  upon 
members’ common-sense knowledge of ‘what usually goes 
on round here’, we can see that the challenge for sensing is 
not just one of getting a fix on social understandings. More 
than that, it is a matter of being able to arrive at what the 
members of just this particular setting know so that they can 
see  not  just  cooking  (etc.)  but  how  the  cooking  (etc.)  is 
indexical to specific people and their routines. 
Reasoning about practices 
Something noticeable in the preceding sections is the way 
in which sensor data can get tied up with reasoning about 
not just what members of the household do, but also about 
just how they do them. On occasion the data quite expressly 
brought  to  the  fore  just  how  certain  people  undertook 
certain activities, making them specifically accountable for 
the fashion in which they were done: 

Connie and Andrew are looking at the light sensor data for 
the bathroom. Connie expresses surprise that they leave 
the bathroom light on. She feels that they leave Andrew’s 
study light on a lot and the kitchen lights. 
Andrew:  I  turn  the  light  on  when  I’m  having  a  shower;  I 
noticed that the other day. 
Connie: Oh, even when it’s light? 
Andrew:  Even  when  it’s  light.  I  like  having  a  really  light 
shower, makes me feel wide awake.” 

The  sensor  here  is  detecting  light  levels  and,  once  again, 
these are being mapped against time. The software is also 
able to identify exactly which light sensor is recording the 
data  and  this  has  been  pre-labeled  as  coming  from  the 
upstairs bathroom. So, at its most basic level, the graph can 
be  seen  to  show  when  it  is  day  and  when  it  is  night  and 
when  the  light  in  the  bathroom  is  switched  on  or  off. 
Though, in a sense, all the sensor is seeing is more light or 
less light plotted against time, it is easy to see how this data 
can  be  further  refined  to  categorise  the  data  in  terms  of 
basic  lighting  events.  What  the  members  reveal  in  their 
accounts  here,  however,  is  much  more  than  just  lighting 
events.  
First  of  all  the  duration  of  the  event  is  problematised  by 
Connie because it does not meet her expectations. The very 
fact  that  it  is  problematised  implicates  the  production  of 
some  kind  of  account  for  the  anomaly.  The  problem  here 
revolves around the fact that this is not so much a one-off 
anomaly as a routine anomaly: the bathroom light is being 
‘systematically’  left  on  for  longer  than  expected.  But  it 
turns out that Andrew has a ready-to-hand account: it is his 
routine practice to have the light on when he is showering, 

495

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

‘even  when  it  is  light’.  This  is  a  practice  that  Connie 
evidently  knew  nothing  about  and,  having  revealed  a 
hitherto unknown practice, Connie renders it remarkable by 
posing the question, ‘even when it’s light?’ Andrew is now 
under  obligation  to  produce  a  further  account  for  this 
particular practice. This he duly does by explaining how he 
likes a ‘really light shower’. 
The leap from light data to the adequacy of a local account, 
such  as  a  particular  individual  liking  to  have  ‘light 
showers’, is substantial and embedded in a body of social 
reasoning about how specific showering practices might be 
adequately accounted for that goes far beyond anything that 
a  sensor  might  be  capable  of  seeing.  However,  this 
particular example also brings into view another matter of 
substance. What has happened here is that the production of 
the  sensor  data  and  its  inspection  has  made  available  to 
another party in the same household an individual practice 
that  they  previously  knew  nothing  about.  ‘Having  a  light 
shower’ is, of course, no grand crime, though it is possible 
that  some  further  discussion  about  the  matter  may  have 
subsequently  ensued  and  clearly  it  could  be  argued  that 
Andrew  has  been  ‘found  out’  in  wanton  consumption  of 
electricity.  
The deeper point here is that sensor data has the potential to 
make visible to others with whom you are quite specifically 
related  matters  that  might  otherwise  be  invisible  to  them. 
Thus  sensor  data  has  the  potential  to  make  household 
members’  activities  and  practices  accountable  to  each 
other,  not  to  a  third  party  who,  importantly,  might  not 
recognise these as particularly accountable matters at all. It 
is of note here that it wasn’t the researcher Andrew had to 
provide an account to, it was his wife. There are numerous 
everyday activities and practices we engage in that we don’t 
‘broadcast’  to  those  we  live  with  and  don’t  ordinarily 
expect  ourselves  to  be  accountable  for.  The  presence  of 
sensors  breaches  this  visibility  of  action  and  presents 
householders with a whole new set of challenges regarding 
how  they  might  understand  themselves  to  be  routinely 
monitored,  not  by  governments  or  employers  or  even  by 
marketing organisations, but by those with whom they have 
the most intimate of relationships.  
The added twist here is that this cuts both ways: people are 
not  just  accountable  for  activities  and  practices  that  might 
now be opened up to being monitored, the people doing the 
monitoring are accountable for their actions as well. There 
are ordinary rights and expectations regarding just what you 
might appropriately watch and notice, and sensor data in the 
home  has  the  potential  to  breach  these.  The  following 
example is instructive: 

Susannah  (talking  about  the  children  and  the  sensor 
data):  So,  I’m  aware  that  there’s  evidence  that  Sally’s 
gone  for  a  wee.  She’s  spent  most  of  her  life  trying  to 
define her space, and David is defining his space. So now 
there’s  evidence  -  now  I  can  see  into  these  spaces  -  so 

there’s  a  sense  of  invasion.  I  can  now  look  and  find  out 
who went for a wee when and where they went. 
Frank:  You  know  when  Sally’s  been  there  because  she 
always puts the toilet roll on the floor. 

There  is,  then,  serious  potential  for  sensor  data  breaching 
members’  ordinary  everyday  practices  of  disregard  and 
making an invasive step into people’s personal relationships 
by  making  things  accountable  where  previously  there  was 
never  a  need  for  an  account  arising  at  all.  The  potential 
fallout is readily imaginable.   
Reasoning about events 
Ultimately  all  of  the  above  aspects  of  reasoning  we  have 
discussed get framed within a broader consideration of just 
what  kind  of  activity  or  event  might  be  indexed  by  the 
visible  data.  So  the  data  is  seen  to  point  to  showers 
happening in bathrooms at certain times of day or in certain 
kinds  of  ways,  or  cooking  being  done  by  certain  people. 
Sometimes  the  events  proposed  within  accounts  of  sensor 
data  display  a  quite  detailed  understanding  of  just  what 
might  be  going  on  to  provoke  the  generation  of  certain 
kinds  of  data,  and  understanding  this  involves  a  profound 
concatenation of all of the other kinds of reasoning we have 
talked about so far: 

Connie  is  inspecting  the  output  from  the  temperature 
sensors in her kitchen. She notices that there are regular 
temperature drops in the kitchen on certain days. 
Connie: Andrew leaves the garage door open when he’s 
working out there, when I’m not there to keep shutting it. 
He  forgets  doors  are  on  hinges.  Born  in  a  barn  really.  
(The garage door opens onto a corridor that leads directly 
into the kitchen) 

In  the  above  example  temperature  sensors  are  capturing 
changes in temperature at certain times and on certain days. 
All  that  the  sensor  can  see  and  all  that  is  visible  in  the 
graphical representation is a lower temperature for a certain 
period  of  time  in  a  location  that  is  identified  as  being  the 
kitchen.  This  relatively  simple  piece  of  data,  however, 
produces  a  deceptively  simple  piece  of  accounting  that 
turns  upon  understanding  a  whole  range  of  matters  about 
who does what in certain places at certain times in the home 
and  in  certain  ways,  and  how  that  might  impact  upon 
measurable matters such as temperature in other locations.  
So  what  Connie  sees  within  the  data  are  the  following 
considerations:  several  days  a  week  Andrew  likes  to  do 
DIY  activities  in  the  garage;  Andrew  routinely  leaves  the 
garage  door  open  when  he’s  doing  so;  Connie  has  called 
him to account for doing this but he has continued to do so; 
it  therefore  falls  to  Connie  to  shut  the  door,  but  she’s  not 
always  there  to  do  so;  the  corridor  the  garage  door  opens 
onto  is  also  connected  to  the  kitchen;  leaving  the  garage 
door open makes the corridor cold and this, in turn, makes 
the kitchen cold; the days and times when the temperature 
drop  happens  in  the  kitchen  coincide  with  the  days  and 
times when Andrew does DIY in the garage; the cause of 
the drop must therefore be his practice of leaving the garage 

496

SESSION: MANAGING PERSONAL DATA

door open. The account given does not by any means render 
all of these matters explicit but, despite this, it is proffered 
as an adequate account.  
So  in  a  single  sentence  account  Connie  brings  together 
reasoning about places and times of events and the people 
who  are  enacting  them  and  their  practices.  The  account  is 
adequate without her subsequent comments that make clear 
her  own  position  on  the  matter:  that  it  is  oriented  to  as 
adequate  is  visible  in  the  way  it  self-evidently  glosses  a 
whole constellation of matters pertaining to the household 
order, its inhabitants, the activities they engage in, and the 
discernible events these create. It speaks of a social order 
that  it  is  presumed  the  recipient  of  the  account,  the 
researcher,  can  see  too  without  any  need  for  further 
elaboration. But social order is not something available to a 
sensor  and  it  turns  upon  small  details  of  local  practice  of 
which the sensor has no sense. 
Reasoning about the routine 
Of course, what underpins much of the reasoning visible in 
the  preceding  materials  is  the  profound  understanding 
members of a household exhibit regarding what constitutes 
the routine within their household: the things that happen in 
certain  places  and  at  certain  times  involving  certain 
members of the household doing things in particular kinds 
of  ways,  in  a  regular  and  taken-for-granted  fashion  such 
that everyday life may proceed on an even keel. Sometimes 
discussion  around  the  data  made  this  deep  appreciation  of 
how the participants’ lives were ‘patterned’ in certain ways 
especially visible: 

Susannah  and  Frank  are  looking  through  the  energy 
consumption data for weekday evenings. 
Susannah: On a Monday - so Frank would pick David up - 
so this is Frank being in and then I would join him. So this 
is  probably  him  getting  sorted  with  some  tea  and  then 
putting kids to bed and then … 
Frank:  It’s  quite  quiet  I  guess  isn’t  it,  putting  the  kids  to 
bed? 
Susannah:  Yeah  I  know  but  then  what  are  they  actually 
using.  So  that’s  lights  on  and  off,  and  that  might  be  - 
we’ve got a projector rather than a TV - so that might be 
this bit here … Now in the overnight the kids have a light 
on in the landing ‘cause they don’t like it to be completely 
dark. 

So  here  all  that  is  being  looked  at  is  a  graph  showing 
varying levels of energy consumption over time. It is, in a 
sense, nothing more than a set of numbers on axes and lines 
between  varying  points  angling  up  and  down.  The  sensor 
has produced a record or trace of changes in the amounts of 
energy  being  drawn  upon  by  the  household  at  the  point 
where it enters the house and it has been rendered open to 
depiction in this way. What is impressive here is the extent 
to  which  such  a  simple  resource  can  provide  for  a 
description  of  family  life  and  its  organisation,  and  in  so 
doing  illuminate  the  measurements  in  ways  that  are  not 
visible within the measures themselves.  

life  and 

the  account,  of  everyday 

Members  are  able  to  point  to  specific  points  where  the 
graph  rises  or  falls  and  express  them  as  points  within  the 
routine: this is probably him getting sorted with some tea; 
it’s  quite  quiet  …  putting  the  kids  to  bed;  that’s  lights  on 
and off; we’ve got a projector … so that might be this bit 
here; overnight the kids have a light on in the landing. Here 
we  have  a  snapshot  of  life  in  this  household  from  the 
moment they enter it after work or school up until when the 
kids  are  in  bed.  But  the  snapshot  is  a  property  of  the 
description, 
its 
organisation, not the graph.  
It  trades  on  what  anyone  knows  about  the  enactment  of 
daily  life  in  the  home.  There  is  no  sense  of  bringing  into 
question  or  needing  to  account  for  why  Frank  would  be 
getting tea, why he would be putting the kids to bed, why 
the projector might have been used after the kids have gone 
to bed. Only leaving the light on in the landing is subject to 
further account, and this itself trades on what anyone knows 
about  children  not  liking  the  dark.  What  anyone  knows  is 
not  represented  in  the  graph  however,  less  still  in  what 
anyone  knows  round  here.  It  resides  in  the  conduct  of 
domestic life and its routine organisation, and is manifest in 
occasioned 
talk  when,  for  example,  researchers  ask 
members  to  account  for  the  energy  represented  in  graphs. 
Thus, in making the data accountable members understand 
that  specific  activities  and  practices  will  have  particular 
energy  consumption  consequences.  They  understand  too, 
without having to be told, that it is through spotting those 
consequences  and  imbuing  them  with  an  ordinary  social 
significance that they inevitably make the routine visible. 
Reasoning about exceptions 
The  flip  side  of  members’  reasoning  about  their  routines 
and its use as a resource in accounting for sensor data is the 
recognition  within  the  data  of  what  might  therefore 
constitute  an  exception  to  the  routine.  Reasoning  about 
exceptions is often generative of quite a significant amount 
of work, as is visible in the following example: 

Frank  and  Susannah  usually  leave  the  house  for  work 
around 07.40. However, looking through the motion  data 
they  can  see  that  the  sensor  detects  movement  in  the 
house in their absence. 
Frank:  OK,  so  I  left  the  house  and  then  there’s  some 
activity at 12.00. 
Susannah: So this has to be the cats because we’re not 
in. 
Frank: Could be cat activity. 
Susannah:  That  has  to  be  the  cats.  It  can’t  be  anything 
else can it? 
Frank: No, I don’t think so. 
Susannah:  Although  that  first  one’s  longer  isn’t  it?  How 
long in duration is that? About eight minutes?  
Susannah: Generally, you see, my perception of what the 
cats do when we’re not here – Fred – like this morning I 
took the car down to the garage at nine and he’s asleep 
on  David’s  bed  and  there  he  will  remain,  apart  from 
getting  up  to  have  a  look  round  for  food.  He’ll  get  up  if 
there’s somebody that comes into the house but otherwise 

497

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

he’ll  stay  asleep.  But  as  I  was  coming  down  the  stairs, 
Moomin shot up them, so I thought I bet she’s going back 
to  bed.  So,  they’ll  get  up  when  we  get  up,  but  then  as 
soon as we leave I do think they go back to bed then have 
periods when they might get up sometimes.” 

the  routine,  but  rather 

As with the discussion regarding bathroom usage earlier the 
data being examined here is motion data where a sensor has 
detected motion at a certain time of day and this is what is 
visible on the graph. In this case the data being examined 
relates to data from several motion sensors within the house 
rather  than  just  one,  but  once  again  it  is  seen  to  require 
explication  because  the  timing  does  not  fit  readily  with 
local understandings of the day-to-day routine.  
What is interesting here is the amount of work involved in 
making exceptional data reason-able: that is, the appeal is 
no longer to what just any member might take for granted 
about 
to  what  might  sound 
appropriate  as  a  body  of  speculation,  based  on  a  set  of 
highly specific and local rationales. This takes more effort 
than usual because it requires more detail than an account 
that trades on what anyone knows.  
The specific problem the members are confronted with here 
is  that  there  is  motion  in  the  house  when  there’s  nobody 
home.  It  takes  inspection  of  their  lives  and  the  particular 
composition  of  their  household  for  them  to  see  that  there 
are only so many candidate possibilities and it is no surprise 
that they arrive at the cats as causing the movement given 
their  absence.  However,  convincing  both  themselves  and 
the researcher of the adequacy of this proposition involves 
working through what they know of the cats’ habits before 
they are able to arrive at the conclusion that this accounts 
for the exception and, in doing so, the example makes the 
curious nature of exceptions visible. 
Exceptions are at first glance remarkable. To remark upon 
them 
they  are  not  readily 
accountable,  and  if  they  are  not  readily  accountable  then 
there’s  a  job  of  work  to  be  done  to  understand  them. 
Curiously, that work involves bringing the remarkable issue 
at hand into line with ordinary, run of the mill happenings 
in the home. So what at first appears remarkable turns out 
not to be particularly remarkable at all; just the cats doing 
what  cats  do,  for  example.  This  work  of  rendering  the 
exceptional ordinary is something we return to again below. 
Reasoning about the moral order 
Above all of the other matters we have so far discussed is 
the  way  in  which  accounts  for  data  are  grounded  in  what 
amounts  to  a  moral  organisation  of  the  home.  That  is, 
members  of  any  household  have  a  sense  of  what  can  and 
cannot appropriately be said about their activities and what 
kinds  of 
rights  and  obligations  such  accounts  are 
demonstrably attentive to. All of the preceding materials are 
imbued  with  this  moral  understanding  in  one  way  or 
another, as indeed would be any account of the household 
and its doings.  

that 

is 

to  make  visible 

the  pursuit  of 

Where  accounts  relate  to  the  accomplishment  of  the 
ordinary  everyday  routine,  members  display  no  sense  in 
their  activities  requires  overt 
which 
explication. Rather, the statement of the routine is presumed 
to be an adequate account in its own right. The exception is 
exceptions. Here we see the taken for granted orderliness of 
domestic  life  being  surfaced  and  made  explicit.  In  the 
following  example  we  return  once  again  to  the  matter  of 
appropriate bathroom practices, with one of the members of 
the household being called quite specifically to account as a 
consequence of data being made visible: 

Frank and Susannah are looking at the light and humidity 
data  for  their  bathroom;  a  sudden  peak  in  activity  in  the 
middle of the day on a weekday becomes remarkable: 
Susannah: That was Mary being off, and the 6th was you 
being at home.  Oooh, what did you do? 
Frank: I didn’t do anything. 
Susannah: You did. At 12 o’clock. Look at that. 
Frank: Where? Nothing. 
Susannah: No, here. 
Frank:  I  could  have  been  up  late,  ‘cause  I’ve  had  this 
headache thing. So that’s probably me getting up late isn’t 
it? Having a late shower. It’s high for a long time. I don’t 
have that long a shower. 
Susannah:  Yeah,  but  you  could  have  had  a  shower  and 
then you could have had a shave. 

So  here  what  is  being  sensed  is  light  and  humidity  in  a 
bathroom.  As  in  all  of  the  other  cases  this  is  being 
visualized  on  a  simple  time-rate  graph,  this  time  showing 
simultaneous increases in both light and humidity levels at 
a certain time and on a certain day of the week. This is all 
the sensor can see. However, what is visible to members is 
the way this indexes bathroom activity at an unusual time of 
day. More importantly, the activity is visibly connected to a 
specific  member  of  the  household,  even  though  there  is 
nothing  in  the  data  itself  to  identify  any  one  particular 
person.  It  then  becomes  incumbent  upon  that  specific 
person to come up with an account for why the data might 
look that way.  
First of all Frank accounts for the matter by saying it might 
have been him getting up late because he had a headache. 
This,  of  course,  is  no  kind  of  explanation  of  why  there 
should be a light and humidity event in the bathroom, but 
already the very notion of getting up late pays testimony to 
his  understanding  of  what  the  routine  should  be  and 
provides acknowledgment of its status as an exception. He 
then ties the account more specifically to the visible data by 
proposing  he  could  have  been  having  a  late  shower. 
However,  immediately  after  this  he  starts  to  question  the 
adequacy  of  this  account  because  the  humidity  and  light 
levels  stay  high  for  a  ‘long  time’  and  he  doesn’t  have 
showers  that  last  that  long.  This  itself  is  bound  up  with  a 
sense  of  what  an  appropriate  amount  of  time  to  have  a 
shower  might  be  for  this  person  in  this  household, 
underscoring  the  moral  implicativeness  of  this  event. 
Having a ‘long shower’ could be described as inappropriate 
here. Susannah, however, rescues his account by suggesting 

498

SESSION: MANAGING PERSONAL DATA

reasoning  being  displayed  here 

he might have followed on from having the shower with a 
shave. 
Underlying  all  of  the  more  explicit  reasoning  here  are  a 
number  of  background  understandings,  including:  a)  what 
kind of things make the bathroom humid; b) what kinds of 
bathroom  activities  this  person  might  engage  in  (e.g. 
shaving);  and  c)  how  that  might  provide  a  reasonable 
account of a phenomenon that at first sight seemed unusual 
and demanded accounting for. As observed recurrently over 
the analyses presented above, the work engaged in here is 
tightly  concerned  with  making  ‘what  the  graphs  say’,  and 
more  specifically  what  the  graphs  render visible  and  even 
remarkable, an ordinary feature of everyday life.  
Accomplishing this is utterly dependant upon membership 
of the household. This is because: 1) It takes membership to 
see  what  might  or  might  not  count  as  being  ‘ordinary’  or 
‘exceptional’ in ‘this’ particular household in the first place; 
in  other  households  showers  at  12  o’clock  might  count  as 
business-as-usual,  but  not  ‘this’  one,  for  example.  2)  It 
takes  membership  to  be  able  to  see  how  the  remarkable 
might be rendered intelligible in ‘this’ particular household. 
3)  It  takes  membership  to  be  able  to  see  what  an 
appropriate  account  would  need  to  look  like  for  this 
intelligibility to be appealed to and invoked. 
The  gap  between  what  is  captured  by  the  sensor  and  the 
kinds  of  moral 
is 
substantial. However, there is a deeper challenge: the moral 
assumptions around which people organise the sociality of 
their homes form a rarely explicated backdrop to the things 
that  are  called 
the  rather  odd 
circumstance  of  a  researcher  (or  some  other  third  party) 
sitting  down  with  a  family  to  talk  through  graphs,  which 
display  data  rendered  from  sensors  that  are  putatively 
indexical  to  the  things  happening  in  their  home,  for  such 
explications  to  be  even  vaguely  forthcoming.  In  ordinary 
largely  unsaid. 
everyday 
Explicitly  uncovering  accounts  of  what  it  is  involved  in 
being  a  member  ‘round  here’  is  therefore  going  to  be  a 
challenging  matter  for  anyone  who  has  need  of  eliciting 
them; and designers have such a need if networked sensing 
systems are to deliver on their promise. 
THE  ACCOUNTABLE  CHARACTER  OF  PERSONAL 
DATA SHARING 
For members, the taken for granted orderliness of domestic 
life is largely unsaid; what need, after all, do members have 
to  busy  themselves  in  articulating  for  others  what  is 
ordinarily  plain  for  them  to  see  or  to  draw  that  which  is 
usually invisible to them, and should be invisible to them, 
to  explicit  account?  However,  when  the  orderliness  of 
domestic  life  is  made  an  accountable  matter,  as  the 
deployment  of  our  sensor  packages  has  done,  then  it 
becomes  visible  that  its  elaboration  implicates  various 
orders of situated reasoning. These are drawn upon to make 
the data generated by sensors accountable, i.e., observable 
and reportable. The making is a methodological matter that 

to  account.  It 

these  matters 

remain 

takes 

life 

499

then, 

in  summary,  are 

consists of articulating the data in terms of the social and 
moral  organisation  of  domestic  life  and  instructs  us  as  to 
how  personal  data  interaction  might  be  appropriately 
handled.  Here 
the  primary 
observations to attend to. 
Accounts are occasioned  
In  the  above  materials  we  have  assembled  a  number  of 
perspicuous examples that together bring into view some of 
the  methodological  characteristics  of  accounting 
for 
personal data to third parties. In this case the third party is a 
researcher.  This  fact  cannot  be  ignored  [14].  It  matters, 
then,  who  the  third  party  is,  and  for  what  reasons  and  to 
what ends they want to pry into people’s personal data. It is 
in this respect that we say that, as a methodological matter, 
the sharing of personal data is ‘occasioned’. In our case the 
sharing is occasioned by the doing of research, whereas for 
others it will be occasioned by the delivery of some kind of 
service, which will have to be accounted for as a premise to 
personal data sharing just as our prying was for the families 
of project members.  
The occasion was ostensibly accounted for by us in terms of 
the  process  of  informed  consent,  an  ‘up  front’  process 
similar in kind to that which frames the use of many digital 
services in spelling out ‘terms as conditions’ as it were. We 
are  aware  of  calls  for  new  models  of  informed  consent  in 
systems  design  [11],  however  the  point  we  would  draw 
attention  to  here  is  that  the  ‘up  front’  nature  of  the 
occasioning of accounts is misleading. Rather, it is the case 
that each  and  every  account  is  occasioned,  in  our  case  by 
the  researcher  asking  household  members  to  inspect  and 
talk  through  particular  representations  of  the  data.  The 
occasioning of accounts is on ongoing matter, it cannot be 
settled ‘up front’, and this is of consequence for design.  
Accounts are mutual accomplishments 
As ongoing matters accounts are primarily oriented towards 
the business of articulating various patterns of activity and 
the  reason-able  character  of  exceptions.  This  turns  upon 
seeing  what  needs  to  be  accounted  for,  and  there  is  a 
reflexive 
and 
representations  of  the  data.  This  means  that  an  account 
cannot just be ‘read off’ the data but has to be discovered 
within 
interaction  between  occasioner,  household 
member(s)  and  their  situated  use  of  the  representation. 
Finding the ‘just what’ of the matter is therefore a mutual 
accomplishment of all parties to the articulation of sensor-
based data. 
Accounts are recipient designed 
The  mutual  accomplishment  of  accounts  turns  upon  the 
presumed appropriateness of accounts. It is not simply that 
not just any account will do - that there appropriate ways to 
account  for  what  can  be  seen  in  the  data  based  on  what 
anyone knows of what goes round here - but that who the 
account is being told to is also consequential for what kind 
of account is offered about what has been seen. Articulating 
appropriate  accounts  of  the  data  implicates  various  orders 

relationship 

between 

seeing 

this 

the 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

of reasoning spanning the home’s organisation, its routines, 
the  activities  that  compose  them,  individual  practices,  and 
the  moral  probity  of  accounting  for  any  of  these  things. 
Who wants to know about them is therefore of consequence. 
Thus, while there is very little to say to local members who 
already  understand  these  matters,  what  members  have  to 
say  to  a  researcher  is  a  different  matter,  and  what  they 
might  have  to  say  to  a  service  provider  or  a  legal 
representative  might  well  be  different  again;  in  each  case 
accounts  are  and  have  to  be  ‘worked  up  for  the  occasion’ 
[15] or designed for particular recipients.  
Accounts are fundamentally social in design 
The  recipient  design  of  accounts  is  predicated  on  the 
supposition  that  they  will  need  to  be  socially,  rather  than 
technically, intelligible. Thus data events are understood by 
members to be indexical to social events and accounts are 
rendered  in  these  terms.  Common-sense  reasoning  is 
brought  to  bear  regarding  the  data  made  visible  such  that 
motion is seen and said to be indexical to the presence of 
people (or cats), for example, whilst temperature, light and 
humidity  are  all  seen  and  said  to  be  indexical  to  certain 
kinds of activity, and energy consumption is seen and said 
to  be  indexical  to  certain  kinds  of  activity  implicating 
certain kinds of device usage. Within these common-sense 
understandings  are  found  situations  and  circumstances 
within  the  local  order  that  can  be  and  are  drawn  upon  to 
appropriately account for what has been made visible. 
Accounts are morally accountable 
The  making  visible  of 
itself  an 
accountable matter. Simply put, the provider of an account 
is accountable for the account. Not only in the sense that the 
person  offering  an  account  may  be  required  to  make  the 
adequacy  of  their  account  observable  and  reportable  to 
other  members  as,  for  example,  when  the  adequacy  of 
Andrew’s account of having the light on in the shower was 
called into question by Connie. In addition to this accounts 
are designed, as a methodological matter on the grounds of, 
and with respect to, moral probity. There are, then, features 
of the local order that are as a matter of moral compunction, 
to be glossed over and disregarded. There exist matters of 
domestic life that are not to be accounted for by members to 
members.  To  do  otherwise  would,  as  Susannah  elaborates 
with  respect  to  her  children,  be  to  make  an  ‘invasive’ 
intrusion into one another’s lives, which in turn may disrupt 
the social order and potentially break it.  
SO WHAT? 
It might be thought that the ‘rich’ human analysis provided 
in  this  paper  bears  little  relation  to  the  ‘thin’  automated 
analysis  that  is  typical  of  Big  Data.  It  is  therefore 
incumbent on us to explain how, exactly, the fine-grained 
articulation  work  exhibited  here  highlights  the  limitations 
of Big Data more generally. It is worth revisiting Pentland’s 
comments  by  way  of  opening  this  up.  Pentland  assumes, 
like many working in the area of Big Data, that “little data 
breadcrumbs” – the kinds of data produced by sensors - can 

local  order 

the 

is 

500

that 

study  makes 

it  perspicuous 

interaction,  and 

tell “the story of your life”; that “fine grain understandings 
of  individual  interactions”  can  be  had  from  systems  that 
produce these breadcrumbs, and that systems can therefore 
be  “built  on  fine  grain  data  sharing”  [13].  Our  study 
suggests that these assumptions are problematic in practice 
in a domestic context at least. 
Our 
fine  grain 
understandings of interaction cannot be simply be read off 
sensor data. It takes work to make the data legible, and thus 
‘speak  about’  real  world 
this  work 
demonstrably 
implicates  various  orders  of  reasoning 
implicated in the local ordering of domestic life. The power 
of  Big  Data  analysis  becomes  problematic  then,  for  while 
the  patterns  and  clusters  that  are  detected  through  thin 
automated  analysis  work  well  for  such  things  as  energy 
optimisation  (e.g., 
load  balancing  and  demand  side 
management), those same analytics start to break down at a 
local  level  where  the  patterns  and  clusters  produced  by 
manifold sensors are much more nuanced. Evaluation of the 
Nest  thermostat,  for  example,  documents  its  inability  to 
recognise interactional ‘context, situations and intent’ [20], 
and  this  is  just  one  single  sensor,  what  of  a  host  of  them 
embedded in the home?  
Of course it might be contended that even if each data point 
cannot  be  interpreted with  a  very  high  level  of  accuracy, 
thin automated analysis can still reveal a lot about the life 
of people in terms of gross patterns. Thus, the question is 
not if sensor-based accounts (rather than human accounts) 
of singular events are right or wrong, but if they allow us to 
understand  patterns  of  activity  that  give  away  private 
information.  Thin  automated  analysis  may  tell  us  when 
someone  got  up,  the  rooms  they  entered,  the  things  they 
interacted  with,  the  times  when  this  occurred,  etc.,  but  it 
does not tell us what people are doing and without that it is 
difficult to see how systems built on fine grain data sharing 
are to respond appropriately. This, of course, is key to the 
harvesting of personal data in the Internet of Things. Data is 
not  simply  being  harvested,  it  is  being  harvested  to  do 
something, to actuate something, to turn the heating up or 
down, for example.  
If  domestic  sensor-based  systems  are  to  be  built  on  fine 
grain  understandings  of  interaction  it  is  necessary  to  go 
beyond what sensors see - quantified measures of humidity, 
the rising and falling of temperatures, light levels, motion, 
varying levels of energy consumption, etc., mapped against 
location  and  time  –  to  the  activities  that  generate  these 
measurements.  The  data  generated  by  sensors  is  indexical 
to  human  action,  but  this  is  not  seen  by  the  sensors. 
Nevertheless, the data they generate, and any patterns that 
may be discerned in the data, obtain their sense from human 
action and the ways in which it is locally ordered.  
We  have  a  curious  situation  then  in  which  the  patterns 
derived from sensor data through thin automated analytics 
ignore  the  actual  real  world,  real  time  patterning  of 
domestic life as it is known, recognized and reasoned about 

SESSION: MANAGING PERSONAL DATA

by  household  members  in  the  interactional  production  of 
the  local  order.  This  makes  a  mockery  of  any  claims  that 
fine grain understandings of interaction and our lives can be 
had from little data breadcrumbs and it puts the building of 
systems predicated on thin automated analysis in jeopardy 
insofar as these are intended to respond to and support the 
localised delivery of services in the home (and not to it, as 
for example, with demand side energy management).  
If  we  want  to  build  effective  networked  sensing  systems 
premised on fine grain data sharing then we need to build in 
mechanisms  that  support  articulation  work  and  enable 
people to make sensor data accountable to the local order. 
This  is  a  non-trivial  challenge,  not  only  technically  but 
socially,  as  no  one  is  going  to  want  to  account  for  every 
moment  of  their  day.  Trying  to  do  so  would  breach  the 
taken for granted orderliness of everyday life, which leaves 
much unsaid and whatever is said morally accountable. Nor 
is  there  any  need  to;  we  are  not  suggesting  that  designers 
should  seek  to  enable  end-users  to  articulate  their  data  as 
they  have  to  us,  only  that  the  various  orders  of  reasoning 
involved  in  articulating  the  data  and  the  methodological 
ways  in  which  accounts  are  assembled  are  matters  to 
consider when tackling the problem. 
The design challenge, then, is not one of enabling all sensor 
data to be articulated but of figuring out just what needs to 
be  accounted  for  in  building  and  using  networked  sensing 
systems  and  the  services  that  will  be  delivered  through 
them.  Our  studies  provide  some  initial  insight  into  what 
articulation mechanisms need to support to bring this about. 
Thus, in contrast to sensor networks ‘seamlessly’ harvesting 
and distributing personal data, mechanisms will be required 
that  support  methodological  features  of  personal  data 
sharing. This will involve developing a range of tools that 
support  the  ongoing  occasioning  of  accounts,  the  mutual 
accomplishment  of  accounts,  and  the  recipient  design  of 
accounts and in such ways that enable members to account 
for the social not the technical character of data, and allow 
them to exercise moral probity not only in sharing their data 
with  others  but  in  surfacing  (or  not)  what  is  made 
accountable to the local cohort.  
Insofar as data sharing is envisioned to be distributed, not 
face-to-face,  then  these  methodological  matters  frame  the 
design  of  communication,  visualisation,  annotation,  and 
collaborative  data  management  tools,  to  enable  end-users 
and  third  parties  to  engage  in  (machine-based)  dialogue 
regarding the harvesting of personal data, to visualise what 
is being harvested, to make it accountable to the local order, 
and  to  enable  end-users  to  exercise  due  diligence  in  its 
harvesting and use.1 

                                                             
1  We  also  anticipate  the  need  to  make  the  underlying 
algorithmic  operations  and  various  judgments  made  about 
data accountable to people. This will require ‘opening up’ 
the  principles,  approaches  and  analytic  techniques  used  to 
develop these in such a manner that they can be articulated 

501

What  of  the  claim  that  thin  automated  analysis  reveals 
patterns  of  activity  that  give  away  private  information? 
There  is  of  course  some  truth  in  this,  but  the  data  is 
nowhere  near  as  transparent  as  presumed  at  least  where 
networked sensors are concerned: human action is missing 
from  the  picture.  The  risk  then  in  this  context  is  less  to 
privacy as it is to the misrepresentation of peoples’ lives, 
which may of course have serious ramifications. Putting the 
end-user into the loop in the ways we have touched upon 
above and enabling them to articulate their data may also be 
a way of managing this problem. 
If personal data derived from sensor networks is to provide 
the  foundation  for  systems  predicated  on  fine  grain  data 
sharing in the digital home of the future, it will be necessary 
to actively involve people in making the data accountable to 
third  parties  to  deliver  services  that  work  in  the  local 
context, ‘here’ in ‘this’ home. The work of accounting – of 
articulating  the  data  –  lies  at  the  heart  of  privacy 
management.  Members’  accounts  are  never  generic,  but 
always situated within particular circumstances and tailored 
for  specific  recipients.  Thus,  supporting  articulation  work 
will  enable  members’  to  manage  the  flow  of  private 
information  and  the  representations  of  their  lives  that  are 
implicated in fine grain data sharing. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The work reported here was supported by EPSRC research 
grants EP/K039911/1 & EP/M001636/1. 
REFERENCES 
1.  Pat Brundell, Andy Crabtree, Richard Mortier, Paul 
Tennent and Peter Tolmie (2011) “The network from 
above and below”, Proc. of SIGCOMM WMUST, pp. 
1-6, Toronto, ACM. 

2.  Nicholas Ciarelli (2010) “How Visa predicts divorce”, 

The Daily Beast, 
www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2010/04/06/how-
mastercard-predicts-divorce.html [Accessed 27-07-
2015] 

3.  Andy Crabtree, Richard Mortier, Tom Rodden and 

Peter Tolmie (2012) “Unremarkable networking: the 
home network as part of everyday life”, Proc. of DIS, 
pp. 554-563, Newcastle, ACM. 

4.  Andy Crabtree, Tom Rodden, Peter Tolmie, Richard 
Mortier, Tom Lodge, Pat Brundell and Nadia Pantidi 
(2014) “House rules: the collaborative nature of policy 
in domestic networks”, Personal and Ubiquitous 
Computing, vol. 19 (1), pp.203-215. 

                                                                                                      
to  ordinary  people.  This  will  also  be  socially  and 
technically  challenging  given 
to  convey 
information  about  what  are  often  quite  sophisticated 
mathematical  and  statistical  techniques  to  people  in  a 
manner  that  they  can  understand  and  integrate  into  their 
practical everyday reasoning.   

the  need 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

5.  Andy Crabtree and Richard Mortier (2015) “Human 
data interaction: historical lessons from social studies 
and CSCW”, Proc. of ECSCW, pp. 1-20, Oslo, 
Springer. 

6.  Andrea Ganna and Erik Ingelsson (2015) “5 year 

mortality predictors in 498 103 UK Biobank 
participants: a prospective population-based study”, 
The Lancet, DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-
6736(15)60175-1 

19.  Peter Tolmie, Andy Crabtree, Stefan Egglestone, Jan 
Humble, Chris Greenhalgh and Tom Rodden (2010) 
“Digital plumbing: the mundane work of deploying 
ubicomp in the home”, Personal and Ubiquitous 
Computing, vol. 14 (3), pp. 181-196. 

20.  Rayoung Yang and Mark W. Newman (2013) 

“Learning from a learning thermostat: lessons for 
intelligent systems for the home”, Proc. of UbiComp, 
pp. 93-102, Zurich, ACM. 

7.  Harold Garfinkel (1967) Studies in Ethnomethodology, 

Prentice-Hall. 

 

 

8.  Hamed Haddadi, Heidi Howard, Amir Chaudhry, Jon 
Crowcroft, Anil Madhavapeddy and Richard Mortier 
(2015) “Personal data: thinking inside the box”, 
Computing Research Repository, 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1501.04737 

9.  HAT (2014) Platform for a Multi-Sided Market 

powered by the Internet of Things, 
www.hubofallthings.com  

10.  Eric Hazan and Francesco Banfi (2013) Leveraging 

Big Data to Optimise Digital Marketing, 
www.mckinsey.com/client_service/marketing_and_sal
es/latest_thinking/leveraging_big_data_to_optimize_di
gital_marketing [Accessed 27-07-2015]  

11.  Ewa Luger and Tom Rodden (2013) “An informed 
view on consent for ubicomp”, Proc. of UbiComp 
2013, pp. 529-538, ACM. 

12.  Richard Mortier, Tom Rodden, Peter Tolmie, Tom 

Lodge, Robert Spencer, Andy Crabtree, Joe Sventek 
and Alexandros Koliousis (2012) “Homework: putting 
interaction into the infrastructure”, Proc. of UIST, pp. 
197-206. Cambridge (MA), ACM.  

13.  Alex Pentland (2012) “Reinventing society in the wake 

of big data”, Edge, 8.30.12, https://edge.org/ 
conversation/reinventing-society-in-the-wake-of-big-
data [Accessed 22-04-15]. 

14.  Melvin Pollner (1991) “Left of ethnomethodology: the 

rise and decline of radical reflexivity”, American 
Sociological Review, vol. 56 (3), pp. 370-380. 

15.  Harvey Sacks (1992) “Verb selection; interactionally 
generated invitations; adequacy of local environments, 
etc.” Lectures on Conversation (ed, Jefferson, G.), Vol. 
1, Pt. VII, pp. 787-801, Blackwell.  

16.  Kjeld Schmidt and Liam Bannon (1992) “Taking 

CSCW seriously”, Journal of CSCW, vol. 1 (1), pp. 7-
40. 

17.  Eric Siegel (2013) Predictive Analytics: The Power to 

Predict Who will Click, Buy, Lie or Die, Wiley. 

18.  Anselm Strauss (1985) “Work and the division of 

labour”, The Sociological Quarterly, vol. 26 (1), pp. 1-
19. 

502

