CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Botivist:

Calling Volunteers to Action using Online Bots
Tobias H¨ollerer
Saiph Savage
UC Santa Barbara
holl@cs.ucsb.edu

Microsoft Research
amh@microsoft.com

Andr´es Monroy-Hern´andez

West Virginia University &

National Autonomous
University of Mexico

norma.savage@mail.wvu.edu

ABSTRACT
To help activists call new volunteers to action, we present
Botivist: a platform that uses Twitter bots to ﬁnd potential
volunteers and request contributions. By leveraging differ-
ent Twitter accounts, Botivist employs different strategies to
encourage participation. We explore how people respond to
bots calling them to action using a test case about corrup-
tion in Latin America. Our results show that the majority of
volunteers (> 80%) who responded to Botivist’s calls to ac-
tion contributed relevant proposals to address the assigned so-
cial problem. Different strategies produced differences in the
quantity and relevance of contributions. Some strategies that
work well ofﬂine and face-to-face appeared to hinder peo-
ple’s participation when used by an online bot. We analyze
user behavior in response to being approached by bots with
an activist purpose. We also provide strong evidence for the
value of this type of civic media, and derive design implica-
tions.

Author Keywords
bots; volunteers; activism; micro-contributions; social media

INTRODUCTION
Activist groups usually have a small set of highly motivated
core members who give a great deal of their own time and
resources to make change in the world [20] – for example,
to ﬁght corruption. However, to achieve their goals, activists
cannot rely entirely on these core members. They usually
require a larger crowd of volunteers who believe in the cause
and can perform small actions, e.g.
individuals around the
world who can help report corruption in their local area [34].
Activist groups need the support of casual volunteers: a group
of interested, but less committed individuals [32].
For years, activists went door-to-door to recruit and engage
casual volunteers. Recently, new technologies have helped
activists build the support of casual volunteers [6, 20]. Some
use mailing lists to maintain continuous communication with

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work 
for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that 
copies  are  not  made  or  distributed  for  proﬁt  or  commercial 
advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on 
the  ﬁrst  page.  Copyrights  for  components  of  this  work  owned  by 
others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit 
is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or 
to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior  speciﬁc  permission  and/or  a 
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW ’16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights 
licensed to ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819985

813

CALLS TO ACTION
WITH STRATEGY 1

CALLS TO ACTION
WITH STRATEGY 2

CALLS TO ACTION
WITH STRATEGY 3

VOLUNTEER PRODUCED 

CONTRIBUTIONS

CAUSE OR 
SOCIAL 
PROBLEM

Botivist

Figure 1. Overview of Botivist: Activists ﬁrst provide the social problem
for which they want action. Botivist then tries different strategies to
trigger contributions from volunteers.

their volunteers [27, 33]. Others are using social media [38].
Facebook has been particularly useful to recruit and coor-
dinate volunteers, issuing calls to action for fundraisers or
demonstrations [39, 42]. Twitter has also enabled activist
groups to raise awareness and mobilize even those unaffected
by the activists’ cause or who live in distant regions [34, 35].
However, despite the technological advancements, social
computing has not been widely employed to connect casual
volunteers [39]. Many eager individuals receive little di-
rection on how to help [34]. Current technologies also do
not help activists mobilize people. Activist groups must still
spend time ﬁguring out how they will present their campaigns
in order to successfully trigger action [38].
Understanding how the presentation of a campaign (message)
affects the engagement of volunteers and people in general
has been extensively studied in both theories for civic engage-
ment and marketing [12, 17, 19, 26, 37]. There has also been
a growing interest in exploring how technology can be used
to frame messages better and more persuasively [12]. Com-
panies, organizations, and even governments have taken to
social media to reach a wider audience and inﬂuence behav-
ior [6]. Some have gone as far as to set up fake accounts op-
erated by automated software (bots) in order to feign support
and inﬂuence real users [13, 43].
In Mexico’s 2012 presi-
dential election, the winning party used over 10,000 bots to
swamp online discussion [25].
Large and well-funded organizations have devised complex
social media strategies to get their message across. However,
most activist groups are still in the dark, trying to ﬁnd the
best strategies to mobilize people [39]. The main difﬁculty
comes from the fact that volunteers’ level of agency changes

based on how they perceive the efforts of activists [38]. But,
social media has transformed how people interpret activists’
varying messages and consequently their efforts [27]. It can
thus be very difﬁcult for activist groups to keep up with new
technology and to predict the outcomes of adopting a cer-
tain strategy. This complexity has forced many activists to
limit who among their organization can use social media [39].
They usually prefer to have a “point person” in charge of the
group’s social media strategy. However, even when the point
person ﬁnally “ﬁgures out” the best ways to trigger participa-
tion, it is not easy to transfer that knowledge to others [27].
Additionally, it can be costly or impossible for the person to
present the group’s campaigns differently to test what is the
most effective. All of this hampers activists’ success.
To help activists identify the best strategies, we present Bo-
tivist, a platform that, by leveraging online bots, allows ac-
tivist groups to try different strategies for calling volunteers
to action. Figure 1 presents an overview of Botivist. The
group ﬁrst presents the cause for which they want to generate
action. The platform then tries different strategies to request
contributions on social media, and help advance the group’s
plans. Activist groups thus receive help about how to prompt
contributions from strangers, reducing the need to invest time
in people who might never contribute.
The purpose of this paper is twofold. First, we aim to analyze
the opportunities, limitations, and challenges of a system that
uses online bots to call people to action in order to act upon
social issues. Secondly, we analyze the online behaviours of
those who are most likely to respond to activist bots. More
speciﬁcally, (1) we focus on understanding how social me-
dia users respond to differently-framed messages (strategies)
when delivered by an activist bot. Most previous work stud-
ied messages framed primarily when the information came
from a company, organization, or individual, and has not ad-
dressed how people respond when the messages are presented
by an online bot, especially for the topic of activism. (2) In
addition, an effort is made to understand the communication
patterns of the people who decide to engage with Botivist.
This analysis is important as these individuals could one day
become core activists.
For this purpose, we designed and conducted experiments on
Twitter. We designed Botivist as a Spanish speaking agent be-
cause we had more background with the language and its us-
age in activism: Botivist’s main researchers are native Span-
ish speakers, with knowledge and experience on activism in
Latin America; we also had direct access to activists from
Mexico1 who helped polish Botivist’s messages. We focused
our calls to action on corruption and corrupt ofﬁcials’ im-
punity from prosecution. These are some of the most pressing
social issues fought in general by activists in Spanish speak-
ing countries, especially those in Latin America [8, 21].

1We had continuous discussions with activists from Mexico’s Rev-
olutionary Action Group (GAR) who collaborate with activists’
across the world to ﬁght corruption and bring justice to work-
ers
https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grupo_de_Accion_
Revolucionaria

814

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Our aim was for Botivist’s calls to action to facilitate collabo-
ration. We chose this focus because activist groups usually
need volunteers to work together towards a common goal.
Thus, Botivist’s tweets were structured to create collabora-
tion by mentioning three users and suggesting that they col-
laborate to ﬁght a social problem. Mentioned users might not
know each other, but they would all be currently using simi-
lar keywords, e.g., in their latest tweets all of them mentioned
“corruption”. By suggesting collaborations, Botivist can also
help people to meet and connect.
To assess and compare the reactions that Botivist triggers in
volunteers, we use methods from previous literature on reac-
tions to different strategic presentations of a message [17, 19,
26, 37], as well as research that analyzed the quality of in-
formation from strangers on social media [24]. We deployed
our platform publicly on Twitter, where our activist-designed
and controlled bots invited people to organize around par-
ticular social issues using different strategies. 175 volun-
teers responded to Botivist’s calls to action. These volunteers
made 1,236 contributions (424 tweets, and 813 favorites and
retweets). We found that Botivist’s most effective strategy
for prompting contributions from volunteers was to be up-
front and direct. Interestingly, when Botivist used techniques
designed to be persuasive and known to be effective in direct
human-to-human interaction, it received far fewer replies. At
times these techniques even seemed to prompt individuals to
discuss whether bots should help solve social problems. We
found that by being less openly persuasive in its message, Bo-
tivist encouraged almost double the number of replies. Our
results also indicate that those who decided to engage with
Botivist were individuals who consistently tweeted terms re-
lated to activism and politics, with a small sub-population of
users who tweeted terms related to marketing analytics.
Together, our results highlight the importance of understand-
ing a community before simply adopting persuasive technol-
ogy and expecting it to function. However, the beneﬁt of Bo-
tivist is that by allowing activists to systematically test dif-
ferent strategies, it might not be necessary to understand a
community in detail. Our work shows the strength of this
new type of civic media.

RELATED WORK

Botivist: Strategically Framed Messages
There is extensive literature on how a message’s framing in-
ﬂuences people’s preferences for a product, or how much they
participate in an event [17, 19]. Such research has uncov-
ered the power of presenting something in terms of its pos-
itive beneﬁts or negative drawbacks can have. Framing can
inﬂuence listeners’ opinions and levels of participation, mak-
ing people more likely to buy a product if its ad highlights
relevant beneﬁts, than if the ad lacks such information. Re-
lated work has also identiﬁed the value of integrating partic-
ular messages into a call to action to motivate participation.
Shen [30] points out that integrating a solidarity component
into the requests made to volunteers led to volunteers com-
pleting their tasks more thoroughly.

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

“Persuasive computing” [12] has combined this literature
with technology to demonstrate how computation can be used
to inﬂuence people’s behavior [6]. Many companies and or-
ganizations are now also using social media technology to in-
ﬂuence choices and shape the habits of their consumers [26],
even their health choices [3]. Online platforms have also
adopted persuasive computing to motivate greater participa-
tion. Ling et al. [18] found that by simply reminding people
of their connection to an online community, people posted
more. However, most persuasive computing research has paid
little attention to designing technology to enhance activism.
While there has been growing interest in creating systems to
help activists coordinate volunteers [20, 4, 9, 14, 5] most of
these systems are not designed to audience-test the framing of
different messages. By having different strategies for calling
people to action, individuals can be persuaded to participate
more in a social cause. Botivist gives activists and organizers
ﬂexibility in framing the most effective call to action.

Botivist: Online Automated Agents
Since the 1960s, there has been a proliferation of automated
conversational agents [40], and it is now commonplace for
humans to respond to them [23]. We designed Botivist to
behave in line with other mainstream conversational agents.
Most previous work on online bots has focused more on de-
veloping techniques to detect these agents [13, 10]. How-
ever, this “Turing test” approach has left out the possibility
that bots can persuade and mobilize people on social media.
This potential has not yet been fully understood, let alone ex-
plored in the ﬁeld of activism. Aiello et al. [1] began an explo-
ration in the area by setting up a social experiment that exam-
ined how people interact with a bot in an online community.
The work uncovered how a bot could acquire social relevance
even when using simple canned responses and lacking proﬁle
information. Botivist builds on these ﬁndings to create on-
line social agents that start to mobilize people to help activist
groups.

BOTIVIST
Botivist is a web application that activist groups can use to
call volunteers to action to help address a social issue. We
based Botivist on the well-known idea that by simply chang-
ing how a message is presented, it is possible to trigger di-
verse reactions [17, 19, 26, 37]. Therefore, by simply framing
a call to action differently, we can prompt different amounts
and kinds of responses. However, deciding how to frame a
call to action to obtain a desired turnout is not simple. There-
fore Botivist probes different strategies, i.e., ways of present-
ing a call to action.

Botivist Strategies
We selected some of the most common strategies used by ac-
tivists to call volunteers to action [11]. The strategies are
also known to be some of the most effective to garner par-
ticipation [30, 37]. The messages used for each strategy were
written by the ﬁrst author, and polished with the help of real
activists. The activists discussed the messages, and then cor-
rected the language to produce content that they would use.

To try out each strategy, Botivist has a set of Twitter accounts
to communicate with potential volunteers. All of the accounts
identify themselves exactly the same. They mention they are
bots (with a bio that states they are a bot; their proﬁle picture
is also of a bot.) All accounts also have at least 50 followers.
The only main difference across accounts is the strategy used
to communicate and call volunteers to action.

Direct Strategy
This strategy is about being upfront and direct when making
petitions [2]. When using this strategy, Botivist directly calls
people to action to ﬁnd solutions for a social issue. For ex-
ample: “Could we collaborate to brainstorm solutions to the
problem of corruption?”

Solidarity Strategy
This strategy posits that feelings of solidarity or empathy can
drive people to respond to a call to action [11, 30]. When
using this strategy, Botivist directly calls people to action, but
it also shares solidarity quotes. For instance, a sample call
to action is: “Could we collaborate to brainstorm solutions
to the problem of corruption?” “Remember, that: One for
all, all for one!” Note that in this strategy for each call to
action or reply, two tweets are sent: one tweet soliciting a
reply, the same as the direct strategy, and one tweet to share
the solidarity quote.

Gain Strategy
This strategy is about presenting a calls to action in terms of
the gain that people would receive if they participate [37].
These calls to action also mimic those used in the direct strat-
egy, but add additional text to emphasize the gain. A sample
call to action from this strategy: “Could we collaborate to
brainstorm solutions to the problem of corruption? We might
improve our cities!”

Loss Strategy
This strategy is about presenting a call to action in terms
of the loss that people would receive if they do not partici-
pate [37]. A sample call to action from this strategy: “Could
we collaborate to brainstorm solutions to the problem of cor-
ruption? If not, our cities might suffer!”
We envisioned activist groups using Botivist mostly at the
beginning of a collective project. Botivist thus focuses on
prompting action in the form of discussions or plan proposals
to help solve the social problem the activists are focused on,
just as discussion and brainstorming are among the ﬁrst steps
of any collective effort. All of Botivists’ responses echo the
“How Might We” questions used to launch brainstorming [7].
Depending on which strategy Botivist is pursuing, it will have
a slightly different follow-up question. For instance, when
following the gain strategy, Botivist asks for ideas, and then
states that by participating in brainstorming, people could
help improve their cities; whereas when following the soli-
darity strategy, Botivist will ask for ideas, and share a soli-
darity quote at the end. Table 1 presents the list of follow-up
questions for the direct strategy. The follow-up questions of
the other strategies are exactly the same, except for the added
text. For instance, the gain strategy had the question: How do
we ﬁght corruption in our cities & thus improve them? All

815

CAUSE

(1) IDENTIFY POTENTIAL 

VOLUNTEERS FROM 

TWEETS

(2) RANDOMLY ASSIGN VOLUNTEERS TO 

EACH OF BOTIVIST’S MODALITIES

(4) BOTIVISM RECEIVES 

RESPONSES

(3) FOR EACH OF ITS MODALITIES, BOTIVIST  
SENDS A CALL TO ACTION TO VOLUNTEERS.

(5) BOTIVISM SENDS 

FOLLOW-UP QUESTIONS 
TO GET MORE RESPONES

Figure 2. Botivist’s process for calling volunteers to action and obtaining
responses.

calls to action and followup messages for brainstorming were
veriﬁed and polished by real activists. A strategy has one par-
ticular call to action associated and a list of replies to pursue
brainstorming. Botivist randomizes its replies. Botivist only
targets a person once, and engages further only if it receives
a response.

Botivst Operation
An activist group ﬁrst deﬁnes the social problem for which
they seek volunteers – in our test case, “corruption.” Botivist
identiﬁes a set of potential volunteers and targets them by
mentioning them in a tweet. Botivist then waits for replies, in
which case it uses the opportunity to request more responses.
We set Botivist up to target the same number of volunteers for
each strategy category. Figure 2 shows Botivist’s work ﬂow.
To determine who will be mentioned in a tweet, we take into
account the ﬁndings from previous work on social media in-
teractions between strangers [24] and research on publicly
mentioning people in social media content [29]. Nichols et
al. [24] showed that obtaining responses to questions from
strangers usually had a low response rate, even under fa-
vorable conditions. We thus designed Botivist to maximize
the chances that people would respond to the call to action.
Botivist targets individuals who have just publicly tweeted
something related to the activists’ social problem of interest,
based on simple keyword matching. For instance, if the ac-
tivist group wants volunteers to ﬁght corruption, the system
will target people who have just publicly shared a tweet ex-
plicitly mentioning corruption. Group managers can provide
a list of relevant keywords or hashtags to the system. This
method is drawn from how activists operate online, searching
for relevant keywords and making publicly addressed tweets
to seek a wide range of help and build new social connec-
tions [34]. Similar to real activists, Botivist engages people
across countries, and has no prejudice against people based
on their initial support or opposition to the social issue at
hand [36].
Once a relevant tweet is detected, its author is randomly as-
signed to one of Botivist’s strategies. When a strategy has
three authors (persons) assigned, Botivist sends a strategic
tweet that mentions and calls the individuals to action to work
together on the issue. Note that Botivist mentions multiple
users in a tweet to facilitate cooperation among possible vol-
unteers. Given Twitter’s space constraints, three users was the

816

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

maximum that Botivist could mention in one tweet. Botivist
is also constantly monitoring Twitter for responses to its calls
to action. Botivist replies with canned responses that depend
on the strategy Botivist used to communicate with the group.
The follow-up messages all focus on prompting action from
the volunteers.

Q#

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Question Text
Direct Strategy

How do we ﬁght corruption in our cities?

How do we ﬁght corruption in our countries?
How do we use Twitter to ﬁght corruption?

How do we use the people to ﬁght corruption?

What should we change personally to ﬁght corruption?

What should we reduce to ﬁght corruption?

What should we change at home to ﬁght corruption?
Table 1. Questions asked in the direct strategy.

EVALUATION
This paper hypothesizes that online conversational bots can
be used to call volunteers to action to work on solving a so-
cial issue. We focus our evaluation on the two main aspects
of this claim. First, for a given social problem, is it possible
to use bots to call volunteers to action? Can Botivist obtain
responses from strangers on social media, and what solicita-
tion strategies are most conducive for obtaining results? Sec-
ond, can Botivist prompt these volunteers to produce relevant
contributions? Does Botivist trigger volunteers to discuss the
issue or to propose plans? Similar to [24], our goal is to shed
light on the type of contributions which autonomous agents
can assemble in short bursts of times to get more immediate
usable results.
To answer these questions, we used Botivist to publicly call
volunteers to action regarding the social problems of corrup-
tion and impunity [8, 21].
We were able to attract 175 volunteers over the course of two
days. Because we did not group targeted users based on their
location, Botivist likely called to action people from different
countries, similarly to how real activists’ Twitter campaigns
function [36].

Method: Botivist and Volunteers’ Participation
Botivist was active from April 26th until May 7th, 2015. We
used the keywords “corrupcion” and “impunidad” (Spanish
for corruption and impunity) to select users with relevant
tweets. For both social problems, we loaded calls to action
and follow-up questions speciﬁc to each of Botivist’s strate-
gies. Botivist alternated between social problems, ﬁrst calling
a group to ﬁght corruption, and subsequently calling another
group to ﬁght impunity. To minimize any sequence effect,
Botivist tried to make its calls to action for all strategy types
almost at the same time. However, we randomized the delay
time between Botivist’s calls to action to avoid being labeled
as spam by Twitter. The researchers also constantly moni-
tored Botivist’s Twitter accounts to ensure they were still run-
ning and not blacklisted. All tweets received and sent by our
system were collected in a database for further analysis.

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Calls to Action
Followup Questions
Volunteers
Volunteer Replies
Reply Rate
Interactions Bot
Interactions Volunteers

Total
376
557
175
423
45 %
320
493

Direct

94
158
94
204
81%
90
274

Loss Gain
94
94
80
79
27
31
53
74
30% 43%
57
48
71
85

Solidarity

94
120
23
92
21%
250
62

Table 2. Summary of Botivist’s and volunteers’ replies and interactions.
Total column shows the results summed across strategies

*Direct had the most volunteers and most number of replies.

80

60

40

20

l

t

s
r
e
e
n
u
o
V
_
e
g
a
n
e
c
r
e
P

t

t

e
a
R
_
y
p
e
R

l

40

Direct

20

0

0.9

Gain

Loss Solidarity

Bot
(b)
*Direct  triggered 
most  interactions 
between volunteers

e
t
a
R
_
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
e
t
n
I

0.6

0.3

0

Direct

0.6

Gain

Loss Solidarity

Bot
(a)

*Solidarity had most  

interactions 

between volunteers 

and Botivist

0.4

0.2

e
t
a
R
_
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
e
t
n
I

0.0

Direct Gain

Loss Solidarity

Bot

(c)

0.0

Direct Gain

Loss Solidarity

Bot
(d)

Figure 3. Overview of the number of volunteers and responses that each
strategy triggered. The direct strategy had the highest participation and
prompted the most responses.

Results
Botivist called to action 376 groups of three: 94 groups per
strategy (47 for corruption; 47 for impunity). In total, Botivist
received replies from 175 volunteers. These volunteers made
1,236 responses or other actions (424 tweets; 320 retweets
and favorites to Botivist’s content; 493 retweets and favorites
to the content of other volunteers.) Table 2 shows a break-
down of the replies and interactions of Botivist and volun-
teers. Figure 3 shows an overview of how people responded
to Botivist’s calls to action. The number of participants varied
across strategies, as well as their contributions.
Figure 3a shows the percentage of people who responded
to each strategy. There was a signiﬁcant difference in the
number of unique contributors across strategies, based on an
ANOVA [F(3, 174) = 38.94, p < 0.001]. The direct strat-
egy was the most effective at mobilizing unique contributors.
Over 50% of Botivists’ participants were gathered via this
strategy. By being direct and upfront, Botivist was able to ob-
tain responses from over 30% of the people it targeted. This
compares favorably with research that shows only 21% of so-
cial media users have participated in groups involved in polit-
ical/social issues [31]. Based on our initial test, this form of
outreach may yield more civic participation. However, Bo-
tivist’s Solidarity strategy obtained participation from only
8% of the volunteers targeted. With inadequate strategies,
people’s civic participation is likely to be inhibited.

Figure 3b presents the number of replies per Botivist tweet
(reply rate). Reply rate is a common measure in the study of
participation by online audiences, and has also recently been
used to study how online audiences interact with advocacy
organizations [28]. For Botivist, a perfect reply rate of 100%
would be one reply per tweet sent, even if the tweet contained
multiple user mentions, as in the call to action. We found that
there was a signiﬁcant difference between number of replies
across strategies (a ANOVA test gave [F(3, 932) = 8.594,
p− value < 0.001]). The direct strategy had the highest reply
rate (81%), receiving almost one reply per tweet sent.
Although the direct strategy reply rate appears high, it is
lower than that of crowdsourcing companies such as Inno-
centive,2 which lets people pose problems for anyone to solve
and gives cash awards for the best proposals. Innocentive re-
ceives approximately 20 replies (proposals) per posed prob-
lem [41]. However, a stark difference between this platform
and Botivist is their monetary compensation. While Botivist
relies purely on volunteers, prizes for the best proposals on
Innocentive can range from $5,000 to $1 million dollars. We
think there is value in exploring non-monetary ways to gen-
erate discussion and proposals from the crowd, especially for
activist groups who may have limited resources.
The reply rate of Botivist’s other strategies was not as high
compared to the direct one. The gain and loss strategies pro-
duced reply rates similar to product reviews [24], while the
reply rate for the solidarity strategy was even lower (21%).
Figure 3c shows for each strategy the number of retweets
and favorites Botivist received per tweet it sent (interaction
rate). There was a signiﬁcant difference between number of
retweets and favorites across strategies, show by an ANOVA
test [F(3, 932) = 3.045, p < 0.01].
Tweets following the solidarity strategy, particularly the soli-
darity quote or phrase shared, received the most retweets and
favorites from volunteers. The rest of the strategies received
almost the same amount of interactions. However, despite
its high interaction rate, the Solidarity strategy received the
lowest number of replies from volunteers. Interestingly, this
strategy appears to prompt volunteers to retweet and favorite
content; but not necessarily to make contributions in the form
of replies.
Figure 3d shows the interaction rate per volunteer tweet,
i.e., how much volunteers retweet or favorite each others’
content. There was a signiﬁcant difference between volun-
teer interaction rate between strategies (a ANOVA test gave
[F(3, 492) = 19.34, p < 0.001]). Here the Direct and Loss
strategies were the ones who harvested the most interactions
among volunteers. We also see that people retweeted or fa-
vorited volunteers’ content more than content original to Bo-
tivist. This result recalls observations of the Scratch online
community in which users valued interactions with humans
more than with computers [22].

2https://www.innocentive.com/

817

Method: Analysis of Volunteer Responses
Our goal was to understand the type of volunteer responses
(including retweets, favorites, and mentions in addition to
replies) that systems like Botivist can trigger. We were par-
ticularly interested to see if Botivist would prompt people
to discuss and provide proposals for social problems. We
used Upwork3 to hire three Spanish-speaking, college edu-
cated individuals to independently classify Botivist’s volun-
teers into people who contributed proposals/discussions rele-
vant to a social problem, and people who contributed to off-
topic conversations. We instructed these response coders to
classify volunteers instead of single tweets because indepen-
dent tweets can be harder to interpret. First, two coders read
through the 423 tweets of the 175 volunteers, and classiﬁed
each volunteer into either on-topic volunteer or off-topic vol-
unteer based on whether the person contributed proposals or
discussion on the assigned social problem. The two coders
agreed on the classiﬁcation of 141 volunteers (Cohens kappa
= 62: Substantial agreement). We subsequently asked a third
coder to act as a tiebreaker in cases of disagreement.

Results
We found that the vast majority of volunteers (81%) re-
sponded to Botivist’s call to action with discussions and pro-
posals relevant to the social problem they were assigned. A
sample of these proposals includes:“Corruption isn’t fought
with street rallies! It’s fought by being tough on crime, having
honesty & transparency!”
Only 19% of all of Botivist’s volunteers contributed solely to
off-topic discussions. The word most used in these off-topic
discussions was: “bots.” A sample off-topic tweet:“Sorry ...
I can’t collaborate with bots. I have a cultural bias.”

Percentage Of On-Topic Volunteers

Strategy
Botivist (all strategies)
Loss
Gain
Solidarity
Direct
Table 3. Overview per strategy of its percentage of on-topic volunteers.
The Direct strategy had the most on-Topic volunteers.

81%
74%
89%
82%
94%

To understand the types of actions promoted by each strat-
egy, we show the percentage of volunteers who responded to
the call to action explicitly with what was requested. Table
3 presents the percentage of volunteers who contributed pro-
posals or discussions relevant to their assigned social prob-
lem, split out by the strategy Botivist used toward them.
The Loss strategy had the largest percentage of volunteers
who responded to the call to action with off-topic replies.
Over 60% of these replies used the term “bot.” Upon man-
ual inspection it appeared that the replies were mainly ques-
tioning whether autonomous agents should help solve social
problems. The Direct strategy, on the other hand, had almost
all of its volunteers dedicated to discussing/brainstorming so-
lutions to their assigned social problem.
3Upwork is an online platform to contract Freelancers to perform
tasks online. Upwork is available at www.upwork.com/

818

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

In laboratory settings of face-to-face discussions [37], the
Loss strategy was more effective than the Direct strategy.
However, our results indicate that online behavior follows the
opposite pattern. This might help shed light on how mes-
sages change when adopted by technology.
In the case of
Twitter, messages used in the Loss strategy prompted people
to question the participation of bots in activism. Bots with an
obvious agenda might be perceived as suspect and unwanted,
whereas people with an agenda would be more easily toler-
ated and even respected.

Method: Communication Patterns of Volunteers
Our objective here was to understand whether those who re-
spond to Botivist communicate on social media differently
than those who decide to not reply. It might be that people
who discuss certain social issues are more prone to interact
with activist bots. To this end, we examined targeted users’
other tweets. We divided the people Botivist called to action
into two groups: responders and non-responders. We ana-
lyzed the public tweets from people in each group to identify
any differences in content.
Text-Based Differentiation. To obtain a descriptive assess-
ment of what characterizes these groups beyind their response
to Botivist, we use as a corpus the 200 tweets of each targeted
user right before Botivist called them to action 4 Within this
corpus, we ﬁrst identiﬁed the words that differentiate each
group, and then sorted these words into different semantic
categories.
To identify each group’s key terms, we used a Mann-Whitney
rank test [16]. This measure highlights the words which have
been used more by one group than the other, per document.
For our purposes, a document is all the tweets of an individ-
ual group member, and the corpus is the collection of the en-
tire group’s tweets (responders vs. non-responder). For each
corpus, we calculate each word’s Mann-Whitney ρ measure,
indicating how frequently the group has used that word, and
also giving more weight to words which one group uses and
the other group does not. This measure allows us to have
corpora of different sizes. We then ranked the words of each
corpus based on their Mann-Whitney ρ score, and identify
the top 1%. These are the group’s “key terms.” In the cur-
rent work, we found that most key terms were hashtags and
mentions to other Twitter users.
Next, we characterized each group’s key terms using qualita-
tive content coding. For each group, one of our authors ﬁrst
read a training set of 200 randomly selected tweets mention-
ing one or more of the key terms. This helped the researcher
understand the context in which these terms were used. This
author also looked up the Twitter proﬁle of the users men-
tioned, since users’ proﬁle descriptions can also provide con-
text for the interaction. This author then began to extract cat-
egories describing the distinguished words of both groups.
Another author then analyzed the emerging categories and
helped to adjust them. Finally, we looked at a set of 400 ran-
domly selected tweets with key terms from both groups and

4We used data prior to Botivist’s interaction, since our system might
have inﬂuenced people’s future conversations [1].

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Category
Activism: covers hashtags ﬁghting for a social cause, or twit-
ter handles of people who appear to participate in activism.

Sample Hashtag in Tweet
“#WeAreAllAyotzinapa We continue to
ﬁght against impunity. We won’t stop, let’s
take this to the streets!”

Politics: covers twitter handles of people who appear to ofﬁ-
cially be part of the political system or hashtags about political
ﬁgures
News: covers hashtags used to give news alerts, or twitter han-
dles of people who appear to be news reporters.
Marketing Analytics: covers hashtags used to analyze one’s
Twitter followers to better market oneself or Twitter handles of
people that give advice on how to better market oneself.

“Bronco & Fernando Elizondo (Mexican
political candidates) will make history in
Nuevo Leon #TweetForElBronco”
“Car crash in Central Street, 2 people hurt.
#Verfollow”
“Over 5% of my followes have retweeted me
in the last 24 hrs and 20% in the last month
#usefulTweet”

Sample Twitter & Proﬁle Description
@antireforma: “REVO... REVOLUTION.!
DAUGHTER OF THIS EARTH! LOVER OF
LIFE! I FIGHT FOR TRUTH, JUSTICE
AND VENEZUELA!!!”
@epn:“President of
States.”

the United Mexican

@epigmenioibarra:“I am a news reporter
and producer.”
@umspromotions:“Nigeria’s
top-class
Promo-Marketing media outﬁt:
Digi-
tal/Social Media Mgmt, Radio/TV Plugin,
DJ Mixes, Strategic PR.”

Table 4. Description and examples of the categories that describe the groups’ proﬁles.

produced a ﬁnal list of mutually exclusive categories. Three
Spanish-speaking, college educated colleagues who had not
been exposed to this work were hired to categorize the key
terms of each group. For each term, we showed the tweets in
which it appeared, and in case the word was a Twitter han-
dle, we showed also the user’s proﬁle description. We asked
these two coders to categorize each of the 155 terms using the
categories listed in Table 4. Coders selected the “most rele-
vant” category for each term given its related information.
The two coders agreed on 143 terms (Cohens kappa = .79).
For the remaining 12 terms, a third coder was asked to act as
a tiebreaker.

Results
We found that across strategies the people who responded
to Botivist tended to consistently use more hashtags related
to social causes, and referenced activists in their tweets.
Over 50% of the key terms of this group were hashtags and
user mentions related to activism. For instance, the hashtag
#porEsoPropongo5 (#that’sWhyIPropose in English) was one
of the most tweeted by the people who replied to Botivist.
This hashtag has been adopted by citizens in Latin Amer-
ica to make proposals for ﬁghting corruption and impunity
globally and locally. In addition to activism, these individu-
als also frequently referred to politicians and news reporters
(25% of their key terms belonged to news and 19% to poli-
tics). However, they made fewer of this kind of reference than
non-responders to Botivist. The latter tweeted more consis-
tently about high proﬁle politicians and news media (43% of
all their key terms were about politics and 40% about news.)
For instance, they frequently mentioned possible Argentine
presidential candidate Jose M. de la Sota (@delasotaok) or
Mexico’s president (@epn). They rarely used hashtags about
social causes (only 6% of their key terms).
A somewhat unexpected result was the presence of hashtags
and users related to marketing analytics in the pool of respon-
ders to Botivist. For instance, these users frequently men-
tioned the account @m g w v, which describes itself as a
guide to help others market themselves to obtain more follow-
ers and retweets. Since Botivist’s purpose is to test message
framing, it may be more natural for those who are interested
in measuring and analyzing responses to content to respond
to persuasive online bots.

5http://www.poresopropongo.mx/

Note however, that marketing analytics hashtags accounted
for only 4% of this group’s distinct words (compared to less
than 1% for those who did not reply). Overall, the people
who replied to Botivist mainly used hashtags related to ac-
tivism. Table 5 presents the top 3 key terms for each group
and strategy, according to the Mann-Whitney ρ test (most dis-
tinct words).

Strategy Responders Key Terms
Loss
@antireforma (activism)

Non-Responders Key Terms

@epn (politics)

#poresopropongo (activism)
@umspromotions (marketing) @sanchezcastejon (politics)
#cambioclimatico (activism)

@delasotaok (politics)

Gain

@albert rivera (politics)
@alvarouribevel (politics)

@eldiarioes (news)

@juanorlandoh (politics)
@presidenciamx (politics)
#radarparlamentario (news)

@ccifuentes (politics)

@periodicovzlano (news)
@sumariumcom (news)

Solidarity #blacklivesmatter (activism)

@jaimerdznl (politics)

@latati2 (activism)

#ﬁcrea (activism)

@maracayactiva (news)
#handicapped (activism)
@aristeguionline (news)

#mgwv (marketing)

Direct

Table 5. Top 3 key terms found consistently in the tweets of people who
replied to Botivst versus those who did not reply.

DISCUSSION
Our experiments demonstrate the potential of using online
bots to call volunteers to action on social issues. The majority
of people called to action by Botivist made relevant contribu-
tions to the discussion, and even started to interact with each
other to further drive collaboration. Our study provides in-
sight into the deployment of platforms that use online bots
to call volunteers to action for activism, as well as demon-
strating their feasibility for social action groups that wish to
expand their social media outreach. In this section, we will
discuss the beneﬁts and limitations of the Botivist system, and
design implications for future systems of automated activist
communication.
Feasibility
Botivist’s direct strategy yielded a reply rate of over 80%.
This strategy also produced a higher percentage of relevant
responses (94%). This high response rate and promising col-
lection of relevant information showcases the feasibility of
using online bots to help activists engage with new potential
members. Our results also highlight how online bots enable
community scaffolding around social issues.

819

The differences between strategy groups in our data show that
message framing makes a difference in terms of how much
people participate in a Twitter discussion. This matches HCI
ﬁndings that the way a computer presents its voice inﬂuences
people’s responses [23]. However, we were surprised to dis-
cover that strategies that work well face-to-face were less ef-
fective when used by Botivist. This goes against the gen-
eral trend for users to prefer computers that act “more hu-
man” [23].
Integrating solidarity quotes has long been a useful tech-
nique that marketing experts use to increment preference for
items [30], and which activists have also adopted to prompt
people to action [11]. This strategy has also been effective
online. For instance, some citizen journalists in the drug war
added a solidarity component to their news reports to ensure
participation to their calls to action [28]. Political activists in
Palestine also share solidarity messages on Facebook to mo-
bilize support [42]. But when adopted by Botivist, the tech-
nique resulted in the lowest number of responses. Similarly,
the loss strategy is known to trigger people to produce more
quality work [37]. In the 2011 Egyptian uprising, activists on
social media used the technique, stating how a lack of action
would result in more corruption, which drove more effective
participation [15]. But when used by Botivist, the strategy re-
sulted in the lowest number of relevant replies, and seemed to
make people actually question the role of bots in social issues.
For bots to be effective, it is necessary to understand the com-
munities in which they are deployed. We identiﬁed the people
who responded to Botivist are individuals involved in online
activism and marketing. They mentioned hashtags and Twit-
ter accounts related to social causes and marketing analytics.
Since Botivist made no attempt to disguise itself as a human
user, it is likely that people linked Botivist to online market-
ing schemes. Therefore, the individuals who responded to
Botivist were those who already found it natural to engage
with marketing agents. However, the persuasiveness of the
strategy also inﬂuenced people’s contributions. People re-
sponded more to activist bots that did not appear to have a
“secret agenda” and are transparent about their purpose.
The proliferation of persuasive technology in social me-
dia [13] may effect how people react to certain strategies, per-
haps driving a preference for less “manipulative” tactics. On
the other hand, the fact that simply changing a bot’s message
changed subsequent response rates, without needing any in-
terface modiﬁcation or design of complex bot behavior, sug-
gests that designing adequate dialog for online automated
agents can have a strong effect on increasing volunteer par-
ticipation in activism.
Generalizability
Botivist can be adapted to focus on any social issue for which
a message can be formulated. Activists have the opportunity
to use Botivist to crowd-source solutions that improve edu-
cation, health care, and economic conditions. City planners
could use systems like Botivist to call to action experts, stake-
holders, or minorities to design novel, more inclusive urban
spaces.

820

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Bootstrapping
Previous volunteer systems have identiﬁed the difﬁculties in
ﬁnding participants [4]. Botivist shows the power of boot-
strapping onto existing networks of people to call volunteers
to action using automated agents. However, if such auto-
mated social actors were to become popular, a large number
of these bots might compete for people’s time and attention.
It would be useful for social media platform developers to
enable functionality for these bots via APIs. For instance,
bots could be notiﬁed of which users have already been tar-
geted by other agents, to eliminate duplicating volunteering
requests, and reduce users’ “compassion fatigue.” Addition-
ally, if a strategy is known to be ineffective, the system could
recommend a different strategy to the bot.
Maintainability
Our results show that a reasonable proportion of people were
willing to make relevant contributions to Botivist’s causes for
free. This is meaningful because cost is a key problem in
maintaining systems that rely on crowds.
However, the long-term success of systems like Botivist may
require automated social agents that can continuously engage
the volunteers they have recruited. Such systems should take
into account that while they do need to maintain contact with
volunteers, they should not ping them so frequently that vol-
unteers tune them out.
Additionally, by mentioning different individuals in a tweet,
Botivist enabled strangers to meet and start collaborating. Fu-
ture work could also analyze how to design for long-term co-
operation and even maintaining lasting relationships among
volunteers. In particular, researchers could study designs that
follow up with volunteers about their experiences, recognize
them for their work, help them feel part of the activist group,
and build a sense of community [39].
On the other hand, some activists follow “syntax rules” when
writing tweets to ease coordination [34], Botivist could also
motivate standardized contributions that use a certain format
or hashtag. This might also help long-term collaborations.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
This paper introduced Botivist, a system that uses Twitter bots
to engage volunteers in a discussion about social issues. The
system uses the bots to quickly probe different strategies for
calling volunteers to action. People on Twitter responded to
Botivist’s calls to action and provided relevant contributions
to the discussion about corruption and impunity that we used
as Botivist’s test case. Volunteers also began to interact with
each other, showing the potential for using bots to scaffold
collective efforts. We found that the strategy which Botivist
uses to call volunteers to action does matter. Tactics known
to be effective when used by humans were not as effective
when adopted by online bots. A direct strategy was the most
effective for getting relevant participation. We believe that
the growing number of persuasive online agents [13, 25] has
made people prefer interactions with greater transparency and
a less “manipualtive” approach. Nevertheless, our experi-

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

ments highlight the real-world feasibility of using online bots
to call volunteers to action.
The insights from this work are limited by the methodology
used and population studied. For example, those targeted
by Botivist were all Spanish speakers, likely with their own
cultural biases towards automated accounts (especially given
the recent accusations that Latin American governments have
used online bots to change political discussions [6]). Our re-
sults might therefore not generalize to an English-, Russian-
or Chinese-speaking population. Future work could study
how people across the globe engage with bots to better under-
stand the phenomenon. Our methods also focused on breadth
instead of depth. Future work could conduct longitudinal
studies and engage in in-depth interviews with volunteers.
Acknowledgements. Special thanks to Mako Hill, Dario
Taraborelli, William Das, and the anonymous reviewers for
their great feedback in this work.

REFERENCES
1. Luca Maria Aiello, Martina Deplano, Rossano Schifanella, and

Giancarlo Ruffo. 2012. People are Strange when youre a Stranger:
Impact and Inﬂuence of Bots on Social Networks. Links 697, 483,151
(2012), 1–566.

2. Turadg Aleahmad, Aruna D. Balakrishnan, Jeffrey Wong, Susan R.
Fussell, and Sara Kiesler. Fishing for Sustainability: The Effects of
Indirect and Direct Persuasion. In Extended Abstracts on Human
Factors in Computing Systems.

3. Eric P.S. Baumer, Sherri Jean Katz, Jill E. Freeman, Phil Adams,

Amy L. Gonzales, John Pollak, Daniela Retelny, Jeff Niederdeppe,
Christine M. Olson, and Geri K. Gay. 2012. Prescriptive Persuasion
and Open-ended Social Awareness: Expanding the Design Space of
Mobile Health. In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’12). 475–484.

4. Erin Brady, Meredith Ringel Morris, and Jeffrey P Bigham. 2015.

Gauging Receptiveness to Social Microvolunteering. In Proceedings of
the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. ACM, 1055–1064.

5. Deana Brown, Gary Marsden, and Ulrike Rivett. 2012. WATER Alert!:

Using mobile phones to improve community perspective on drinking
water quality in South Africa. In Proceedings of the Fifth International
Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and
Development. ACM, 230–240.

6. Nanette Byrnes. 2015. Persuasive technologies surround us, and theyre

growing smarter. How do these technologies work? And why?. In
Technology and Persuasion. MIT Technology Review.

7. Maureen Carroll, Shelley Goldman, Leticia Britos, Jaime Koh, Adam
Royalty, and Michael Hornstein. 2010. Destination, imagination and
the ﬁres within: Design thinking in a middle school classroom.
International Journal of Art & Design Education 29, 1 (2010), 37–53.

8. Pew Research Center. Crime and Corruption Top Problems in

Emerging and Developing Countries. Pew Research Center (????).
http://www.pewglobal.org/2014/11/06/crimeandcorruptiontop-
problemsinemerginganddevelopingcountries/.

9. Justin Cheng and Michael Bernstein. 2014. Catalyst: triggering

collective action with thresholds. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM
conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social
computing. ACM, 1211–1221.

10. Emilio Ferrara, Onur Varol, Clayton Davis, Filippo Menczer, and
Alessandro Flammini. 2014. The rise of social bots. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1407.5225 (2014).

11. John A Fleishman. 1980. Collective action as helping behavior: Effects
of responsibility diffusion on contributions to a public good. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 38, 4 (1980), 629.

12. Brian J Fogg. 2002. Persuasive technology: using computers to change

what we think and do. Ubiquity 2002, December (2002), 5.

13. Michelle Forelle, Phil Howard, Andr´es Monroy-Hern´andez, and Saiph
Savage. 2015. Political Bots and the Manipulation of Public Opinion in
Venezuela. arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.07109 (2015).

14. Aaron Halfaker, Oliver Keyes, and Dario Taraborelli. 2013. Making

Peripheral Participation Legitimate: Reader Engagement Experiments
in Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’13). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
849–860. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2441776.2441872

15. Naila Hamdy and Ehab H Gomaa. 2012. Framing the Egyptian uprising

in Arabic language newspapers and social media. Journal of
Communication 62, 2 (2012), 195–211.

16. Adam Kilgarriff. 2001. Comparing corpora. International journal of

corpus linguistics 6, 1 (2001), 97–133.

17. Irwin P Levin, Sara K Schnittjer, and Shannon L Thee. 1988.

Information framing effects in social and personal decisions. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology 24, 6 (1988), 520–529.

18. Kimberly Ling, Gerard Beenen, Pamela Ludford, Xiaoqing Wang,

Klarissa Chang, Xin Li, Dan Cosley, Dan Frankowski, Loren Terveen,
Al Mamunur Rashid, and others. 2005. Using social psychology to
motivate contributions to online communities. Journal of
Computer-Mediated Communication 10, 4 (2005), 00–00.

19. Durairaj Maheswaran and Joan Meyers-Levy. 1990. The inﬂuence of

message framing and issue involvement. Journal of Marketing research
(1990), 361–367.

20. Elaine Massung, David Coyle, Kirsten F Cater, Marc Jay, and Chris

Preist. 2013. Using crowdsourcing to support pro-environmental
community activism. In SIGCHI Conf. on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. ACM.

21. Patrice McSherry and Molina Raul. 1999. Introduction to Shadows of

State Terrorism: Impunity in Latin America. Social Justice 26, 4
(1999). https://www.socialjusticejournal.org/SJEdits/78Edit.html.

22. Andr´es Monroy-Hern´andez, Benjamin Mako Hill, Jazmin

Gonzalez-Rivero, and danah boyd. 2011. Computers Can’t Give Credit:
How Automatic Attribution Falls Short in an Online Remixing
Community. In SIGCHI Conf. on Human Factors in Computing
Systems.

23. Clifford Nass, Jonathan Steuer, and Ellen R Tauber. Computers are

social actors. In SIGCHI Conf. on Human Factors in Computing
Systems.

24. Jeffrey Nichols, Michelle Zhou, Huahai Yang, Jeon-Hyung Kang, and

Xiao Hua Sun. 2013. Analyzing the quality of information solicited
from targeted strangers on social media. In Proceedings of the 2013
conference on Computer supported cooperative work. ACM, 967–976.
25. Mike Orcutt. 2012. Twitter Mischief Plagues Mexico’s Election. MIT

Technology Review (2012).

26. Ruth Rettie, Ursula Grandcolas, and Bethan Deakins. 2005. Text

message advertising: Response rates and branding effects. Journal of
Targeting, Measurement and Analysis for Marketing 13, 4 (2005),
304–312.

27. Saqib Saeed, Markus Rohde, and Volker Wulf. 2011. Analyzing

political activists organization practices: ﬁndings from a long term case
study of the european social forum. Computer Supported Cooperative
Work (CSCW) 20, 4-5 (2011), 265–304.

28. Saiph Savage and Andr´es Monroy-Hern´andez. 2015. Participatory

Militias: An Analysis of an Armed Movement’s Online Audience. In
Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work & Social Computing (CSCW ’15). 724–733.

29. Saiph Savage, Andres Monroy-Hernandez, Kasturi Bhattacharjee, and
Tobias H¨ollerer. 2015. Tag Me Maybe: Perceptions of Public Targeted
Sharing on Facebook. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM Conference on
Hypertext &#38; Social Media (HT ’15). 299–303.

821

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

30. Lijiang Shen. 2010. Mitigating Psychological Reactance: The Role of

Message-Induced Empathy in Persuasion. Human Communication
Research 36, 3 (2010), 397–422.

31. Aaron Smith. 2013. Civic engagement in the digital age. Pew Internet

(2013).

32. David Horton Smith. 1981. Altruism, volunteers, and volunteerism.

Journal of Voluntary Action Research (1981).

33. Erich Sommerfeldt. 2011. Activist online resource mobilization:

Relationship building features that fulﬁll resource dependencies. Public
Relations Review 37, 4 (2011), 429–431.

34. Kate Starbird and Leysia Palen. 2011a. ”Voluntweeters”:

Self-organizing by Digital Volunteers in Times of Crisis. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI ’11). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
1071–1080. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979102

35. Kate Starbird and Leysia Palen. 2011b. Voluntweeters: Self-organizing

by digital volunteers in times of crisis. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM,
1071–1080.

36. Kate Starbird and Leysia Palen. 2012. (How) will the revolution be

retweeted?: information diffusion and the 2011 Egyptian uprising. In
Proceedings of the acm 2012 conference on computer supported
cooperative work. ACM, 7–16.

37. Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman. 1986. Rational choice and the

framing of decisions. Journal of business (1986), S251–S278.

38. Alcides Velasquez and Robert LaRose. 2014. Youth collective activism

through social media: The role of collective efﬁcacy. New Media &
Society (2014), 1461444813518391.

39. Amy Voida, Ellie Harmon, and Ban Al Ani. 2012. Bridging between

organizations and the public: volunteer coordinators’ uneasy
relationship with social computing. In SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. ACM.

40. Joseph Weizenbaum. 1966. ELIZA: a Computer Program for the Study

of Natural Language Communication Between Man and Machine.
Commun. ACM 9, 1 (Jan. 1966), 36–45. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/365153.365168

41. Wikipedia. 2015. InnoCentive. (2015).

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/InnoCentive.

42. Volker Wulf, Konstantin Aal, Ibrahim Abu Kteish, Meryem Atam, Kai
Schubert, Markus Rohde, George P Yerousis, and David Randall. 2013.
Fighting against the wall: Social media use by political activists in a
Palestinian village. In SIGCHI Conf. on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. ACM, 1979–1988.

43. Xiaofeng Yang, Qian Yang, and Christo Wilson. 2015. Penny for Your

Thoughts: Searching for the 50 Cent Party on Sina Weibo. In Ninth
International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media.

822

