CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Managing Expectations: Technology Tensions among 

Parents and Teens

Lindsay Blackwell, Emma Gardiner, Sarita Schoenebeck

School of Information
University of Michigan

{lblackw,egard,yardi}@umich.edu

e-mail 

ABSTRACT
Extensive scholarship  has  investigated  technology  use 
among  families.  Existing  work  has  focused  primarily  on 
parents’  reactions  to  and  restrictions  of their  children’s
technology  use; here,  we  explore  the  underlying  tensions 
surrounding  technology  use  in  the  home.  We draw  on 
historical  perspectives  of  adolescence  and  family  life to 
better  understand  technology’s  impact  on  present-day 
parents  and  teens. Through an interview  study  with  18
parent-child pairs (19 parents; 23 children, ages 10-17), we
find a number of technology tensions, including 1) parents’ 
underestimation of children’s technology use; 2) children’s 
perception  that  parents  only  tell  them  which  behaviors  to 
avoid; 3)  both  parents’  and  children’s  poor  adherence  to
household technology rules; and 4) parents’ and children’s 
desire  for  mutual  attention. We  argue  that  the  use  of 
personal  devices  introduces distinctive  challenges  into 
modern family life, due to the limited visibility (or practical 
obscurity) of personal device use, expectations of constant 
connectivity,  and  overly-romanticized  notions  of  family 
time. We consider the historical evolution of both teenage 
and  family  life,  and  conclude  that  consistent  and  realistic 
expectations  around  work,  attention,  and  adolescence  may 
help families better manage household technology use.
Author Keywords
Parents; teens; adolescence; family time; technology; home; 
attention; rules.
ACM Classification Keywords
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous.
INTRODUCTION
Teenagers  use  mobile  phones  and  social  media  almost 
constantly  [26], and children  are  gaining  access  to  these 
devices and platforms at increasingly younger ages [27]. As 
a result, parents are presented with the challenge of keeping 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the 
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02...$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819928

up  with  their  children’s  use  and  adapting  their  parenting 
strategies  accordingly.  A  growing  body  of  research  has 
explored  the  tensions  parents  and  children  experience  as 
they  navigate  these  new  digital  boundaries [1,7,15,22,32].
Broadly,  this body  of  work  finds  that  parent  involvement, 
mediation, co-viewing, and open communication tend to be 
correlated  with  better  outcomes  (e.g.,  reduction  in  risky 
behavior, improved parent-child relationships) [10,25,30].
Despite these findings, technology use remains a persistent 
source  of  tension  for many  families.  Many  parents  feel 
unknowledgeable and anxious about what their children are 
doing online, while parents can also exhibit risky behaviors
themselves [7,19,33]. Most prior research has  investigated 
parents’ reactions to their children’s Internet use [10,25,30]
or  parents’  own use  of
technology  [1,15,22,32]. This 
research  builds  on  that  prior  work,  but  focuses  on  the 
tensions which exist around household technology use. This 
research addresses two open questions: 

1. What tensions exist between parents and children

around technology use in the home?

2. Why do family technology tensions arise, and how

might families manage them?

family 

four  overarching 

To  identify  parent-child  tensions  surrounding  technology 
use and attitudes, we conducted interviews with 18 parent-
child pairs (a total of 19 parents and 23 children) about how 
they  and  their  families used  technology.  Interviews  were 
conducted  separately  and  then  compared  during  analysis. 
Results  contribute
tensions  which 
technology  use.  First,  parents 
characterize 
underestimate how many and which social media sites their 
children  use.  Second,  while  parents  report  that  they 
communicate with their children about technology use, their 
children say that parents only tell them which behaviors to 
avoid. Third, parents enact household technology rules, but 
both parents and children break those rules (e.g., no phone 
use at the dinner table). Fourth, children do not want more 
attention from their parents, but they do want attention to be 
reciprocally paid. We argue that family technology tensions 
have  emerged  which  differ  from prior  ones  (e.g.,  tensions
around  television  watching),  because  of  the  practical 
limited  visibility—afforded  by  personal 
obscurity—or 
devices.  We 
constant 
connectivity 
to  show  how  work 
expectations  impinge  upon  home  life  (e.g.,  dinner  time).
This  work  contributes  insights  into  the  limitations  of  the 

extend
the  workplace 

scholarship 

around 

in 

1390

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

construct of adolescence—as neither child nor adult—in the 
context  of  household  technology  use.  It  further suggests
that parents, rather than simply saying “no” or setting rules 
which  are  not  followed,  should  instead  set  expectations 
around mutual attention, whether attending to a device, an 
activity,  or  each  other. At  the  same  time, perceptions of 
“family  time”  should  be  revised  to  better  align  with 
evolving technology use in modern households.
RELATED WORK
Children, teens, and adolescence
Prior to the eighteenth century, childhood ended when work 
began—“almost  from  the  time  they  could  walk,”  children 
were  expected  to  contribute  to  the  household,  at  which 
point adulthood began [18]. As Aries [3] argues, “the idea 
of childhood was bound up with the idea of dependence… 
one  could  leave  childhood  only  by  leaving  the  state  of 
dependence.”
In the late eighteenth century, as industrialization forced the 
separation of work from the home, two competing views of 
childhood  emerged:  first,  that  “childhood  was  held  to  last 
hardly beyond infancy… once he had passed the age of five 
or seven, the child was immediately absorbed into the world 
of  adults”  [3].  This  early concept  of  childhood  remained 
consistent  among  lower  class  families,  in  which  children 
served  a  significant  economic  role  [18].  A  different 
understanding  emerged  in  the  middle  class,  rooted  in  the 
moralist  traditions  of  the  church:  a  long  childhood, which 
“expressed  the  realization  of  the  innocence  and  the 
weakness of childhood, and consequently the duty of adults 
to  safeguard  the  former  and  strengthen  the  latter”  [3].
Beginning  in  the  nineteenth  century,  the  success  of 
educational 
the  adoption  of  an 
intermediary  stage  between  childhood  and  work—the  age 
of school, in what would become our modern understanding 
of adolescence.
Following the Great Depression, G. Stanley Hall’s vision of 
adolescence  “galvanized  a  movement  to  keep  the  young 
from growing up too rapidly” [18]. In the twentieth century, 
“going to school became the key teenage experience” [18].
The word teenager did not enter modern parlance until the 
1940s, when “the word was coined to describe an age group 
that had suddenly become of great interest to marketers and 
social  reformers”  [18].  As  Hine  [18] suggests,  “the  word 
‘teenager’  tells  us  only  that  the  person  described  is  older 
than  twelve,  younger  than  twenty…  the  word  actually 
masks tremendous differences in maturity between different 
members of the age group.”
The  difficulty  in  defining  categorically  “teenage”  traits, 
both across dissimilar age groups and between individuals, 
leaves adolescents in a sort of developmental purgatory, as 
they make “sudden shifts from dependence to maturity and 
back” [18]. This has led to a representation of the teenage 
years as inescapably fraught. Hine [18] argues that the very 
concept  of  the  teenager  “rests  in  turn  on  the  idea  of  the 
adolescent  as  a  not  quite  yet  competent  person,  beset  by 

institutions

led 

to 

1391

teenagers  “serve  a 

stress and hormones.” Families with teenage children often 
expect  “a  certain  disagree  of  discomfort,”  with  conflict, 
oppositionalism  and  defiance  viewed  as  normative  in 
adolescent  development  [39]. Hine  [18] suggests  that 
today’s 
sentence  of  presumed 
immaturity, regardless of their achievements or abilities… 
teenagers are losing their license for irresponsibility while, 
at the same time, they continue to be denied a role in their 
society.”
Parent and Teen Relationships
As Laslett and Wall [23] note, the industrial revolution also 
catalyzed  “the  simplification  of  social  relationships  based 
on kinship, the decline of the tribe and the clan, [and] the 
decay  of  familiar  authority.” Rather  than  the  patriarchal 
family  units  of  centuries  past,  “the  industrial  revolution 
paved the way for the emergence of the democratic type of 
family,”  accelerated  in  the  United  States  by  the  rise  of 
public  schooling  [23].  The  industrial  revolution  saw  a 
separation  of  family  experience  from  “the  organization  of 
everyday  life,”  leading  to  romanticized  notions  of  what 
time  spent  with  family  is  and  what  can  be  accomplished 
within  it  [13].  Family  time  became a  respite  from  the 
demands of modern life [16].
In the early twentieth century, a “strict separation of public 
and  private  spheres”  emerged  in  the  middle  classes, 
modeled through the single-family home [15]. Livingstone 
[29] argues that the home  was  “constructed as a refuge, a 
place for nurturing positive values and for the socialization 
of  children.”  In  the  present  day,  expectations  of  constant 
connectivity  and  availability  [31,43] burden  working 
parents, who must balance vocational demands with family 
life [20]. Family time is increasingly perceived as “a time 
[to be] engaged with each other, to have everyone involved 
and be aware that they [are] involved with each other” [13].
Families  expect  that  their  time  spent  together  will  be 
positive  and  lead  to  an increased  sense  of  togetherness; 
however,  expectations  of  family  time  often  differ  from 
actual 
between 
romanticized  ideals  and  actual  experiences  of  family  time 
may result in disillusionment and guilt.
Conflicts  between  parents  and  teens  often  arise  due  to 
differences  in  expectations  and  conflicting  ideas  around 
social  conventions. What  to  parents  may  be  seen  as 
“involving codes of right and wrong—either moral codes or 
codes based on social conventions” is considered by teens 
to be “matters of personal choice” [39]. Parents view their 
teenage children  as  “more  obligated”  to  disclose  personal 
information to parents than teens consider themselves to be
[37]. For  teens,  mutual trust and  parental  acceptance  are 
predictors  both 
increased 
disclosures [37]. Although both parents and teens generally 
agree that teens are deserving of some amount of privacy, 
parents  also  feel  “none  of  their  children’s  possessions 
should ethically be exempt from parental monitoring” [11].

reduced  secrecy  and 

Contradictions 

for 

experiences

[13].

Teens, however, feel strongly that “cell phones, particularly 
text messages, [are] private” [11].
As teens begin to spend less  time at home and  more time 
with  peers,  parents  seek more knowledge  about  their 
children’s activities [37]. A common child-rearing strategy 
is  to  provide  children  with  a  set  of  rules  and  then  “track 
compliance  with  those  rules,”  taking  disciplinary  action 
when rules are violated [38]. Some research associates high 
levels  of  parental  monitoring  with  “less  delinquency  or 
antisocial behavior, less illegal substance use, less tobacco 
use,  less  risky  sexual  activity,  better  school  performance, 
and fewer deviant friends” [21]. However, “most measures 
of  parental  monitoring  are  really  assessments  of  parental 
knowledge”
[12]. Parents  accrue  more—and  more 
accurate—information about their children’s activities from 
their  children’s  own  disclosures [38]. Perceived  trust, 
security, and involvement between parents and teens lead to 
increased  disclosures  and,  by  extension,  less  discordance 
[37,38]. Misperceptions between parents and their teenage
children have negative implications for both the teen’s own 
behavior as well as the parent-teen relationship. In the case 
of  risky  driving  behaviors,  teens  who  disagreed  with  their 
parents  were  significantly  more  likely  to  engage  in  risky 
driving  behaviors  than  teens  who  agreed  [5].  The  authors 
posit  that,  for  some  families,  “the  only  time  [a  rule]  is 
discussed  is  when  it  has  been  violated”  [5]. A child  who 
experiences  a  strong emotional  bond  with  a  parent is  less 
likely 
that 
relationship,  such  as  risking  a  parent’s  embarrassment  or 
disapproval
[38].  However,  a  parent-child  relationship 
which  prevents  children  from  engaging  in  potentially 
deviant  behavior  requires  the  willingness,  action,  and 
cooperation of both parent and child [38]. As Steinberg [39]
argues,  “early  adolescence  is  an  important  period  for  the 
negotiation of autonomy-related changes in the parent–child 
relationship.”
Parents and Teens Online
The  rise  of  technology  in  family  life—from  radios  to 
televisions  to  mobile  phones—further  complicates  family 
relationships and the boundaries of adulthood.
Teens  are  active  technology  users;  24%  of  teens  report 
being  online  “almost  constantly,”  in  large  part  due  to  the 
ubiquity of  mobile devices [26]. Among teens  who access 
the  internet  via  a  mobile  device,  94%  go  online  daily, 
compared to 68% percent of teens who do not have mobile 
internet  access [26]. Teens  are  also  avid  users  of  social 
media platforms: 71% of teens ages 13 to 17 use Facebook, 
52% use Instagram, and 41% use Snapchat, with teens also 
reporting use of Twitter, Google+, Vine, Tumblr, and other 
sites. 71% of teens report active use of more than one social 
media  site.  In  addition  to  social  media  use,  90%  of  teens 
with  a  cell  phone  or  smartphone  exchange  text  messages
[26]. Though statistics often focus on teens, parents are also 
pervasive  technology  users,  and  their  use  of  sites  like 
Facebook has been growing [9,15,22,32].

to  do  anything 

compromise 

that  might

1392

SESSION: PARENTS AND CHILDREN

the  management  of 

Parents  who  use  technology  in  the  presence  of  their 
children sometimes experience guilt, and  may deliberately 
engage in periods of non-use to set an example for and be 
more  responsive  to  their  children [19]. However,  social 
media  also  offers  a  number  of  benefits  for  parents.  Social 
media sites are particularly beneficial for new mothers, who 
“can  experience  social  exclusion,  particularly  during  the 
early  weeks  when  infants  are  solely  dependent  on  their 
mothers” [15].  Mothers  share  birth  announcements  on 
social media  sites  and  use  Facebook  to  share  baby  photos
[22,32].  Mothers  use  the  anonymous  parenting  forum
YouBeMom to  “discuss  their  lives  in  ways  that  they  may 
not in other settings,” such as complaints about spouses or 
sexual  confessions [36].  Fathers  use  social  media  to  ask 
parenting  questions,  to  compare  themselves  with  other 
parents, and to access social support [2].
Many  parents  struggle  “with  their  own  unfamiliarity  with 
technology,”  and  desire  greater  transparency  in  children’s 
Internet  use [45]. Parents  employ  a  number  of  direct  and 
indirect  strategies  in  an  attempt  to  regular  their  children’s 
technology  use [14].  Parents  also  turn  to  non-technical 
methods  for  regulating  behavior,  such  as  imposing  time 
limits, 
taking  devices  away,  or  enforcing  physical
boundaries for where devices can be used [11]. The effort 
parents  exert  negotiating 
their 
children’s  digital  footprints  is  what  some  scholars  have 
referred to as a “third shift,” an extension of parents’ first 
and 
labor  and  homemaking,
respectively) [1]. However, parents and teens often disagree 
“about how much and what kinds of autonomy teens should 
have, and how much authority parents should have” [45].
Parents  of  adolescents  “have  to  balance  their  children’s 
growing independence  with their own concerns for safety; 
they have to make decisions about which rules to relax and 
which  to  enforce”  [14]. The  mediation  strategies  parents 
employ  depend  heavily  on  parents’  own  digital  literacies 
[45]. As Cranor et al. [11] note, “parents cannot necessarily 
draw  from  their  own  teenage  experience  when  making 
decisions  about  privacy  for  their  children.”  Wisniewski  et 
al. [44] suggest that children of parents who rely on direct 
intervention approaches, such as the use of parental controls 
or  setting  a  child’s  privacy  settings  for them,  are  indeed 
exposed  to  fewer  online  risks—however,  their  “ability  to 
engage  with  others  online  and  to  learn  how  to  effectively 
cope with online risks” is also reduced. Furthermore, teens 
whose parents encourage them to engage with others online 
are “more morally advanced than younger teens who were 
prevented from having these experiences” [44]. Instead, as 
Petronio  [35] suggests,  negotiating  privacy  rules  together 
“may prove a way for parents to signal that, although they 
want to know what the child is doing, they recognize their 
child  has  a  right  to  claim  control  over  certain  information 
considered within the child’s domain.”
Teens report a number of  visibility-obscuring strategies in 
their use of technology, such as placing a phone underneath 

second 

shifts 

(paid 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

a  desk  to  text during  school  hours,  or  relying  on  instant 
messaging  applications  to  “blend  into  their  computer 
work… rendering [them] temporarily invisible” [17]. boyd 
and  Marwick [8] describe 
teens’  practice  of  social 
steganography,
in  which  they  hide  private  messages  to 
friends  in  public  statuses.  In  legal  scholarship,  “practical 
obscurity” has been used to describe information that may 
not  be  completely  concealed,  but  is  not  easily  accessible.
For  example,  as  records  become  digitized,  information 
which was  previously  obscured  (or  hard  to  find)  may be 
more  easily  discoverable.  Stutzman  and  Hartzog  [40]
describe  steps  online  users take  to  maintain  practical 
obscurity,  such  as  modifying  privacy  settings,  adopting 
pseudonyms, and manipulating search engines. They argue 
that practical obscurity is an important consideration when
managing multiple profiles in online settings.
METHODS
We conducted semi-structured interviews with parents and 
their  children  to  learn  about  their  experiences  using  and 
managing  technology  and  social  media.  We  conducted 
interviews  with at  least  one  parent  and  one  child  from  18 
families. We purposively sampled parents of children aged 
10-17,
to  focus  on  the  transitional  age  at  which  many 
children  begin  to  gain  access  to  their  own  mobile  phones 
and  social  media  accounts through  the  age  of  their
transition into early adulthood.
To  recruit  participants,  we  posted  online  recruitment 
messages  to  local  parenting  groups  on  Facebook  and  to 
Craigslist. We also posted flyers to local community centers 
and relied on snowball sampling within the networks of our 
study participants. In an effort to diversify our sample, we 
created  targeted  recruitments  to  attract  fathers  and  single 
parents.  All  participants  were  United  States  residents  with 
at  least  one  child.  Of  the  parents  interviewed  (n=19),  15 
were  mothers.  Of  the  mothers  interviewed  (n=15),  two 
shared custody with their children’s fathers, and one was a
single mother. One mother interviewed was married to her 
female  partner,  but  shared  custody  of  her  son  with  his 
father. Of the fathers interviewed (n=4), one shared custody 
of his 2 teenage daughters with their mother. The remaining 
3  fathers  were  in  heterosexual  marriages  with  children 
living at home full-time. 
Children interviewed (n=23) ranged in age from 10 to 17, 
according to our recruitment messaging, though families in 
our study had other children at home ranging in age from 4 
to  20. Eleven  families  had  2  children,  four  families  had  3 
children,  one  family  had  4  children,  one  family  had  7 
children, and one family had 1 child. Some families (n=4) 
had college-aged children living outside of the home. Of the 
children  interviewed  (n=23),  10  were  female  and  13 were 
male.  In  families  where  more  than  one  child  expressed 
interest  (n=5),  we  interviewed  2  children  who  fit  our 
recruitment  requirements.  In  one  family,  both  the  mother 
and  the  father expressed  interest  in  participating. We 
conducted  a  total  of  42  interviews  (see  Tables  1a,b).  The 

Parents

Mothers
Fathers

15
4

Children

Girls
Boys

10
13

Children’s Ages

Interviewed

Other children

<10
10-11
12-13
14-15
16-17
>18

0
1
10
8
4
0

7
2
1
2
3
5

Table 1a, b. Participant demographics. Individual family 

structures have been aggregated to maintain privacy.

interviews  were  all  conducted  face-to-face  in  a  medium-
sized  city  in  the  United  States.  Throughout,  we  use 
pseudonyms to refer to participants. We use “teen” to refer
broadly to the age range of 10-17 and the term “adolescent” 
to refer to the developmental period. We also use the term 
“child” when in context of the parent-child relationship.
We  conducted 
interviews  between  August  2014  and 
December 2014. Interviews typically lasted about one hour, 
and ranged from 25 to 90  minutes,  with parent interviews 
tending to last longer than child interviews. We conducted 
interviews  until  reaching  data  saturation  in  the  stories  we 
heard from participants. All 42 interviews were conducted 
face-to-face,  with  one  set  of  interviews  occurring  in  the 
participants’ home, two in public places, and the remainder 
conducted  at  the  researchers’  institution.  In  all  cases,  two 
researchers  conducted  interviews  in  separate  locations,  to 
ensure  parents  and  children  were  not  visible  or  audible  to 
one  another.  Parents  were  verbally  walked  through  the 
consent process and signed a consent form to indicate their 
consent  to  participate  as  well  as  their  consent  for  their 
child’s  participation.  Children  were  verbally  walked 
through  a  simplified  assent  process  and  signed  a  paper 
assent  form.  Each  participant  was  compensated  $25  for 
their time (a total of $50-$75 per family). We did not view 
or access any participants’ social media accounts during or 
outside of the interviews.
Participants  were  asked  to  tell  us  about  their  families  and 
about  technology  use  in  their  homes.  Participants  were 
asked about family relationships; both parents and children 
were  asked  about  the  ease  of  talking  with  each  other,  as 
well as the attention paid both to themselves and each other. 
Participants were asked to describe both a typical weekday 
and  weekend  at  home,  with  emphasis  on  times  when  the 
family spends time together (such as dinnertime). We asked 
participants  to  describe  what  family  time  meant  to  them, 
and  then  to  describe  whether  or  not  their  families  used 
devices  during  family  time. We  specifically  asked  about 
dinner 
times,  bedtimes,  and  nighttime  routines  and 

1393

SESSION: PARENTS AND CHILDREN

[they  could]  possibly  see  some  inappropriate 
things.” 

things  and 

Bill had also asked his children to delete Snapchat: “I just 
didn’t like the idea of not being able to see what was on it.” 
Ellen said one of her sons had also been using Snapchat: “I 
got upset… that they disappear. That people can send you 
terrible 
they  can  disappear.”  Ellen  was 
particularly worried about pornography, and asked her son
to  delete  the  application;  she  said  her  two  older  children 
were no longer using Snapchat. However, when asked if he 
used  Snapchat,  Ellen’s  son  Jake  said  he  used the  app 
frequently.  Jake  also reported  using  Snapchat  to  talk with 
his  siblings. Furthermore,  when  asked  if  his  parents  knew 
that he used Snapchat, Jake said: “Yes.”
Though  Bill  and  Michelle  carefully  monitored their 
children’s  social  media  platforms,  including  monitoring 
their text messages, neither parent was aware that one child
used Kik (and  thus  they  were  not  monitoring  its  use).
Christina’s  daughter  did  not  yet  have  a  phone,  but  used 
various  social  media  applications  on  her  iPod  to  stay  in 
touch  with  friends.  Christina would  often  overhear  her 
daughter having conversations with a friend before bed, but 
was  not  sure  which  app  (or  apps)  she  was  using  to  make 
calls: “I should know this, but I don’t.” Even when parents 
knew  which sites  and  applications  their  children  were 
using, many expressed a limited understanding of how the 
sites  worked.  Both  of  Roxanne’s  sons  were  active  Vine 
users,  a  video-sharing  application  which  Roxanne  told  us 
she was still familiarizing herself with: “I didn’t even know 
what that  was until about a month ago—the vines and the 
retweets and finding out what all that is.” Similarly, Dawn
knew her daughter was using Snapchat to stay in touch with 
her  cousin, but  said she  “still  [doesn’t]  understand  how 
that’s  used.”  Some  parents  appeared  to  be  exhausted with 
trying to keep up:

“My son would like to talk more about Pokémon 
with  me,  and  I  do  not  want  to  know.  And  my 
daughter  wants  to  talk  about  Minecraft  till  my 
ears fall off.” 

Kate expressed  similar  sentiments.  She  knew her  son  was
playing Pokémon, but would prefer he talked about it with 
his friends: “If you trade those ones, then you can get this,
and this monster is that, and blah blah blah… Pokémon or 
whatever. I feel kind of bad to say, uh, why don’t you go 
talk  about  that  with  Brady or  something.” Roxanne,  too, 
said that social media “is all I hear about”: 

“Will gets  in  the  car—‘You’re  not  going  to 
believe [it]! I have 70 followers.’ And then he’s 
saying  stuff  like  retweet  and  I’m  sitting  there 
like…  what  are  you  talking  about?  What’s  a 
retweet? I don’t know what that means. And then
Micah’s  like, ‘Yeah, I  got  740  followers  on 
Instagram.’ They talk constantly about it.”

for  paired 

interviews 

expectations. Participants were also asked about the ways in 
which  they  communicate  with  their  families,  how  much 
time  they  spend  using  technology  and  about  parental 
concerns regarding children’s technology use.
We  transcribed  the  interviews and  used  an  inductive 
approach  to  develop  codes [42]. To  do  this,  the  research 
team individually read through interviews and noted codes 
by  hand.  Later,  after  discussing  the  codes  as  a  research 
team, we created a more comprehensive list of codes (34 in 
total). We then coded interviews using Atlas.TI, frequently 
discussing codes to maintain agreement. Though interviews 
with parents and their children were conducted individually 
and  privately,  interview  transcripts  were  paired  as  parent-
child(ren) pairs before coding. 
A note on privacy: A number of details and reporting have 
been  anonymized  to  protect  the  identity  and  privacy  of 
individual  participants,  as  well  as  to  prevent  parent  and 
child  participants  from  identifying  one  another.  A  unique 
privacy  consideration 
(unlike 
interviews  with  single  participants)  is  that  if  a  parent 
identifies  herself  in  our  paper,  she  may  learn  information 
about  her  child  that  compromises  the  child’s  right  to 
privacy  as  a  participant  (or  vice  versa).  Therefore,  we 
obscure paired information in cases where an individual—
or her family member—may be deanonymized.
RESULTS
Parents Underestimate Teens’ Social Media Use
Parents  underestimate  how  many  and  which  social  media 
sites  their  teenage  children  are  using.  Most  parents  knew 
their children were texting, but were not aware of the use of 
additional  chat  applications, 
(instant 
messaging) or Oovoo (video chat). Parents were also often 
unaware  of  teen’s  use  of  newer  social  media  applications 
(e.g., Vine, a platform for sharing short video clips). Some 
children  intentionally  obscured  their  use  of  applications 
parents  considered  contentious,  such  as  Snapchat,  a  chat 
application  in  which  messages  self-destruct.  Other  parents 
knew  their  teens  had  created accounts  on  particular 
platforms,  but  underestimated  their  overall  investment in 
the channel. Laura reported that her son and daughter were 
avid social media users, but that they did little beyond text 
messaging  and  Instagram:  “They don’t  have  Facebook. 
They don’t do Snapchat.” However, Laura’s daughter told 
us  she  used Facebook  to  follow  updates  from  her  theater 
guild;  she  was  also a  frequent  Tumblr  user. Laura’s  son
reported  heavy  use  of  Snapchat which  he  used  to  stay  in 
touch with family and even other friends’ parents.
Some  parents  relied  on  restrictive  mediation  strategies  to 
exercise  control  over  their  children’s  usage.  Bill  and 
Michelle said  they  frequently  asked  their  sons  to  delete 
applications from their devices: 

such  as  Kik

“Both of them had Twitter, and [we] just didn’t 
see  a  point  for  them  to  have  it.  It  was  just 
something that was gonna take up their time and 

1394

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Although parents underestimated which sites their children 
were using, many teens felt their parents overestimated the 
time they spent on social media each day. One teen said he 
spent less than 30 minutes per day on social media sites but 
frequently  used his  iPad  for  homework.  When  asked  how 
much time his parents think he spends on social media, he 
said: “I’m convinced they think I don’t sleep.”
Some  parents  were  aware  of  gaps 
their  own 
in 
understanding,  and  expressed  concern  that  their  children 
might  take  advantage  of  their  unfamiliarity.  Many  parents 
attributed  gaps  in  their  own  technological  literacy  to  their 
own upbringings: “I am probably the most inept, because I 
am  older  than  anybody  else  in  the  family.  And  I  went  to 
college  at  that  time  when  computers  were  really  just 
starting, and it was very optional. You had a cellphone, but 
it was an emergency phone. The kids are much more adept 
than I am in that.”
Parents Communicate; Teens Just Hear “No”
Although  many  parents 
they  were  adequately 
communicating  with their children about social media and 
technology  use,  children  reported  that  parents  simply  told 
them  what  not
to  do; pornography,  profanity,  and 
inappropriate 
commonly  mentioned 
examples. When  asked  if  his  family  had  conversations 
about technology use, Kyle reported that the conversations 
were “always about posting bad things on Twitter”:

pictures  were 

felt 

“So, like, profanity is a huge no-no… especially 
because 
that  could  reflect  poorly  on  [my 
parents].  If  I  tweet  something  bad  or  post 
something  on 
that’s  bad—just 
anything  that’s  mean  or  that  could  result  in 
something bad.” 

Instagram 

Similarly,  Sam said  “My  dad  takes  more  of  an  authority 
position:  ‘You  do  something  bad  and  you  will  be  found. 
This is not a good thing. Don’t do anything stupid.’” There 
was ambiguity around what “bad” actually meant, and most 
teens reported only knowing this boundary when they had 
violated  it. When  asked  if  he  and  his  parents  had  had 
specific conversations about technology, Dan said:

“Sometimes  if  I  tweet  during  school  my  dad  is 
like,  ‘Why  are  you  tweeting  during  school?’  or 
‘This is a bad tweet.’ And he’ll tweet at me and 
be  like,  ‘Take  this  down!’  So  I  guess  that’s 
communication, technically.”

Linda frequently asked her daughter to delete social media 
posts:  “She’ll  post  pictures  of  her  just  waking  up—you 
know, her hair’s not done, or she had a messy room, even 
clothes that were not appropriate. She didn’t want to [delete 
them],  but  I’m  the  parent,  so… not  up  for  discussion.” 
Parents overwhelmingly expressed similarly reactive rather 
than  proactive  strategies  for  discussing  social  media  use 
with  their  children,  primarily  through  monitoring.  Sarah 
said:

“There  have  been  times  when  Kyle tweeted 
something  that  we  made  him  take  down—[it] 
exhibited lack of judgment, or swearing, or you 
know, just being obnoxious. We reserve the right 
anytime to just check and see what’s going on.” 

Many teens expressed frustration with parents’ monitoring, 
particularly when attempts at conversation were dismissed. 
Shawn  tried  to  talk  with  his  parents  about  his  desire  for 
privacy: “I have things [that are] personal, that I don’t want 
to share with other people, like everyone else. But my dad 
feels that he has a right to know—‘I own your phone, I pay 
for the bill, so I have a right to look at this.’ That bothers 
me.”  Laura dismissed  a  similar  conversation  with  her 
daughter,  who had asked,  “‘What about  my privacy?’ I’m 
like, you can have your privacy when you pay for yourself 
and  live  on  your  own.”  When  asked  a  similar  question, 
Laura’s daughter said “I feel like they should just be able to 
trust me better.” 
Some  parents,  however, 
that  conversations 
initiated  by  their  children  were  welcomed.  Helen  said:
“We’ve also had conversations where the kids have told us 
we’re using our devices too much. We appreciate having it 
pointed out, because you’re right. It’s not a good example.”
When  asked  if  she  had  any  explicit  conversations  about 
social media use with her children, Laura described specific 
behaviors she had told her son and daughter not to engage 
in: “Don’t post any inappropriate pictures of yourself. Limit 
your  [screen]  time.  Don’t  let  anybody  use  your  phone.” 
Still,  Laura  worried  she  was  not  engaging  her  children  in 
productive discussion about their own technology use:
really 
“That 
happened 
is 
something that  my husband and I have talked a 
lot about, and yet… life gets in the way.” 

it  should.  It  really 

conversation  hasn’t 

reported 

explicit 

the  way 

Other parents  relied on  religious  education  or  moral 
obligation 
in  place  of  specific  conversations  about 
technology and social media use. When asked if he and his 
parents had ever had a conversation about  what he should 
or  should not  be  doing  online,  Shawn  said  they  had  only 
one conversation, three years prior: “It was a lot about… it 
was really religious. ‘Jesus wouldn’t do this.’”
Both parents and children reported that conversations about 
technology frequently revolved around safety, which some 
teens  found  repetitive:  “After  a  while  it’s  repetitive, 
because  of  teachers  and  parents  and  so  many  people  who 
told  us  how  to  stay  safe  online.” Matthew felt  that  online 
safety  was  a  less  effective  conversation  to  have  with  his 
children: “How to be safe in public is not any different on a 
server. I don’t see it as different from what we teach them 
as  parents  about  being  a  person  in  the  world.” Despite 
compelling intentions from parents, who seek to—and do in 
fact—talk  about  technology  with  their  teens,  our  data 
suggest  that  many  families  still  struggle  to  communicate 
effectively.

1395

Family Technology Rules are Made, Then Broken
Parents  created a  variety  of technology  rules  for  their 
families. While all participants had rules around technology
use,  both  parents  and  children reported  breaking them.
Children  reported frequent  instances  of  parents  using 
phones during dinner time or other family times. Children, 
however, excused these violations if they perceived them to 
be work-related. Violet said:

“Because of [my dad’s] schedule, he has a bunch 
of  people  that  need  to  communicate  with  him. 
[His baseball players] always text him when they 
need to know times for practice, and his assistant 
coaches,  and  then  all  of  his  people  from  work. 
We joke that he’s worse than we are.”

Similarly, Shawn reported that both his parents occasionally 
used their phones during family time. Shawn said this rule 
violation felt disrespectful:

“I feel a bit disrespected… well, it depends what 
the call is for. Something random like a friend or 
something,  I  feel  a  bit  ignored.  But  if  it’s  for 
work, I completely understand.” 

Michelle and Bill emphasized that their household had very
strict  rules  about  phone  use.  When  asked  if  anyone  had 
their  phones  at  the  dinner  table,  Michelle said:  “Nope.”
However, when asked if anyone checked their phone during 
dinner, her son said: “Yeah, any of us will. A lot of times 
our [phones] are on silent anyway. But if it’s a call, then my 
dad will go answer it.” Kyle said that although his parents 
often broke technology rules, he understood that his parents 
had work responsibilities: “I think it’s sort of hypocritical,
but they also have a lot more to keep track of. I know that 
they’re  not  just  on  Instagram  and  Twitter, you  know, just 
scrolling through  their  feeds  and stuff.” Jaclyn said that it 
was not appropriate for her mother to use her phone during 
family time, regardless of whether or not it was for work: 
“It  kinda  makes  me  feel  like she’s not listening or paying 
attention.”
Many  parents reported  breaking  their  own  rules.  When 
asked  if  phones  were  allowed  at  the  dinner  table,  Heather
said: “Not during dinner, no. I think it just goes back to the 
whole  idea  that  dinner  is  the  most  important  family 
communication time. It’s an old fashioned ideal.” However, 
when  asked  if  she  had  ever  checked  her  phone  during 
dinner,  Heather said,  “Uh-huh.  Yup,  I  do.” Matthew  also 
expected his children to avoid phone use during dinnertime, 
but understood if his children broke the rule, given that he 
broke it too:

“I expect them to be understanding if I get a text 
during  dinner.  It’s  probably  work-related,  and  I 
probably need to check it. But I wouldn’t expect 
them to adhere to the standard of behavior that I 
myself  don’t  adhere  to. When  you  ask  them  to 
adhere to something that’s not realistic, you can 

1396

SESSION: PARENTS AND CHILDREN

lose  their  adherence  to  things  that  are  really 
important.”

restricted 

Some  teens  made  explicit  connections  between  their 
parents’ lack of adherence to household rules and their own 
behaviors.  Justin reported  that  phones  were  not  allowed 
during  family  time,  but  that  her  father  often  violated  this 
rule: “My dad’s really obsessed with his phone. I think I’m 
just mirroring him.” Periodic device “shut-offs” in favor of 
offline  activities—like  reading  or  playing  outside—were 
also  common.  As  Ellen said,  “I'd  rather  them  be  doing 
things  with  their  hands…  crafts  and  building  things  and 
drawing.”  Other  parents 
some  use,  but 
encouraged  more  constructive  behaviors:  “We  will  say, 
‘Time to do something constructive.’ But that can be using 
a screen. Playing Minecraft is constructive.”
Children  expressed frustration  with  limits  to  screen  time, 
especially  when  they  believed their  parents  misperceived
their actual device use, lacked understanding of the device’s 
value,  or  underestimated
and  work 
responsibilities. Jaclyn said  her  mother  thought  she  spent 
too  much  time  online,  but  Jaclyn wished  her  mother 
understood  social  media  better:  “She  thinks  I  just  watch 
videos  and  stuff  when  I’m  really  doing  something 
productive.” Christina reported that she tried to restrict her 
son’s screen time before bed: 

their 

school 

“He uses his iPad all the time [in the evenings]. 
He’s either doing his fantasy football or looking 
up  videos  or  whatever  he’s  doing  on  it… 
chatting with his buddies.”

When asked if he used technology at night, Christina’s son 
said he needed to, in order to finish his homework: “All my 
books and stuff are on the iPad. Sometimes, if I have a lot 
of  homework,  I’ll  end  up  staying  up  until  like  12  or  1.” 
Christina knew  that  Shawn  needed to  study,  but  that  she 
“can’t  tell  if  he’s  studying  or  goofing  off.”  Helen tried  to 
limit  her  son’s  Internet  access,  but  expressed  frustration 
with  enforcing  her  own  rule:  “Sometimes  it’s  absurd, 
because he wants to know what something is, and we don’t 
know the answer. There’s really only one way to answer it.” 
Laura also  tried  to  enforce  a  ‘no  devices  during  family 
time’ rule, but she could not always tell when to intervene: 

“They could be looking up something that we're 
talking  about.  Or  they  could  be  pulling  up  a 
song.  It’s  not  like  they’re necessarily  texting 
somebody  else  or  whatever…  there’s  a  lot  of 
things that they could be doing,  so I don't even 
know what they’re up to.”

Families Want Shared Expectations, Not More Attention
Parents  and  teens  were  both  asked  if  they felt  they  paid 
enough attention to one another. Perhaps counterintuitively, 
neither parents nor children desired more attention from one 
another.  Instead,  participants  wanted  their  expectations  of 
attention  to  be  shared, whether  attention  was  paid  to  a 
device,  an  activity,  or  to  each  other. Evelyn  reported  that 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

her mother often had her phone out, because her mother’s 
partner had a dangerous job. Evelyn felt it was acceptable 
to attend to her device whenever her mother was doing the 
same: “Usually, if she has her phone, then we’re allowed to 
have  ours.”  Austin also  noted  the  importance  of  shared 
expectations,  saying  that  it  felt  uncomfortable  when  one 
person  was  on  their  phone  but  not  the  other:  “Here’s  my 
iPhone, there’s you. I’m looking at Twitter, you’re looking 
at me on my phone looking at Twitter.” 
Although  many  participants  acknowledged  situations  in 
which  it  would  not  be  appropriate  to  attend  to  a  device, 
some participants reported checking their devices anyway.
Participants often attributed this compulsion to visible and 
audible device cues, which command the user’s attention: 

“We have alerts that come to our phones. Every 
time somebody posts—constantly. There’s times 
when  I  try  to  just  put  them  down…  and  our 
phones are just going off, going off, going off.”

Dawn and her daughter had recently set their phones aside 
for several hours in order to escape the continual allure of 
their  devices:  “[My  daughter] wasn’t  happy.  I  made  them 
read.” Heather’s  family  discouraged  device  use  during 
dinnertime, but she used an iPad while cooking:

“Often I’m using recipes that are on my phone or 
my  iPad.  If  notifications  are  coming  in, I’m 
immediately  reacting to  that  sound  or  that  buzz 
or that visual, so I will switch over.” 

Linda said  she  would  only  attend to  device  notifications 
during dinner if they were on her work phone; she said her 
children  would  never  check  their  notifications  during 
dinnertime, “but they would probably want to.” Teens also 
reported a reliance on device notifications to indicate when 
their  attention  was required:  “I  have  the  SportsCenter 
notification  [app],  so  it’ll  send  me  any  major  news.  So,  I 
can literally wake up and be like, ‘Why’d I wake up again?’
Oh,  yeah!  Check  my  phone.  ‘Oh,  big game!’ Alright. Go 
back to sleep.”
Susan said her attention to technological devices sometimes 
detracted  from  the  attention  she  was  able  to  pay  to  her 
children: “I was busy working, doing reports or something 
like that. They came down and they were like, “Bye, mom.” 
I said bye to them, [but] I don’t remember seeing their eyes. 
I  was  thinking, ‘I’ve  got  to  remember  to  shut  off  the 
stinking  laptop.’” Dawn expressed  similar  frustration  with 
the  constant  need  to  attend  to  her  devices:  “It  gets  to  me, 
you know. It can get to be too much. But then other times… 
it’s a way of life.”
Attention also influenced the appropriateness of device use
when  family  members  were  each  focused  on  a  similar 
activity.  Though  Christina did  not  allow  phones  at  the 
dinner  table,  she  said  she  would  check  her  phone under 
certain circumstances, particularly if everyone attended to a 
particular task:

“You  know,  we  do  this  all  the  time—I’m  sure 
you  do  it,  too—you’ll  go  ‘we  can  just  Google 
that.’ Everyone whips out their phone, we’re all 
Googling  something  or  other…  but  it’s  part  of 
the conversation.”

Some  participants  also  reported  that  attending  to  a  device 
while  watching  a  movie  or  in  the  car  (not  while  driving) 
was also acceptable, when the primary focus of attention is 
not each other. Sarah said:

“If we’re watching a TV show together... I used 
to be disgusted by the idea of ‘dueling screens.’
But  then  I  started  to  feel, like, what  do  I  really 
care?  If  this  is  your  downtime  and  your  social 
time and we’re watching a thing and you wanna 
be checking your Instagram or whatever, go for 
it.” 

Other parents, like Susan, felt device use should be limited 
to  “one  thing  or  the  other.” Susan reported  that  both  her 
children  preferred to  use  their  phones  while  watching  a 
movie. She had her children choose: “We’ll turn the movie 
off if you just wanna be instant messaging your friends.” 
Although  device  use  during  family  time  was  discouraged 
across  households,  certain  instances  of  togetherness  were 
seen as exceptions, as long as expectations for attention—
whether attention to each other or to a particular activity—
were shared. Kate said her daughter often checked her cell 
phone while they were in the car together, and though Kate 
said she was okay with this use, she also said “it depends if 
we’re  actually  having  a  conversation.  If  we’re  actually 
having a conversation and she goes completely silent, then I 
feel  annoyed.” Austin  also  said  that  phone  use  during 
family  time  depended  on  the  quality  of  conversation:  “It 
depends  if  it’s  really  engaged.  My  mom  will  pull  out  her 
phone and it’s like saying ‘bye, I’m gonna go on this device 
and look at the web [instead].’”
The struggle to manage attention extended outside of home 
use;  both  parents  and  teens  articulated  strategies  for 
determining to what (or to whom) their attention was paid.
Dawn said that she would not use her phone while on a date 
or  while  talking  with  someone  she  just  met,  but  when  at 
home with her family, she often did:

“If I’m  sitting around  with  my  family  members 
and  I’m  having  a  conversation  with  my  sister, 
it’s nothing. We both will do it. We’ll be talking 
to each other, but it’s [different] with somebody 
that  you  know  and  that  you’re  around  all  the 
time.” 

Conversely,  Laura said  “when  you're  with  your  closest 
people  or  when  you're  having  a  meal  with  people,  that 
would  be  an  appropriate  time  to  disengage  from  [your 
phone].” Graham liked to use his phone while hanging out 
with his friends, as long as expectations for attention were 
shared:

1397

“Me and my friends will have group matches on 
Flappy Golf. You can play multiplayer on it, and 
that’s fun—so we’ll do that sometimes, or we’ll 
all  watch  someone  text.  We’ll  just  be  messing 
with someone… like a prank phone call.” 

Kyle also  said  he  sometimes  used  his  phone  with  friends, 
and  especially  during  meals:  “While  eating,  it’s  sort  of 
like… since I’m already doing something that isn’t making 
my full attention go toward my friends, I might as well go 
on  my phone.”  Libby reported that  she  would not  use  her 
phone “in a situation with a group of people and everyone’s 
talking,”  and  that  it  would  feel  inappropriate  if  only  one 
person  were  to  attend  to  a  device:  “It  seems  sort  of 
pointless.  Like,  why  are  you  spending  time  with  them  if 
they’re just on their phone? Why are you talking to people 
who aren’t there?” 
DISCUSSION
Our  results  highlight  four  overarching  tensions  between 
parents  and  teens  regarding  technology  use  and  attitudes. 
Here,  we  first  describe  how  the  practical  obscurity  of 
personal device use creates anxiety for parents, who can see 
that their children are using a device, but not what they are 
using it for. We then discuss how expectations of constant 
connectivity affect parents’ and children’s ability to manage 
when—and to what—their attention is paid. Last, we draw 
on  historical
literature  to argue  for  a  more  realistic 
understanding of family time and of adolescence.
Practical Obscurity of Personal Device Use
A  primary  affordance  of  social  media  sites  is  that  of 
visibility. Social  media  “affords  users  the  ability  to  make 
their  behaviors,  knowledge,  preferences,  and  connections 
visible  to  others”  [42]. However,  although  content  posted 
online may be visible to its creators and to their networks, 
the  individual  behaviors  of  a mobile technology  user  are 
rarely  visible  to  observers  in  the  physical  world.  This 
creates anxiety and stress for parents, who can see that their 
children are using a device, but not what they are using it 
for. Simultaneously,  the  physical  visibility  of  a  child’s 
device (e.g., holding or checking the phone) may generate 
anxiety for parents, who are forced to confront and accept 
how  little  control  they  have  over these  devices  and,  by 
extension,  over  their  children’s  information  consumption, 
content production, and social lives.
Obscurity refers broadly to the ways in which information 
can  be  hidden  or  kept  from  others’  reach.  In  our  study, 
parents  expressed  frustration  with  the  obscurity  of  their 
children’s actual device use. Although many teens reported 
a  reliance  on  technology  to  complete  homework  or  other 
responsibilities  (often  at  the  request  of  schools,  who 
sometimes provide textbooks only digitally), some parents 
worried that children said they were doing homework when 
they  were actually engaged in other activities,  such as the 
use  of  social  media  sites.  Many  parents  tried  to  exercise 
control  through  the  creation  of  rules  and  limitations (e.g.,
restricting  screen 
to  be 

requiring  homework 

time, 

1398

SESSION: PARENTS AND CHILDREN

identities

[41], 

such 

goals, 

learning  about 

children’s  developmental 

completed  on  a  shared  computer,  limiting  device  use  to  a 
certain  time  of  day).  However,  parents  were  often  unsure 
when they could acceptably intervene, as children could be 
engaged  in  any  one  of  a  range  of  Internet-enabled 
behaviors—some  of  which  parents  considered 
to  be 
constructive uses of their time. 
The  practical  obscurity  of  personal  device  use  prevents 
parents from implementing successful technology rules, and 
may also contribute to parents’ misconception that children 
do  not  use  technology  to  accomplish  meaningful  goals. 
However,  recent  research  suggests  that  technology  may 
support 
as 
information-seeking [6], maintaining privacy [7], exploring 
emerging 
rules  and 
boundaries [4],  and  maintaining  social  relationships [24].
Historically,  many  of  these  developmental  tasks  were 
accomplished  through  activities  which  were  visible  to 
parents—for  example,  a  child  might  maintain  social 
relationships  by  entertaining  visitors,  exercise  privacy  by 
shutting  a  bedroom  door [28],  or  seek  information  by 
reading  an  encyclopedia  or  book.  Although  teens  may 
accomplish  similar  tasks  through  the  use  of  technological 
devices, this developmental work remains largely invisible 
to parents. With ubiquitous mobile internet access, parents 
are unable to see or control what their children are exposed 
to, who they communicate with, or what they produce [34];
this  often  causes  parents  to  rely  on  restrictive  mediation 
strategies,  such  as  restricting  device  use.  Instead,  parents 
should  discuss  with  teens  what  they  should  do  or  can 
accomplish with technology. Rather than prohibit negative 
behaviors, parents should encourage positive ones.  
Attention Expectations and Management
Prior  work  shows  that  teens  are  online  almost  constantly 
[26]; many  parents  are  similarly  active.  For  both  parents 
and teens, we see an emerging kind of constant connectivity 
[43]—one which challenges family members to divide their 
time  and  attention  between  device  use  and  family 
interactions.  Here  we  draw  on  scholars’ discussion  of 
constant  connectivity  and  availability to  understand 
technology tensions among families [31,43].
The  ubiquity  of  mobile  devices  has  led  to  expectations  of 
professional  availability  outside  of  the  workplace  [31];
interestingly,  we  see  that  this  constant  availability  has 
implications for family life. Mazmanian and Erickson [31]
describe “availability” as “the sociotechnical state of being 
constantly connected and accessible to others.” They focus 
on  the  workplace  and  the  service  of  availability,  which, 
when  provided  by  firms,  has  evolved  into  a  type  of 
economic  currency.  We  extend  these  arguments  into  the
family and the home, and explore how constant availability 
becomes  a  social  exchange,  in  which the  expectation  of 
parents to be constantly accessible requires the negotiation 
of social currency (namely time and attention) paid to their 
children. Similarly,  teens’  social  and  school  demands 
require that they negotiate their own time and attention, and 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

instead, 

they  wanted

sometimes  present  a  “legitimate”  rationale  for  breaking 
parents’ technology rules (e.g., no technology late at night).
Mazmanian and Erickson [31] describe a kind of “creeping 
availability,” or creeping in intensity, “as infrastructure and 
technologies  enable  ubiquitous  communication  and  easier 
transfer  of 
information  across  distance.”  Creeping 
expectations of availability in quotidian contexts like dinner 
times  may  negatively  impact  when  (and  why)  attention  is 
required,  contributing  to  ambiguity  in  household  rule 
adherence and  overall  family  tensions. This  framing 
suggests  that  managing  time  and  attention  is  not  an 
individual  responsibility;  instead,  for  both  parents  and 
teens,  collective  responsibilities  and  social  or  institutional 
loyalties (e.g., workplace, family, school, peers) contribute 
to expectations of and demands for individuals’ time. 
Parents and teens in our study did not desire more attention 
from  one  another; 
attention 
expectations to be shared. In our study, the use of a mobile 
device  was  considered  acceptable  during family  time  as 
long  as others’  attention  was  similarly  split,  whether 
attending to a device or to a specific activity like driving or 
watching  a  movie.  Our  research  suggests  that  establishing 
shared expectations  with  regards  to attention  can  help 
families better manage family time.
Adolescence, Work, and Family Time
Household  technology  use  has  long  been  a  source  of 
tension  between  parents  and  children,  whether television 
use  or  telephone  conversations.  As  Hine  [18] says,  “the 
ways in which young people amuse themselves has been a 
source of worry at least since the eighteenth century, when 
elders worried that their daughters were being ruined by too 
many novels.”
This  research  surfaces  a  number  of  tensions  between 
parents  and 
to 
technology  use.  Within  our  study,  families  expressed 
difficulty  adhering 
rules, 
particularly when devices  were prohibited during meals or 
other  family  times.  Though  parents  often  broke  their  own 
rules,  many  children  considered  rule  violations  acceptable 
when they believed the interruption to be work-related. The 
into  home  contexts  positions 
reintroduction  of  work 
professional  device  use  as  an  exception 
to  existing 
household  rules—at  the  risk  of  interruptions  to  mealtime 
routines and overall feelings of family togetherness. In this 
way, 
that  modern  professionals  will 
incorporate availability into their lives outside of work [31]
may compete  with the expectation for parents to attend to 
their children instead of their devices [19], creating anxiety 
and guilt for working parents who cannot effectively fulfill 
either role.
Instead,  we  propose  a  reinterpretation  of  what  “family 
time” should mean today. In particular, romanticized ideals 
of family time differ from families’ actual experiences. The 
perception of family time as a time for family members to 

teenage  children  with  regards 

the  assumption 

to  household 

their 

technology 

be  constantly  engaged  with  each  other  [13] is  unrealistic, 
particularly  as  expectations  of  constant  connectivity 
reintroduce  work  responsibilities  into  home  life.  In  lived 
experience,  family  time  can  represent  a  spectrum  of 
activities:  families  can  be  copresent  but  managing  their 
attention  individually  (e.g.,  reading  a  book  or  using  a 
device); families can be copresent, but attending to a shared 
activity (e.g.,  watching a movie together); or, families can 
be  copresent  and  attending  to  each  other  (e.g.,  playing  a 
game or having a conversation). Though the latter category 
is  what  families  typically  consider  to  be  representative  of 
actual togetherness, a more nuanced interpretation of family 
time  could  make  expectations  of 
togetherness  more 
attainable,  and  alleviate  guilt  for  parents  and  teens  who 
struggle to  manage competing demands for their  time and 
attention. 
Just  as  differences  in  expectations  of  togetherness  create 
conflict  among  families,  problematic,  too,  are  relatively 
modern  notions  of  what  constitutes adolescent  life. The 
concept of the teenager—a word first coined in the 1940s—
“has been an impediment that has  kept [adolescents]  from 
becoming the people they were ready to be” [18]. Although 
adolescence  has  always  been  a  problematic  construct, 
household technology use further highlights these tensions. 
Teenagers  seek  independence  and  privacy  [28];  although 
parents  wish  to  provide their  children  some  privacy  [30],
the  practical  obscurity  of  personal  device  use  serves  as  a 
frequent  reminder  to  parents  of  the  privacy  they  have 
afforded their children. Teenagers’ primary responsibility is 
expected  to  be  schoolwork;  though  many  teens  in  our 
sample  reported  frequent  use  of  their  devices  for  school-
related purposes, the ability for teens to easily shift between 
schoolwork  and  socializing  on  a  single  device  creates
anxiety for parents, who cannot discern whether a device is 
being used responsibly. 
Hine  [18] argues  that  these  competing  expectations  for 
teenage  children—who  are  expected  to  be  both  child  and 
adult,  and  therefore  succeed  at  being  neither—restrict 
adolescents’  abilities 
into 
adulthood, and that instead, teenagers “should be treated as 
beginners: inexperienced people who are not fundamentally 
different  from  adults,  but  who,  because  they  are  dealing 
with so many new things in their lives, usually need more 
help,  more  attention,  and  more  patience  than  those  who 
have  experience.”  As  with  considerations  of  family  time, 
parents may benefit from more generous—and consistent—
expectations of their teenage children.
Limitations
Our  sample  was  not  diverse  in a  number  of  aspects.  We 
sampled  from  a  single  region in  the  U.S.,  leading  to 
possible  geographic  biases.  The  majority  of  participants 
were  likely  to  be  middle  or  upper  class,  though  some 
participants were likely to be working class based on their 
professions.  Only  one  participant  identified  as  being  in  a 
same-sex  relationship.  We  note  that  although  we  closely 

successfully  advance 

to 

1399

SESSION: PARENTS AND CHILDREN

3.

4.

7.

8.

the  use  of 

analyzed  our  data  to  look  for  differences  in  technology 
tensions  with  respect  to  children’s  ages, no  patterns 
emerged,  which  could  be  because  they  do  not  exist  or 
because  of  our  relatively  small  sample  size.  Though  we 
recruited for diverse participants on some measures, namely 
fathers  and  single-parents,  we  did  not  observe  discernable
differences between those participants, especially given the 
small sample sizes of each.  This  work sets the stage for a 
larger-scale study with subsampling of these demographics. 
This  study  is  also  subject  to  self-selection  bias,  in  which 
more  engaged  parents  may  have  been more  likely  to 
participate  in  this  study.  Asking  both  parents  and  teens 
about their personal technology use is also subject to social 
desirability  bias; it  is  likely  some  participants  engaged  in 
face-saving behaviors.
CONCLUSION 
This  research  surfaces a  number  of  tensions  between 
parents  and  children  about 
technology. 
Specifically,  parents  underestimate  their  children’s  social 
media use. Parents report that they communicate with their 
children  about  technology,  but  children  feel their parents 
only  tell  them  what  not  to  do.  Both  parents  and  children 
describe  violating  household  technology  rules.  Although
parents and children do not desire more attention from each 
other,  they  do  want  their  expectations of  attention  to  be 
shared—that  is,  agreed-upon  contexts when  attention is 
paid to  each  other  instead  of a  device.  We  extend  the 
concept  of  constant  connectivity  from  the  workplace  into 
the  home,
to  better  understand  how these technology 
tensions  arise.  We  also  draw  on  the  concept  of  practical 
obscurity, to  highlight  the  ways  in  which an  individual’s
behaviors  might  be  kept  hidden  from  another through  the 
affordances  of  personal  devices.  Finally,  we  propose  a 
reinterpretation  of  family  time and  of  adolescence,  to
acknowledge  both  the demands  on  attention  personal 
devices  afford  as  well  as  the  competing  expectations  of 
teenage 
consistent 
expectations will allow both parents and children to better
manage household technology use.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We 
(HCC 
#1318143)  for  support.  Any  opinion,  findings,  and 
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material 
are  those  of  the  authors  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  the 
views of the National Science Foundation.
REFERENCES
1. Tawfiq Ammari, Priya Kumar, Cliff Lampe, and Sarita 

the  National  Science  Foundation 

life.  Ultimately, 

thank 

realistic 

and 

Schoenebeck. 2015. Managing Children’s Online 
Identities: How Parents Decide What to Disclose 
About Their Children Online. Proceedings of the 33rd 
Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, ACM, 1895–1904. 

2. Tawfiq Ammari and Sarita Schoenebeck. 2015. 

Understanding and Supporting Fathers and Fatherhood 
on Social Media Sites. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual 

1400

ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, ACM, 1905–1914. 
Philippe Aries and J. H. van den Berg. 1978. Centuries 
of childhood. Towards Sociology of Education, edited 
by J Beck, C Jenks, N Keddie and M Young. New 
Jersey: Transaction Inc, 37–47.
Sandra Bebbington. 2014. A Case Study of the Use of 
the Game Minecraft and Its Affinity Spaces for 
Information Literacy Development in Teen Gamers. 

5. Kenneth H. Beck, Jessica L. Hartos, and Bruce G. 

Simons-Morton. 2005. Parent–Teen Disagreement of 
Parent-Imposed Restrictions on Teen Driving After 
One Month of Licensure: Is Discordance Related to 
Risky Teen Driving? Prevention Science 6, 3, 177–
185. 

6. Bradley J. Bond, Veronica Hefner, and Kristin L. 

Drogos. 2008. Information-Seeking Practices during 
the Sexual Development of Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual 
Individuals: The Influence and Effects of Coming Out 
in a Mediated Environment. Sexuality & Culture 13, 1, 
32–50. 
danah boyd. 2014. It’s Complicated: The Social Lives 
of Networked Teens. Yale University Press, New 
Haven, CT, USA.
danah boyd and Alice Marwick. 2011. Social 
Steganography: Privacy in Networked Publics. Annual 
Conference for the International Communication 
Association.

9. Moira Burke, Lada A. Adamic, and Karyn Marciniak. 

2013. Families on Facebook. ICWSM.

10. S. Byrne and T. Lee. 2011. Toward predicting youth 

resistance to internet risk prevention strategies. Journal 
of Broadcasting and Electronic Media 55, 1.

11. Lorrie Faith Cranor, Adam L. Durity, Abigail Marsh, 
and Blase Ur. 2014. Parents’ and teens’ perspectives 
on privacy in a technology-filled world. Proc. SOUPS.

12. Ann C. Crouter and Melissa R. Head. Parental 

monitoring and knowledge of children. In Handbook of 
Parenting. 461–484.

13. Kerry J. Daly. 2001. Deconstructing Family Time: 

From Ideology to Lived Experience. Journal of 
Marriage and Family 63, 2, 283–294. 

14. Lee B. Erickson, Pamela Wisniewski, Heng Xu, John 
M. Carroll, Mary Beth Rosson, and Daniel F. Perkins. 
2015. The boundaries between: Parental involvement 
in a teen’s online world. Journal of the Association for 
Information Science and Technology.

15. Lorna Gibson and Vicki L. Hanson. 2013. Digital 

Motherhood: How Does Technology Help New 
Mothers? Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, 313–
322. 

16. John Gillis. 1996. Making Time for Family: the 

Invention of Family Time(S) and the Reinvention of 
Family History. Journal of Family History 21, 1, 4–Y
21. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

17. Rebecca E. Grinter, Leysia Palen, and Margery 

Eldridge. 2006. Chatting with Teenagers: Considering 
the Place of Chat Technologies in Teen Life. ACM 
Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 13, 4, 423–447. 

18. Thomas Hine. 2000. The rise and fall of the American 

teenager. Harper Collins.

19. Alexis Hiniker, Kiley Sobel, Hyewon Suh, Yi-Chen 

Sung, Charlotte P. Lee, and Julie A. Kientz. 2015. 
Texting while Parenting: How Adults Use Mobile 
Phones while Caring for Children at the Playground. 
ACM Press, 727–736. 

20. Arlie Hochschild. 1997. The Time Bind. WorkingUSA

Cooperative Work & Social Computing, ACM, 1272–
1282. 

33. Margaret K. Nelson. 2010. Parenting Out of Control: 

Anxious Parents in Uncertain Times. NYU Press.

34. (cid:39)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:50)(cid:78)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:76)(cid:93)(cid:88)(cid:78)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:44)(cid:87)(cid:448)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:24)(cid:17)(cid:3)

Personal, portable, pedestrian: Mobile phones in 
Japanese life. MIT Press.

35. Sandra Petronio. 2010. Communication privacy 

management theory: What do we know about family 
privacy regulation? Journal of Family Theory & 
Review 2, 3, 175–196.

36. Sarita Yardi Schoenebeck. 2013. The Secret Life of 

Online Moms: Anonymity and Disinhibition on 
YouBeMom. com. ICWSM.

37. Judith G. Smetana, Aaron Metzger, Denise C. 

Gettman, and Nicole Campione-Barr. 2006. Disclosure 
and Secrecy in Adolescent–Parent Relationships. Child 
Development 77, 1, 201–217. 

38. Häkan Stattin and Margaret Kerr. 2000. Parental 

Monitoring: A Reinterpretation. Child Development
71, 4, 1072–1085. 

39. Laurence Steinberg. 2001. We Know Some Things: 
Parent–Adolescent Relationships in Retrospect and 
Prospect. Journal of Research on Adolescence 11, 1, 
1–19. 

40. Frederic Stutzman and Woodrow Hartzog. 2012. 

Boundary Regulation in Social Media. Proceedings of
the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work, ACM, 769–778. 

41. Kaveri Subrahmanyam, Patricia M. Greenfield, and 
Brendesha Tynes. 2004. Constructing sexuality and 
identity in an online teen chat room. Journal of 
Applied Developmental Psychology 25, 6, 651–666. 

42. David R. Thomas. 2006. A General Inductive 

Approach for Analyzing Qualitative Evaluation Data. 
American Journal of Evaluation 27, 2: 237–246. 

43.  Jeffrey W. Treem and Paul M. Leonardi. 2012. Social 

Media Use in Organizations: Exploring the 
Affordances of Visibility, Editability, Persistence, and 
Association. Social Science Research Network, 
Rochester, NY. 

44. Judy Wajcman and Emily Rose. 2011. Constant 
Connectivity: Rethinking Interruptions at Work. 
Organization Studies 32, 7, 941–961. 

45. Pamela Wisniewski, Haiyan Jia, Heng Xu, Mary Beth 

Rosson, and John M. Carroll. 2015. Preventative vs. 
Reactive: How Parental Mediation Influences Teens’ 
Social Media Privacy Behaviors. Proceedings of the 
18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work & Social Computing, ACM, 302–
316. 

46. Pamela J. Wisniewski, Heng Xu, Mary Beth Rosson, 
and John M. Carroll. 2014. Adolescent Online Safety: 
The “Moral” of the Story. Proceedings of the 17th 
ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work & Social Computing, ACM, 1258–1271. 

1401

1, 2, 21–29. 

21. Margaret Kerr and Håkan Stattin. 2000. What parents 

know, how they know it, and several forms of 
adolescent adjustment: Further support for a 
reinterpretation of monitoring. Developmental 
Psychology 36, 3, 366–380. 

22. Priya Kumar and Sarita Schoenebeck. 2015. The 

Modern Day Baby Book: Enacting Good Mothering 
and Stewarding Privacy on Facebook. Proceedings of 
the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work & Social Computing, ACM, 1302–
1312. 

23. Peter Laslett and Richard Wall. 1978. Household and 

family in past time. 

24. Sook Jung Lee. 2009. Online Communication and 
Adolescent Social Ties: Who benefits more from 
Internet use?*. Journal of Computer-Mediated 
Communication 14, 3, 509–531. 

25. Sook-Jung Lee and Young-Gil Chae. 2007. Children’s 
Internet Use in a Family Context: Influence on Family 
Relationships and Parental Mediation. 
CyberPsychology & Behavior 10, 5, 640–644. 

26. Amanda Lenhart. Teens, Social Media & Technology 

Overview 2015. Pew Research Center’s Internet & 
American Life Project.

27. Amanda Lenhart. Is the age at which kids get cell 
phones getting younger? Pew Research Center’s 
Internet & American Life Project.

28. Sian Lincoln. 2004. Teenage girls’ “bedroom 

culture”: Codes versus zones.

29. Sonia Livingstone. 2007. From family television to 
bedroom culture: Young people’s media at home. 
Media studies: Key issues and debates, 302–321.

30. Sonia Livingstone and Ellen Helsper. 2008. Parental 

Mediation of Children’s Internet Use. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media 52, 4, 581–599. 

31. Melissa Mazmanian and Ingrid Erickson. 2014. The 
Product of Availability: Understanding the Economic 
Underpinnings of Constant Connectivity. Proceedings 
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, ACM, 763–772. 

32. Meredith Ringel Morris. 2014. Social Networking Site 
Use by Mothers of Young Children. Proceedings of the 
17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported 

