CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Distributed Liveness: Understanding How New

Technologies Transform Performance Experiences

Andrew M. Webb1,2, Chen Wang2, Andruid Kerne1, and Pablo Cesar2

1Interface Ecology Lab, Texas A&M University, USA, {andrew, andruid}@ecologylab.net

2CWI: Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica, Amsterdam, Netherlands, {C.Wang, Pablo.Cesar}@cwi.nl

ABSTRACT
We identify emerging phenomena of distributed liveness, in-
volving new relationships among performers, audiences, and
technology. Liveness is a recent, technology-based construct,
which refers to experiencing an event in real-time with the
possibility for shared social realities. Distributed liveness
entails multiple forms of physical, spatial, and social co-
presence between performers and audiences across physical
and virtual spaces. We interviewed expert performers about
how they experience liveness in physically co-present and
distributed settings. Findings show that distributed perfor-
mances and technology need to support ﬂexible social co-
presence and new methods for sensing subtle audience re-
sponses and conveying engagement abstractly.

Author Keywords
Distributed performance, liveness, audience engagement

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
J.5 Computer Applications: Arts and Humanities

INTRODUCTION
We investigate how performers’ experiences of liveness are
transformed by technology in distributed performance, where
performers and audiences are not all present in the same phys-
ical space. By liveness, we mean experiencing an event in
real-time with the potential for shared social realities among
participants [8]. The concept of ‘live’ performance emerged
in the 1930s with the introduction of radio as a way to dis-
tinguish from broadcasts of recorded performances [1]. Ini-
tially, live performances involved only physically co-present
performers and audiences. The Internet and social media ad-
vanced new forms of online liveness in which performers and
audiences are socially co-present, but not physically [8].
We observe that as technologies for representing performance
evolve, notions of live and recorded evolve with them. It be-
comes important to investigate the impact of this co-evolution
on both performers and audiences. Prior HCI researchers

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW ’16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02?$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819974

432

have focused on audience experiences [2, 3, 6, 14]. We in-
stead focus on performers and how they experience liveness.
This investigation examines traditional forms of performance:
theater, dance, and music. To broaden exposure, live art
performances have begun using technologies for distributing
across the world [13, 18]. A resident of a small town in the
UK can listen to the Metropolitan Opera from home or attend
an expensive production by the National Theatre in London
at the local theater. One might think that this was enabled by
television, but television is one-way. The goal of distributed
performance is to join performers and audiences in a shared
sensory experience through bi-directional connections.
Emerging from our investigation, we identify the phenomena
of distributed liveness, involving new relationships among
performers, audience, and technologies that have the poten-
tial to transform live experiences. Distributed liveness en-
compasses various forms of physical, spatial, and social co-
presence. For example, in Can You See Me Now?, phys-
ically and socially co-present performers run through city
streets, chasing online players who are spatially and socially
co-present in a virtual game space [3]. Distributed liveness is
supported by hybrid spaces [4], which connect the physical
and virtual to create shared experiences.
We conducted a qualitative investigation of performance artist
experiences. We interviewed artists experienced in both phys-
ically co-present and distributed settings. Through data anal-
ysis, we discovered four themes: challenges in social co-
presence, performer attention to distributed liveness, sensing
engagement through subtle feedback, and representations of
audiences. Findings motivate implications for design of hy-
brid spaces that promote distributed liveness for performers.
This paper begins by connecting related work. Next, we
present our qualitative methodology, followed by a discus-
sion of ﬁndings, and implications for design.

RELATED WORK
Prior work has developed several methods for sensing and vi-
sualizing audience engagement. Emphasis has been on phys-
ically co-present performances. Distributed performances
are now using teleconferencing systems and interactive tech-
nologies to enable bi-directional signals among spaces. HCI
researchers are investigating audience experiences in these
emerging forms of performance and technology. In this pa-
per, we focus on performers’ experiences and needs for dis-
tributed liveness.

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Audience Engagement
Latulipe et al. deﬁned audience engagement in terms of affec-
tive states of arousal (sleep-activated) and valence (positive-
negative) [12]. They used galvanic skin response (GSR) sen-
sors to measure individual’s arousal while watching videos
of dance performances. Wang et al. used a hybrid method
that combines GSR data and survey responses for determin-
ing the audience engagement during a play [19]. Mobile
devices have been used to collect audience feedback, in the
form of likes and dislikes [17] and comments and responses
to questions [6]. Corness et al. used interviews to provoke
audiences to re-live a performance and measure their empa-
thy towards performers [7]. Teevan et al. visualized audience
engagement using graphics, in which circles changed colors
based on engagement [17]. Alternatively, Cerratto-Pargman
et al. displayed text messages from the audience on a large
display behind the actors [6].

Performance and Technology
Theaters are exploring new ways to use broadcast and tele-
conferencing technology in live performance. The UK’s Na-
tional Theatre successfully broadcasts live performances of
plays onto cinema screens around the world [13]. However,
this is still one-way communication. Miracle Theatre recently
used the Vconect platform (teleconference system) to per-
form the play The Tempest between two locations, where
both actors and audiences were distributed [20]. Teleconfer-
encing systems provide visual and auditory audience feed-
back, but our investigation found that this is often not enough
for performers to form connections with remote audiences.
Broadhurst describes how technology in performance cre-
ates tensions at the threshold between physical and virtual
spaces [5]. She suggests “it is within these tension-ﬁlled
spaces that opportunities arise for new experimental forms
and practices.” Benford et al. experiment with mixed reality
performances in which physical and virtual spaces are com-
bined with live performance and interactivity [3, 4]. Audi-
ence members become directly engaged as interactive partic-
ipants. Connections between performers and audiences are
supported through hybrid spaces. We investigate the expe-
rience of performers in traditional live performance contexts
where the audience is a participant, but not necessarily an in-
teractive one. Audiences in traditional live performance are
becoming more interactive with new uses for mobile tech-
nologies, such as second screens as alternate views on a per-
formance [2]. Our focus in this investigation is on performer
experiences and how technologies can support or limit their
engagement with audiences.

METHODOLOGY: INTERVIEWS
To construct an understanding of how performers sense audi-
ence engagement and the differences between physically co-
present and distributed performances, we performed a quali-
tative investigation together with performance artists.
We conducted semi-structured interviews with eleven artists
including ﬁve musicians, three actors, two dancers, and one
director (Table 1). All of them are successful profession-
als, with training and careers in performance. Their levels of

433

experience with distributed performance varied. Participants
were recruited from institutions already engaged in exploring
creative intersections between art and technology.
Interviews were conducted via video chat, with the exception
of one participant who was interviewed via e-mail. Interviews
lasted from 30-60 minutes. Participants were asked about
their experiences in sensing a live audience both in physically
co-present and in distributed performance. Video and audio
were recorded. Researchers took observational notes during
interviews.
After each interview, researchers discussed observational
notes. Potential interesting phenomena were identiﬁed. Inter-
view questions were revised to help ask clearer, more speciﬁc
questions directed at emerging phenomena.
Interviews were transcribed. Transcripts were broken down
into units of meaning. Over 600 units were derived from
the data. We performed open coding [16] on units to itera-
tively derive emergent themes. We initially developed over
20 codes. Codes were categorized into four themes presented
in the following section.

FINDINGS AND DISCUSSIONS
Our analysis of interview data discovered several themes.
First, how spaces are connected can prevent social interaction
despite the intention of supporting social co-presence. Sec-
ond, distributed liveness requires active attention from per-
formers, in order to sense audience engagement. Third, per-
formers sense engagement of physically co-present audiences
through subtle physical cues that are lost in distributed set-
tings. Fourth, abstract representations of audiences can be
effective at conveying engagement to performers.

Challenges in Social Co-Presence
Performers experience problems connecting with distributed
audiences when using technologies intended to support so-
cial interaction among performers and audiences, such as
video and audio communication channels. Musicians, in
particular, described how in physically co-present settings,
they are able to socially interact with audience members dur-
ing setup, sound check, between songs, and after the per-
formance. However, they felt socially disconnected in dis-
tributed settings, despite video and audio channels supporting
two-way communication with the audience.
M2: It makes a difference that fact the audience is there. It
makes a difference that I’m aware that the audience is there,
and I try to make sure that what I perform is something that I
would like to hear, and I’m not just experimenting the whole
time ... It’s not the same as going to a venue. Talking to the
people there. Making sure that the wires are well connected.
Having people come in slowly and realizing, ”Oh, shit! This
is actually a real thing.”
Being physically co-present supports performers developing
social awareness about a space, even without paying close
attention to what is going on in that space.
M1: When you are in the room, you’re together in a space
with the sound, the physical movement of the sound. You are

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Table 1. List of participants, ID, performer type, gender, and expertise in performance and with distributed liveness. Performance expertise describes
participants’ experiences in the roles of performer and designer. All performance designers were also expert performers. Distributed liveness expertise
is based on number of distributed performances where participant was involved, and the role that participant took in designing performances.

ID
A1

Type
Actor

Sex P. Expertise
F

Expert

A2

A3

D1

Actor

Actor

Dancer

F

F

F

Dancer

D2
F
M1 Musician M
M2 Musician M

M3 Musician M

Expert

Expert

Designer

Expert
Expert
Expert

Expert

M4 Musician M

Designer

M5 Musician M
R1 Director M

Expert
Designer

Distributed Liveness Expertise

Novice. Interactive theater piece with mobile video; some performers were not physi-
cally co-present with other performers and the audience.
Expert. Combined theater and music pieces across two physical locations. Performers
and audience in both locations.
Novice. Instructional performance for planning a distributed theater performance; she
was not physically co-present with audience.
Expert. Distributed performance designer. Art performances in which she was not
physically co-present with other performers or the audience.
None.
Expert. Many performances; various levels of physical, social, and spatial co-presence.
Novice. Improvisational music performances; he was not physically co-present with
other performers or audiences.
Novice. Improvisational music performance; he was physically co-present with audi-
ence and several performers. Other performers were not physically co-present.
Expert. Distributed performance designer; physically co-present with audience and
several musicians. Other musicians were not physically co-present.
Novice. Improv. music performances; not physically co-present with others.
Novice. Interactive theater piece with mobile video; some performers were not physi-
cally co-present with other performers and the audience.

in the same space as the musicians and the audience, so even
if you are not necessarily paying attention to it, I think we
must be aware of what’s happening in that space.
Performers want to socially interact with audience members,
but the technology does not always facilitate such interactions
with distributed audiences. Providing two-way communica-
tion does not insure that performers and audiences will expe-
rience remote participants as live. In one example, actors in
Korea talked to an audience in New York via live video, but
audience members failed to recognize the actors’ liveness.
A2: I thought it would have been really great to react and
talk to the audience, because I wasn’t even sure if they were
aware of us being in Korea. I got feedback from New York af-
terwards, and they said some of the audience members were
actually confused. When they were informed later that we
were actually in Korea performing at 6 in the morning, they
were like, ”Oh my god! That was Korea.” Some of the peo-
ple weren’t aware of us being in Korea and doing telepres-
ence. They thought that was just a video clip of something.
Although, we talked in it with them.
While performers described the importance of social inter-
actions in the moments before and after a performance, the
amount of interaction with the audience during the perfor-
mance varied by performer and context. Several of the mu-
sicians and actors expressed concern about certain audience
reactions that they believed could harmfully affect the perfor-
mance, such as audience members ignoring the performance
and talking to each other. The participants wanted ﬂexible
control in distributed settings over the kinds and amount of
audience response transmitted to them.
M3: It’s nice to have that constant connection with the venue.
In terms of visual feedback, I would always like to have it
there in some form. The form could change in little ways that

the data was being displayed. ... I would always like some-
thing there, so that I might not have to be looking at it all the
time, but if you were just to glance across at the screen you
could quickly see how things were with the audience.
Audience feedback is delayed due to technological limita-
tions. This disrupts continuity of feedback loops, creating
cyclic periods of performing and watching. A participant per-
forms an action that requires a response, and then must wait
to observe reactions from the audience or another performer.
D1: Because there is always a slight delay, there’s always an
element of I do it and I watch. So, there’s a little bit of that
tiny time segment of what is performance. Do and watch. You
know in that sense that we are witnessing each other as well
as engaging with each other.

Performer Attention to Distributed Liveness
The lack of physical co-presence in distributed performances
challenges performers’ abilities to be attentive to remote au-
dience engagement. A performer must adapt how she directs
her attention towards audiences in other spaces. The common
approach for connecting spaces is to provide video or audio
streams of the other spaces. These connections ﬁlter what
a performer is able to perceive about an audience, provid-
ing a limited, focused representations of a space. Performers
must actively direct visual attention at a display with a video
stream. Each connected space is often represented by an indi-
vidual display, requiring performers to divide their attention
among several different displays. As a result, participants ex-
pressed favoring auditory feedback more than visual in past
distributed performances.
A2: More audio than video. Because of the nature of the
telepresence, it is really hard to focus on different screens at
the same time. So, I can only focus on the other performer or
on the other location.

434

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

When physically co-present with others, performers will
build connections with those around them (e.g., technicians in
a studio or performers in the same space). The shared physi-
cal space and the directed attention of those observing creates
a localized performance within the larger hybrid space.
D1: The audience changes, because even when you are do-
ing a remote performance, the reality is that you do have an
audience. You have people in the lab, and you can’t help but
connect with the people that you are with ...
Thus, the model of distributed liveness consists of smaller, lo-
calized performances that are combined to constitute a whole,
connecting spaces, performers, and audiences.

Sensing Engagement through Subtle Feedback
Participants reported using sensory feedback involving vi-
sion, hearing, and kinesthesia to sense audience engagement
in physically co-present settings. Much of the feedback de-
scribed involved subtle physical responses from the audiences
reﬂecting changes in emotional state or engagement, such as
facial expressions, tightening of muscles, or a shared energy.
In particular, dancers and actors described this physical feed-
back as kinesthesia or proprioception, sensing through the po-
sitioning of body parts and movement. When an audience is
engaged, the performers and audience are physically synchro-
nized (e.g. sharing similar respiratory patterns).
If I do something that has constant inhales, [inhales
D1:
deeply several times] and I keep doing this; the way human
beings are designed is that we mimic, so the audience will
start doing that. When you are doing extreme things on the
stage that involve breath or risk taking, you can feel the audi-
ence’s kinesthetic engagement with you; and that is a power-
ful thing. That really makes you feel connected.
Performers want to feel the audience’s presence and engage-
ment. The audience’s physical presence gives energy to the
performers, creating a unique live experience for all.
D2: When there are a lot of people gathered around you, of
course, there is an energy. That’s a natural energy of human
beings being together as a collective, which is an experience
that we don’t have very often.
Participants primarily experienced audience presence in dis-
tributed performance through cameras and microphones, used
to capture views and sounds of the audience and stream those
to the performer. Participants reported problems with this ap-
proach for conveying the subtle feedback of human expres-
sion and engagement of distributed audiences.
M4: The artist-audience relation becomes even more pro-
nounced. Which is unfortunate, because you want to think
of the internet as very egalitarian, democratic. But when you
put it in that context, only the local audience is so specialized.
You really feel that difference even more so. Yes, it is harder
to tell whether or not they are actually engaged. It’s difﬁcult
to know if people are smiling. A smile is a difﬁcult thing to
capture, even with a good camera. Particularly, when people
are moving, and they don’t want to be on camera themselves.
Those little differences in peoples’ faces. The look of excite-
ment. Very hard to communicate that through a screen. Those

435

are things that are really missing for a performer. They just
can’t get those subtleties of human expression.
In traditional stage performances, such as theater, opera, and
ballet, the absence of sound can be an indicator of audience
engagement. During intense moments, a performer expects
the audience to be on the edge of their seats silently engaged.
If the performer hears the audience rustling, it could be an
indication that audience members are disinterested.
D1: Silence can also be an incredible indicator. [The audi-
ence] retracts in a way. That’s also really powerful. You feel
they give you the space to go deeper into your moment, which
might sound like a contradiction. That they kind of recede
and you feel even more alone or quiet and silent, but in a way
it connects you even more.

Representations of Audiences
Distributed liveness is supported by providing representations
of audiences to remote performers. In one context, improvisa-
tional musicians performed together in a distributed live event
where movement of audience members, sensed by a camera,
was translated into abstract graphic scores for the perform-
ers. As the score changed, so did the music they produced.
The abstract visual representation was interpreted by the per-
formers not only as a musical score, but also a form of visual
feedback about audience engagement. Increased movement
in the graphic score, indicated a highly mobile audience, with
people coming and going and not particularly engaged with
the performance. Slow movements indicated an audience that
was standing still and watching the performance.
M3: As the room sort of ﬁlled up and emptied out, then the
density of the score would change. You couldn’t literally see
that it was people that you were looking at. You see it more
as sort of shapes moving. Which is very interesting to play to,
as a performer’s perspective, because for one it gives you a
gauge on how many people you are actually playing to. You
can tell how many people are in the room at any one given
time. And two, it sort of gauges how people are responding,
reacting to what is going on. I sort of had it in my head that if
people were standing still, if there wasn’t a lot of motion hap-
pening, generally that would sort of mean that the audience
was engaged and concentrated on listening to what we were
playing as opposed necessarily to if there was a lot of motion
people moving around, coming in and out, the opposite.
The graphic score was combined with a microphone feed
of the audience space. Sensory feedback loops between
performers and the audience emerged. Audience members
movement provided visual feedback to performers, and re-
sulting musical changes in the musicians’ performances fed
back to the audience. Indirect spatial co-presence emerged
through abstract representations in a virtual space.

IMPLICATIONS FOR DESIGN
We present implications for the design of new performance
environments to support distributed liveness. Designing hy-
brid spaces that give performers ﬂexible, directed control over
social interactions with audiences will improve experiences
of liveness. The physical separation of spaces in distributed

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

liveness requires new methods for sensing subtle visual, au-
ditory, and kinesthetic reactions from distributed audiences,
and conveying that feedback abstractly to performers.

Design Hybrid Spaces for Flexible Social Co-Presence
Distributed performances bring together performers and au-
diences across different spaces, both physical (e.g. theaters)
and virtual (e.g. YouTube streams). Design for distributed
liveness creates hybrid spaces [4] that mix the physical and
virtual. Physical spaces situate performers, audience mem-
bers, and objects. Virtual spaces are comprised of representa-
tions of people and their engagement.
We need to design hybrid spaces to effectively support so-
cial co-presence in distributed performances. The technol-
ogy used to connect spaces impacts how performers and au-
diences form connections with each other. Despite the provi-
sion of visual and auditory channels, meant to convey social
cues, performers reported difﬁculty socially interacting with
distributed audiences. Without rich social interaction, per-
formers expressed feelings of isolation, along with confusion
for audiences about the liveness of the performance.
Several participants wanted ways to engage in direct social
interaction with distributed audiences. One way that this is
presently supported is text chat. Examples of hybrid spaces
that effectively support social co-presence through text chat
can be found in the virtual game spaces of Can You See Me
Now? [3] and live streaming environment of Twitch [10]. In
performance art contexts, reading text chat during the perfor-
mance would be difﬁcult for many of our participants. Yet
in these contexts, technology should still support performers
interacting with audiences before, during intermissions, and
after the performance. For example, performers should be
able to view audience text chat, toggle on video and audio
feeds, and talk to audiences directly, addressing questions,
chatting about the performance, as well as see and hear how
other performers are engaging speciﬁc audiences.

Sense Subtle Feedback, Convey Abstractly
Performers identiﬁed the importance of sensing audience en-
gagement through subtle visual, auditory, and kinesthetic
feedback. The physical separations and clear boundaries ef-
fected by video screens and speakers make prior teleconfer-
encing systems inadequate for conveying this feedback.
We need to develop new techniques for sensing and convey-
ing audience engagement. Physiological sensors, such as
those for GSR, respiration rate, electromyography, provide
means for measuring audiences’ and performers’ bodily re-
sponses. Participants described forming connections with the
audience and other performers through similar bodily experi-
ence, such as shared breathing patterns, heart rates, or muscle
tension. Physiological sensors have been previously shown
as effective measures of audience engagement [12, 19].
While invasive sensing technologies are suitable for experi-
mentation, deployment in the wild requires non-invasive tech-
niques that address privacy concerns. New commercial de-
vices for health and ﬁtness, such as Apple Watch1 and Fit-
1http://www.apple.com/watch

bit2, provide personal sensing of physiological data, such as
heart rate and body movement. These sensing technologies
can be combined with mobile applications that operate only
in local areas. This would enable audience members to opt-in
to collection of anonymous sensor data in commercial perfor-
mance venues, such as theaters, to participate in distributed
liveness. This approach enables performance venues, such as
theaters broadcasting the Met Opera, to serve as distributed
liveness venues. Standards and compliance certiﬁcation for
how-to collect such data and guarantee privacy would ame-
liorate, but not eliminate, privacy issues.
We advocate representations that convey subtle sensory feed-
back. Some musicians we interviewed had experience per-
forming in response to abstract representations of distributed
audiences. They found these representations helpful for per-
ceiving audience engagement. Abstract representations avoid
overwhelming attention. They are ambiguous and allow per-
formers to form their own interpretations. Gaver et al. point
out that “ambiguity can be frustrating, to be sure. But it can
also be intriguing, mysterious, and delightful. By impelling
people to interpret situations for themselves, it encourages
them to start grappling conceptually with systems and their
contexts, and thus to establish deeper and more personal rela-
tions with the meanings offered by those systems” [9].
Representing kinesthetic feedback requires using physical de-
vices beyond screens and speakers. For example, heart rate
data could be represented with a pulsating arm band that ex-
pands and contracts to mimic beats of the heart. This repre-
sentation is a form of wearable kinetic garment, containing
mechanical components, such as actuators, that move in re-
sponse to physiological data [15]. Such garments will pro-
nounce kinesthetic engagement in new ways to performers,
as compared to traditional physically co-present settings. De-
vices, such as TVs and headphones, which convey visual and
auditory feedback, reproduce light and sound waves for our
eyes and ears, as if physically co-present where original stim-
ulus was produced. Devices for kinesthetic feedback produce
a new sensation that seeks to mimic the original stimulus, but
it is not the same. Performers will have to train their kines-
thetic senses to interpret feedback from these devices. Con-
versely, remote audience members can wear kinetic garments,
creating bi-directional kinesthetic feedback loops.

CONCLUSION
We coined the term distributed liveness, to refer to an emerg-
ing aspect of computer-supported collaborative performance
with broad impact on creative human experiences. The In-
ternet provides means to connect performers with audiences
from around the world. Yet, this technological connection of-
ten fails to provide a shared sensory experience. Performers
and audiences are physically and often temporally separated.
Performers become unaware of remote audience experiences.
We contextualized this historically, noting that liveness is a
socio-technical construct, nearing a century in age.
We conducted interviews to understand performer experi-
ences of liveness in different settings. Analysis of our ﬁnd-

2http://www.ﬁtbit.com

436

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

ings contribute implications for design of distributed liveness
environments. Hybrid spaces for distributed performances
need to support ﬂexible social co-presence, enabling perform-
ers to switch among levels of social interaction at different
moments in a performance. We need to develop new ways to
sense subtle physical cues of audience engagement, and com-
municate audience response without overloading attention.
As an emergent arena of phenomena, distributed liveness pro-
vides avenues for exploration of diverse, new forms of com-
puter supported collaborative work and play. In addition to
the performing arts and games, we envision designing new
classroom environments for distributed liveness, in which vir-
tual spaces connect classrooms of students at multiple insti-
tutions, as well as students at home, in shared learning expe-
riences. Abstract representations of aggregated sensory data
from remote participants, in concert with live streaming, will
enable teachers to sense remote student engagement and ad-
dress gaps in student attention.
A result of the seams inherent in experiences of distributed
liveness is that we must co-design performance and technol-
ogy, because the tandem fundamentally prescribes partici-
pant experiences. Seamful design strategies, in which per-
formance is composed while taking into account limitations,
such as delay, is one part of this. Another is to build rep-
resentations that holistically combine sensory feeds, using a
strategy such as information composition [11].
Co-designed approaches to distributed liveness have the po-
tential to transform the nature of performance events, con-
necting participants physically, spatially, temporally, and so-
cially in new ways. As technology changes performance,
so performance must change, creating new hybrid forms [5].
Performers will need to broaden their skills, learning to inter-
act with new technologies and engage in new types of perfor-
mance. Likewise, writers and directors will need to account
for the characteristics of seams and the situated technologies
that produce them. We look forward to new hybrid spaces and
works that engage collaboration through distributed liveness
to achieve compelling, participatory forms of performance.

REFERENCES
1. Philip Auslander. 2008. Liveness: Performance in a

mediatized culture (2nd ed.). Routledge.

2. Louise Barkhuus, Arvid Engstr¨om, and Goranka Zoric.

2014. Watching the Footwork: Second Screen
Interaction at a Dance and Music Performance. In Proc.
CHI. 1305–1314.

3. Steve Benford, Andy Crabtree, Martin Flintham, Adam
Drozd, Rob Anastasi, Mark Paxton, Nick Tandavanitj,
Matt Adams, and Ju Row-Farr. 2006. Can You See Me
Now? ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 13, 1
(March 2006), 100–133.

4. Steve Benford and Gabriella Giannachi. 2011.

Performing Mixed Reality. MIT Press.

5. Susan Broadhurst. 2006. Intelligence, Interaction,
Reaction, and Performance. In Performance and
Technology: Practices of Virtual Embodiment and
Interactivity, Susan Broadhurst and Josephine Machon
(Eds.). Palgrave Macmillan.

437

6. Teresa Cerratto-Pargman, Chiara Rossitto, and Louise
Barkhuus. 2014. Understanding Audience Participation
in an Interactive Theater Performance. In Proc.
NordiCHI. 608–617.

7. Greg Corness, Kristin Carlson, and Thecla Schiphorst.

2011. Audience Empathy: A Phenomenological Method
for Mediated Performance. In Proc. Creativity and
Cognition. 127–136.

8. Nick Couldry. 2004. Liveness, ’reality,’ and the

mediated habitus from television to the mobile phone.
The Communication Review 7 (2004).

9. William W. Gaver, Jacob Beaver, and Steve Benford.
2003. Ambiguity As a Resource for Design. In Proc.
CHI. 233–240.

10. William A. Hamilton, Oliver Garretson, and Andruid

Kerne. 2014. Streaming on Twitch: Fostering
Participatory Communities of Play Within Live Mixed
Media. In Proc. CHI. 1315–1324.

11. Andruid Kerne, Andrew M. Webb, Steven M. Smith,
Rhema Linder, Nic Lupfer, Yin Qu, Jon Moeller, and
Sashikanth Damaraju. 2014. Using Metrics of Curation
to Evaluate Information-Based Ideation. ACM Trans.
Comput.-Hum. Interact. 21, 3, Article 14 (June 2014).

12. Celine Latulipe, Erin A. Carroll, and Danielle Lottridge.
2011. Love, Hate, Arousal and Engagement: Exploring
Audience Responses to Performing Arts. In Proc. CHI.

13. National Theatre of London. 2015. NT Live.

http://timeandspace.org/ntlive.

14. Stuart Reeves, Steve Benford, Claire O’Malley, and

Mike Fraser. 2005. Designing the Spectator Experience.
In Proc. CHI. 741–750.

15. Thecla Schiphorst, Wynnie (Wing Yi) Chung, and Emily

Ip. 2013. Wo.Defy: Wearable Interaction Design
Inspired by a Chinese 19th Century Suffragette
Movement. In Proc. TEI. 319–322.

16. Anselm Strauss and Juliet M. Corbin. 1998. Basics of
Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for
Developing Grounded Theory. SAGE Publications.

17. Jaime Teevan, Daniel Liebling, Ann Paradiso, Carlos

Garcia Jurado Suarez, Curtis von Veh, and Darren
Gehring. 2012. Displaying Mobile Feedback During a
Presentation. In Proc. HCI with Mobile Devices and
Services. 379–382.

18. The Metropolitan Opera. 2015. The Met: Live in HD.

http://www.metopera.org/metopera/liveinhd/
LiveinHD.aspx.

19. Chen Wang, Erik N. Geelhoed, Phil P. Stenton, and

Pablo Cesar. 2014. Sensing a Live Audience. In Proc.
CHI. 1909–1912.

20. Doug Williams, Ian Kegel, Marian Ursu, Pablo Cesar,

Jack Jansen, Erik Geelhoed, Andras Horti, Michael
Frantzis, and Bill Scott. 2015. A Distributed Theatre
Experiment with Shakespeare. In Proc. Multimedia.

