CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Analysing Volunteer Engagement in Humanitarian Mapping:

Building Contributor Communities at Large Scale

Martin Dittus
ICRI Cities, UCL

London, UK

martin@dekstop.de

Giovanni Quattrone

Department of Computer

Science, UCL
London, UK

g.quattrone@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Licia Capra

Department of Computer

Science, UCL
London, UK

l.capra@ucl.ac.uk

ABSTRACT
Organisers of large-scale crowdsourcing initiatives need to
consider how to produce outcomes with their projects, but also
how to build volunteer capacity. The initial project experience
of contributors plays an important role in this, particularly
when the contribution process requires some degree of ex-
pertise. We propose three analytical dimensions to assess
ﬁrst-time contributor engagement based on readily available
public data: cohort analysis, task analysis, and observation of
contributor performance. We apply these to a large-scale study
of remote mapping activities coordinated by the Humanitarian
OpenStreetMap Team, a global volunteer effort with thousands
of contributors. Our study shows that different coordination
practices can have a marked impact on contributor retention,
and that complex task designs can be a deterrent for certain
contributor groups. We close by providing recommendations
about how to build and sustain volunteer capacity in these and
comparable crowdsourcing systems.

Author Keywords
Crowdsourcing; Peer Production; Social Computing;
Retention; Engagement; Task Design; Task Analysis

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.3. Group and Organization Interfaces: Computer-
supported cooperative work; Design

INTRODUCTION
The Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team (HOT) aims to map
all the undocumented and crisis-stricken regions of the world.
The formidable scale of this ambition was illustrated during the
2014 Ebola epidemic: even after months of work by thousands
of volunteers, the new maps of Central and West Africa are still
not complete. An article by Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF)
suggests that to reach their goal, HOT organisers need to grow
their project to “the biggest instance of digital volunteerism
the world has ever seen” [11]. Organisers thus not only need

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CSCW ’16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02...$15.00.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819939

108

to consider how to produce these maps, but also how to foster
a large global volunteer community in the process.
The HOT projects presented in this study represent two aspects
of this community-building challenge: disaster aid initiatives
need to build volunteer capacity to provide quick emergency
response, and disaster preparedness initiatives need to sustain
volunteer capacity in the absence of urgent causes. While
organisers have signiﬁcant freedom in designing these projects,
it is not clear how to they can evaluate their choices in these
regards. Furthermore it is not always clear whether certain
design choices involve trade-offs.
Other studies have already assessed the quality of HOT out-
puts, and their impact on the map [9, 34]. This study will
instead focus entirely on engagement aspects: the existence of
HOT presents a rare opportunity to compare different coordi-
nation practices within the same platform, involving a large
number of projects and participants.

Proposed contributions
The present study is focused on a key growth challenge: to
develop understanding of how best to increase volunteer capac-
ity. Our research takes the form of a large-scale quantitative
observational study. We evaluate whether individual projects
can successfully activate new volunteers (enrolment), but im-
portantly also retain them over time (retention). Together we
deﬁne these as engagement.
A range of HOT initiatives and organisational practices of-
fer many opportunities to evaluate speciﬁc organiser choices.
We aim to assess a large number of participations in a con-
sistent manner. To this purpose we propose three analytical
dimensions: cohort analysis where we compare collections of
similar projects, task analysis where we compare projects in
their task complexity, and observation of contributor perfor-
mance relating to the rate of contributions. All rely on readily
available public data, and we will demonstrate that they can
yield important ﬁndings.
The analytical dimensions we propose are grounded in exist-
ing theory, and have direct operational implications so that
ﬁndings can be translated to organisational change. They pro-
vide minimum-effort complements to more invasive evaluation
practices such as controlled experiments, A/B tests and partici-
pant observations. They are general enough to be transferrable
to other online communities: their minimum requirement is a
capacity to observe individual contributions over time.

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

A key aspect of this evaluation is our focus on ﬁrst-time con-
tributors, starting from their initial enrolment. In these ﬁrst
hours and days, we can expect that engagement is at least in
part shaped by the speciﬁc design of this ﬁrst project. We
can assess whether the initial experience was so discourag-
ing that contributors never returned, or whether it prepared
them to contribute for longer periods. A more experienced
contributor on the other hand may still be able to contribute to
a badly designed task, which would make it harder to identify
problematic design choices.
On the following pages we ﬁrst present three research ques-
tions motivated by the growth challenge we presented. We
then provide an introduction to HOT and its practices, de-
scribe key project initiatives, present an overview of related
work, and introduce our methodology. Finally we address our
research questions with a set of analyses based on contribu-
tor engagement metrics, and close with a discussion of our
ﬁndings, and a brief outline of future work.

RESEARCH QUESTIONS
RQ1: Cohort analysis
Are different coordination practices associated with different
contributor engagement characteristics? In large distributed
online communities we are likely to ﬁnd subgroups with di-
vergent practices. In the case of HOT these are the different
humanitarian causes within the same platform.
We expect that divergent coordination practices and circum-
stances can affect contributor engagement in different ways.
In particular we believe that the perceived urgency of a cause
can act as an attractor and lead to higher enrolment. On the
other hand we expect that sustained promotion of needs can
likely increase retention, however it is unclear how well this
actually works and how long it can last.

RQ2: Task analysis
Are different task designs associated with different contributor
engagement characteristics? Task analysis serves to assess
the impact that contribution mechanics can have on the ini-
tial enrolment experience. It allows to distinguish between
different tasks in terms of their task complexity.
We expect that a minimum degree of task complexity is needed
to yield substantial contributions, however there may be di-
minishing returns: more complex work can be discouraging.
This may be particularly true for newcomers, who may choose
to abandon their participation early.
We further expect that such effects can be addressed with
better contributor guidance. A gradual learning curve and
other forms of guidance can help newcomers build a sense of
self-efﬁcacy. However we also expect diminishing reports in
this context: too much documentation can be overwhelming
as well.

RQ3: Contributor performance
Is contributor performance an early indicator of retention?
A volunteer’s rate of contributions, or edit pace, can be con-
sidered a key measure of their performance. Do faster con-
tributors tend to stay longer? Can we observe performance

improvements during the initial period of participation? Are
these measures associated with particular retention proﬁles?
We expect that faster contributors tend to stay longer, they may
be more conﬁdent in their abilities. We further expect to see
that newcomers start slowly, but then pick up their pace. We
further expect that any observed performance improvements
are associated with an increase in short-term retention, as a
result of increased contributor self-efﬁcacy and enjoyment.

VOLUNTEER MAPPING WITH HOT AND OSM
HOT was founded in 2010 by an informal network of ex-
perts, and the organisation has gradually reﬁned the necessary
processes and technologies that allow it to scale [30]. HOT
organisers coordinated responses to typhoon Haiyan in 2013,
the West African Ebola crisis in 2014, the 2015 Nepal earth-
quake, and many other activations [32]. The promise of these
initiatives is to achieve a greater volunteer capacity for disaster
response and humanitarian aid by incorporating the help of
a global online volunteer force. The MSF staff member Ivan
Gayton summarises the particular appeal HOT has for repre-
sentatives of aid organisations: “Finally, I can give volunteers
something to do that isn’t just giving money” [18].
HOT organisers set up projects to address particular informa-
tion needs, and promote these to potential volunteers. Projects
seek to map certain geographic features in a particular region,
for example to map settlements so that aid experts can under-
stand population distributions, or to trace roads so that ﬁeld
teams can plan transport routes. Larger HOT activations can
consist of dozens of individual projects.
The maps produced by HOT volunteers are free for all under
a liberal license, and are now in use by experts at MSF, the
American and British Red Cross, the World Health Organ-
isation, and a growing number of other institutions [7]. A
2014 report by MSF discusses the impact such initiatives can
have on the work of aid organisations: “Many interviewees
commented that they were ‘amazed’ by the speed at which the
area was mapped with the help of the volunteers. On his own,
the GIS ofﬁcer would not have been able to produce these base
maps during his mission." [17]. Figure 1 visualises the global
distribution of all HOT edits.

Remote mapping with the Tasking Manager
Typically the ﬁrst step in the creation of a new map is a remote
mapping practice involving the help of hundreds or even thou-
sands of volunteers. In remote mapping, HOT volunteers trace
maps from satellite imagery of remote places. In some cases,
regional groups host mapathons to come together in a more
social setting, but many contributors simply participate online.
The HOT Tasking Manager is a key technology in the con-
tribution process, it emerged out of a need to distribute work
across large numbers of remote mappers while reducing edit
conﬂicts [23]. The Tasking Manager is also a rich source of
contextual information: it publishes a list of all remote map-
ping projects, task descriptions, boundary polygons for project
regions, and contributor lists.
Figure 2 shows a screenshot of a project and its description.
Within all Tasking Manager projects, work is divided spatially

109

SESSION: CROWD WORKERS

Figure 1. Geographic distribution of all HOT contributions. Activities focus on Central and West Africa, Southeast Asia, and other parts of the world.

into smaller tasks (map grid cells). Contributors choose a free
task in the Tasking Manager when they begin their work, and
then contribute according to a set of instructions.
All contributions are made on OSM using OSM mapping tools,
and HOT contributors require an OSM account to contribute.
Most of their time is spent in these editing tools rather than
the Tasking Manager. The OSM changesets of their contribu-
tions are now automatically annotated with HOT-speciﬁc tags,
which means HOT contributions can be identiﬁed in the OSM
edit history. Further background on OSM and its relationship
to HOT is provided by Soden et al [30].
In subsequent stages, local mappers with knowledge of the
respective area may augment the maps by adding more detailed
annotations, including place names and other details, and by
making corrections based on ground observations [31].
For this study we focus on the remote mapping process, and
we will not assess the contributions of local mappers: there
is less less readily available data on the circumstances and
outcomes of their practices, and these subsequent activities
on the ground are not as easily observed at scale. As a result
a large-scale quantitative evaluation of their work is harder
to achieve. Their engagement characteristics are also likely
different from those of remote mappers: they involve a much
smaller number of contributors who are often more closely
embedded with local communities or aid organisations.

RELATED WORK
A key barrier to entry for ﬁrst-time HOT contributors is the fact
that mapping with OSM is a complex practice: it requires spe-
cialist tools and an understanding of specialist concepts [29].
To our knowledge there is no published research on how this
affects HOT contributor engagement, however there is some
knowledge in related domains.
1http://tasks.hotosm.org/project/870

Figure 2. The HOT Tasking Manager, showing a project description on
the left hand side, and a map with a task grid on the right.1

Crowdsourcing is the solicitation of labour from a large group
of participants, typically online, accomplishing a variety of
tasks such as the creation of content or solving of prob-
lems [13]. This includes forms of citizen science where a
coordinating party invites scientiﬁc contributions by laypeo-
ple [35]. Crowdsourcing systems in which participants are
motivated by payment and similar incentives are sometimes
distinguished as crowd work [16].
In crowdsourcing and crowd work systems, organisers (or
“requesters”) prepare tasks that are then offered to contributors.
Organisers need to strike a balance between organisational
performance and worker satisfaction: badly designed tasks
can be deterrents for participation [35]. A basic design strategy
is to split the work into smaller pieces that are manageable by
a single contributor in a limited amount of time.
Kittur et al. further propose to communicate more clearly
with contributors, but also to better support their learning

110

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

experience. “Workers may need to acquire new skills to per-
form unfamiliar tasks, before or in the midst of performing
the actual work” [16]. In an evaluation of Mechanical Turk
crowd workers, Khanna et al. found that more complex tasks
that require a nuanced understanding of the domain can pose
barriers to participation. Other barriers included problems
related to the user interface, or misunderstandings derived
from differences in cultural contexts between coordinator and
contributor [15].
There is some evidence that increased activity and increased
retention may not always be achievable at the same time. In
online citizen science projects it was found that more proliﬁc
contributors can have shorter retention periods [25, 26]. A
similar effect was found for crowdsourcing designs that aim
to increase member productivity, and was attributed to either
burnout or a sense of a “mission accomplished” [33].
A basic psychological model that allows us to reason about
the nature of engagement barriers is the framework of self-
efﬁcacy [1]. According to this model, perceived human efﬁ-
cacy determines if an individual will initiate an activity, how
much effort will be expended, and how long the activity will
be sustained. Self-efﬁcacy is derived from four principal in-
formation sources: performance accomplishments, vicarious
experience, verbal persuasion, and physiological states. In
other words, task designs that aim to increase self-efﬁcacy
must consider how best to bring about experiences of mas-
tery, and to not overwhelm prematurely. This can at least in
part also involve social processes: persuasion, observation of
others, and feedback.
When designing tasks, one should also consider the moti-
vations of contributors to participate. A general model of
motivations of volunteer workers was presented by Clary et
al. who describe six basic motivational categories, including
values (such as altruism), social experience, and enhancement
(self-improvement, a positive self-image) [8]. In a study of
Wikipedia contributor motivations, this was later amended by
two further categories: fun, and ideology [19]. Among early
OSM contributors, Budhathoki found that an individual’s lo-
cal geographic knowledge was the most signiﬁcant driver to
contribute [3]. In the context of charitable work it was further
shown that the presence of a community of participation can
affect a person’s willingness to contribute to charitable organ-
isations [28], as does the perceived degree of social urgency
behind a particular cause.
HOT can also be considered an example of commons-based
peer production [2]. It emerged out of the activities of the OSM
community, and is shaped by its technologies and practices:
in principle anyone can contribute, and contributors choose
their own tasks freely [23]. There is a substantial amount of re-
search on peer production systems, with Wikipedia and OSM
as prominent examples. However in such systems there typi-
cally is no clear distinction between organiser and contributor,
while in HOT a central committee coordinates activities with
aid organisations. As a result, work in HOT may be organ-
ised differently than in OSM or Wikipedia, and contribution
processes tend to be more formal and goal-oriented.

Research contribution
We present the ﬁrst comparative study of HOT activity across
multiple large initiatives, and likely the ﬁrst large-scale study
of HOT community engagement. Despite increased research
interest in the topic, to our knowledge there has been no pub-
lished research on the ability of different HOT project designs
to build volunteer capacity, and then successfully retain trained
contributors over longer periods.

METHODOLOGY
Data
All our analyses are based on two data sets:
1. Project information published on the HOT Tasking Man-

ager.2 This data was scraped for every project.

2. The OSM edit history of all map contributions, recording
the creation and modiﬁcation of map objects over time. This
dataset is freely available for download.3

Using contributor lists from the Tasking Manager as a start-
ing point, we extracted the OSM map contributions by all
known HOT participants and cross-referenced them with HOT
projects based on username, date, and location. For the pur-
pose of this study, any creation or modiﬁcation of a map object
is considered an edit.

Study period
We selected an 18-month enrolment window from mid-2013 to
late 2014 to observe ﬁrst-time contributions, further extended
by a buffer period of 180 days for the observation of contrib-
utor retention. This time captures the most active period of
the Tasking Manager history to date. It excludes an initial
early-adopter period, but includes the ﬁrst Tasking Manager
use at a larger scale in late 2013 [23].
Figure 3 shows the remarkable growth of HOT remote map-
ping activity in this time: by early 2015, HOT organisers had
created almost 1,000 remote mapping projects. Our study
period is highlighted in the graph.
The speciﬁc timeframe, all dates are inclusive:
• First date of enrolment window: 16th of June 2013
• Last date of enrolment window: 15th of December 2014
• Plus 180-day buffer period: ends 16th of June 2015

Cohort selection
For this ﬁrst study of HOT engagement we limited our evalua-
tion to key remote mapping initiatives: larger collections of
Tasking Manager projects with a shared singular purpose and
shared organisational practices. We identiﬁed such collections
based on project listings on the HOT homepage and the OSM
wiki. Approximately 50% of HOT projects could not easily
be allocated to a group.
In order to ﬁnd collections that are suitable for both cohort
analysis and task analysis we further rejected initiatives that
involved less than 50 contributors, and less than 10 projects.
2http://tasks.hotosm.org
3http://planet.osm.org/planet/full-history/

111

SESSION: CROWD WORKERS

Cohort
Projects
23
TH
ER
65
MM 11
99
Total

First-time contributors
481
881
208
1,570

Table 1. Project cohort sizes.

Figure 3. Growth of HOT Tasking Manager projects over time. Our
study period is highlighted.

We identiﬁed six larger initiatives as candidates. Of those
we chose three as study cohorts based on their proﬁles: they
represent a cross-section of typical HOT coordination prac-
tices, from urgent responsive mapping to sustained proactive
mapping. Their aggregate size is substantial: they encompass
30% of all projects on the Tasking Manager, and account for
almost 50% of all ﬁrst-time contributors in the period.

Typhoon Haiyan (cohort: TH)
Also known as Typhoon Yolanda, TH was a tropical cyclone
that devastated the Philippines on November 8, 2013. The
HOT projects associated with it were of high urgency: the map
data was used in disaster response and humanitarian aid as
soon as it became available. TH was probably the ﬁrst highly
promoted HOT initiative to rely on the Tasking Manager for
coordination. Volunteer work started only few days before the
event, initially with projects to prepare a base map. The focus
later switched to damage assessment of the affected areas. The
OSM wiki lists 22 mapathons which were organised around
TH in November 2013 in cities around the world. Typically
these were one-off events [22].

Ebola response (cohort: ER)
The Ebola outbreak began in Guinea in early 2014. Aid or-
ganisations needed maps to locate and treat those infected, yet
many of the affected areas were not documented on any exist-
ing maps. Initially this was treated as an urgent one-off event,
and activity stopped soon. However coordination was picked
up again as the epidemic spread to neighbouring countries, and
the strategy changed to a more sustained effort covering larger
regions. The initiative lasted until early 2015. Mapathons
were organised in many parts of the world to train newcomers
and coordinate volunteers, including monthly events in several
cities [20]. Project descriptions indicate that many activities
were coordinated by representatives of aid organisations.

Missing Maps (cohort: MM)
This effort launched in November 2014: regions vulnerable
to crises are mapped early so that maps are already available
when a crisis occurs [27]. In contrast to TH, this initiative is
proactive rather than reactive, and continuity of contributor

112

Figure 4. Timeline of contributor enrolment, broken out per cohort.
Contributors are arranged vertically in order of ascending user ID.

engagement is more important than a quick response. Where
TH and ER were more ad hoc in their coordination, MM organ-
isers set up structures to support more sustained engagement:
there are regular mapathons in many parts of the world, often
organised as monthly events. A signup form for volunteers
allows contributors to get informed of upcoming initiatives
and mapathons [21]. Similar to ER, many of the MM projects
were initiated by representatives of aid organisations.
We selected contributions relating to each cohort in the study
period, identifying instances where new ﬁrst-time contributors
joined a project. The ﬁnal data set derived from this is sum-
marised in Table 1, with a total of 1,570 ﬁrst-time contributors
across 99 projects.
A timeline of contributor enrolments per cohort is shown in
Figure 4, this plot illustrates a number of key aspects of our
data set. The cohorts were active at different periods: TH in
late 2013, ER throughout much of 2014, and MM from late
2014 onwards. The contributor distribution also indicates that
many ﬁrst-time contributors already had existing OSM user
accounts, as indicated by their user IDs. The plot also reveals
a participation gap for ER between May and July 2014, this
reﬂects the period of inactivity between its initial conclusion
in early 2014, and a subsequent resurgence of activity later in
the summer.

j

s
t
c
e
o
r
p
 
T
O
H

 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

900

800

700

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

3

1

0

n   2

J a

4

1

0

n   2

J a

5

1

0

n   2

J a

D

I
 
r
e
s
u
 
M
S
O

TH
ER
MM

4

1

0

n   2

J a

4

1

0

J u l  2

5

1

0

n   2

J a

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Experience dpre

0 days

1-9 days

10-99 days

TH 30.9%
ER 52.8%
MM 72.8%

22.2%
24.3%
18.4%

20.3%
11.7%
5.3%

≥100 days

26.6%
11.2%
3.4%

Table 2. Distribution of prior OSM experience per cohort, in days with contributions (dpre).

Contributor observation periods
We collected all contributions by ﬁrst-time contributors in the
ﬁrst 180 days after their initial contribution. We paid particular
attention to three different timeframes per contributor:
• The initial enrolment period of the ﬁrst 48 hours. This
period is used to observe initial contributions, and to assess
how many contributors returned immediately on the second
day. The short initial observation period of two days was
chosen based on the median difference between the ﬁrst and
last moment of contribution of all ﬁrst-time contributors,
which is only 20 hours.

• A 90-day retention period from the moment of enrolment.
This was chosen based on an analysis of average contributor
lifetimes: almost 90% of contributors cease contributing
after 90 days of their initial participation.

• A 180-day survival period from the moment of enrolment,
to identify the last known moment of contribution. This was
used for survival analysis: we considered contributors ‘dead’
if they had been inactive for at least 90 days by the end of
this survival period. The last known date of contribution
before that point marks their ‘death event’.

In summary this means that we only consider the ﬁrst 90 days
of contribution activity for our analyses, however we observe
for a full 180 days after enrolment to establish abandonment
with some degree of certainty.

Engagement metrics
Based on these relative observation windows we computed en-
gagement metrics for every ﬁrst-time contributor we identiﬁed.
We computed contribution sessions based on the timestamps
of individual contributions, with a session timeout of one hour.
Based on these we computed the number of labour hours spent
on each contribution, using a process described by Geiger et
al in the context of Wikipedia contributor analysis [12].
A ﬁrst set of engagement metrics are measures of activity in
the enrolment period. We chose time-based activity measures
rather than simple edit counts because they allow us to more
meaningfully compare contributor effort across different kinds
of tasks [12]. We seek to quantify the amount of time spent
contributing, rather than the volume of data that was produced,
so we can compare contributor effort across different map
object types.
More speciﬁcally, we captured the number of labour hours
l48h in the ﬁrst 48 hours. These are also calculated separately
for the ﬁrst and second day in this initial period: ld1, ld2. We
further capture the rate of contributions in the ﬁrth 48 hours
c48h, measured in edits per hour, and contribution rates for the
ﬁrst and second day cd1 and cd2. These allow us to determine

113

a change in pace between the ﬁrst and second day to test for
the presence of performance improvements. This change in
pace is described by the ratio cd2/cd1.
A second set of metrics are measures of retention. These are
calculated per project: what share of ﬁrst-time HOT contribu-
tors could later be retained for further activities on any HOT
project? To quantify short-term retention per project we de-
termine Rd2, the percentage of ﬁrst-time contributors that are
still active on the second day of their participation. Addition-
ally we calculate long-term retention metrics Rm2 and Rm3,
the retention rates in the second and third month after enrol-
ment. These 30-day periods were chosen to reﬂect monthly
mapathon cycles observed by some HOT initiatives.

Quantifying prior domain experience
We further quantiﬁed each contributor’s degree of prior OSM
experience as dpre, the number of days on which they had
contributed to OSM before they joined their ﬁrst HOT project.
In certain analyses we used this measure as a control variable:
contributors with prior OSM experience may ﬁnd it easier to
contribute to HOT.
In an initial assessment of the impact of prior experience we
correlated dpre with our engagement measures. We found that
less experienced users contribute for less hours during their
enrolment (Spearman correlation coefﬁcient ρS = 0.19), that
they contribute at a lower pace (ρS = 0.23), and that they are
retained less often than others in the second month (ρS = 0.12)
and third month (ρS = 0.13, all with p < 0.001).
Comparison across cohorts shows that the three groups have
different constituencies: the most experienced group was TH
(median: 5 days of prior OSM contributions, mean: 113 days),
the most inexperienced group was MM (median: 0 days, mean:
23 days), and ER was in between (median: 0 days, mean: 52
days). Table 2 visualises the distributions as a histogram.
Pairwise comparison of these distributions with Kolmogorov-
Smirnov statistic (KS) conﬁrmed that these are statistically
different populations (p < 0.001), with the greatest difference
measured between TH and MM (KS statistic: α = 0.41).

Task analysis
We rely on the fundamental assumption that some tasks are
more challenging than others, and that this affects contributor
engagement. We expect that we can identify this effect by
observing participation across different tasks. We speciﬁcally
aim to assess how easy it is for a newcomer to become a
productive contributor.
In “Task Complexity: Deﬁnition of the Construct”, Wood dis-
tinguishes between the complexity of the required work itself,
and the amount of information cues and guidance necessary to

SESSION: CROWD WORKERS

Aspect
Motivation
Visual complexity
Task complexity
Task complexity
Guidance
Guidance

Description
Does the project description state an explicit purpose?
Is the mapped region rural (simple), mixed, or urban (complex)?

Variable
has_context
urban_density
num_concepts How many different types of map objects are to be mapped?
building_trace Are buildings to be mapped as points (simple) or polygons (complex)?
num_cues
num_tag_ex

Number of information cues provided in the documentation?
Number of tag examples listed?

Table 3. Task design feature vector produced by our task analysis.

produce it [36]. These can be quantiﬁed as the number of acts
and number of information cues involved in the work. Both are
measures of task complexity: simple tasks require processing
fewer cues than complex tasks [24]. They reﬂect the consider-
ation that task designs must consider how best to bring about
experiences of mastery without being overwhelming.
Table 3 lists the six task design features we considered for
this study, including motivational factors, visual complexity
of satellite imagery, task complexity, and forms of guidance.
These were labelled by the ﬁrst author in an iterative process,
involving a detailed study of a large number of projects. We
categorised all requested map features by their geometries and
semantic role: natural features, roads and highways, settlement
boundaries, buildings, urban infrastructure, and other features.
We similarly classiﬁed and counted the distinct number of
information cues per project: stated priorities, descriptions
of map object types, explicit sequences of work steps, and
external links to coordination pages, reference documents, or
instruction manuals.
These features were then used to compute task design feature
vectors for each project as described in Table 3. We standard-
ised these feature vectors using z-scores, so that all variables
have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. We found no
multicollinearity across the standardised variables: the condi-
tion index of all variables is 2.33, and we found no near-zero
eigenvalues in their cross-correlation matrix.

FINDINGS

RQ1: Cohort analysis
Table 4 shows median engagement statistics per cohort for the
enrolment period of the ﬁrst 48 hours. TH and ER have similar
enrolment proﬁles, while MM contributors appeared to work
longer but also contributed more slowly than the other cohorts.
We conﬁrmed the pairwise difference of these distributions
with a KS statistic: with one exception these differences in
distribution were statistically signiﬁcant (p < 0.01). The only
instance where a difference could not be asserted were the
distribution of labour hours in the TH and ER cohorts, however
their rate of contributions differed.
Table 5 shows the corresponding median retention rates per
cohort, broken out for short- and long-term retention periods.
These measures indicate that TH and ER have the highest
short-term retention, with almost 30% of contributors return-
ing on day 2. However the long-term retention rates of TH
are the lowest of all cohorts. In contrast MM starts with the
lowest short-term retention of only 10% returning on second

Cohort
1.14
TH
ER
1.16
MM 1.29

l48h

c48h

640.4
620.0
529.2

Table 4. Median contribution activity by cohort: labour hours (l48h) and
contribution rate (c48h) in the ﬁrst 48 hours.

Rd2

Cohort
26.8%
TH
ER
27.2%
MM 10.1%

Rm2
4.2%
13.6%
9.6%

Rm3

4.6%
8.9%
8.7%

Table 5. Median retention for day 2 (Rd2), and months 2 and 3 (Rm2 and
Rm3). These indicate the percentage of HOT contributors who are still
active in the respective period.

day, followed by the most stable long-term retention of all
cohorts: almost 9% contributors are still retained by month
three. We computed survival functions for each cohort based
on a Kaplan-Meier estimate with a 95% conﬁdence interval.
A pairwise logrank test conﬁrmed statistically signiﬁcant dif-
ferences in survival rates between ER and TH (p < 0.001), no
other pairing was found signiﬁcant.
When limiting survival analysis to OSM newcomers only,
where the ﬁrst HOT contribution was also the ﬁrst OSM edit,
we observed a statistically signiﬁcant difference in survival
rates between TH and MM, as well as TH and ER (both p <
0.001). The corresponding survival plot for OSM newcomers
in Figure 5 illustrates this: TH has the lowest overall retention.
ER and MM differ in the short term, with MM having lower
initial retention, yet then achieve similar long-term retention
characteristics. According to the plot MM may even have
the highest long-term retention, yet this difference was not
conﬁrmed by the logrank test.

RQ2: Task analysis
We prepared a regression model to observe the impact of the
six task design features on early abandonment, measured in
labour hours l48h as the dependent. We included two control
variables: prior user experience dpre, and the size of the project
(its number of tasks) to account for goal-setting effects with
larger projects.
Regression analysis was performed on all data, and for each co-
hort separately. The only signiﬁcant model was found for the
MM cohort (using ordinary least squares: adjusted R2=0.37,
F-statistic of 18.72, with p < 0.001 at 7 degrees of freedom).

114

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Figure 6. Mean contribution rate (c48h) segmented by contributor en-
gagement in the ﬁrst 48h, with 95% conﬁdence intervals.

across the three bins with a KS statistic over the respective
distributions of l48h was signiﬁcant for all pairs (p < 0.001).
On the other hand it cannot be said that there always are per-
formance improvements within the ﬁrst sessions: the median
change in pace is around 0% between the ﬁrst and second day
of enrolment across cohorts. We found no correlation between
performance improvements and long-term retention.

DISCUSSION
In the following section we will summarise our results by
highlighting the key effects we observed, and close with a set
of implications and design recommendations.
The three cohorts have different volunteer constituencies. A
comparison of their distributions of prior experience revealed
markedly different distributions. This may be a result of a
difference in engagement strategies: TH required a quick
response by an existing community, while ER and MM could
build volunteer capacity in a more sustained manner over
longer periods. Furthermore they were active at different
periods: by the time ER and MM were active, HOT had already
gained some prominence outside of the OSM community.
The three cohorts have different contribution proﬁles during
enrolment. The initial contribution proﬁles of TH and ER are
quite similar, although TH contributors contribute at a slightly
higher pace. In contrast, MM volunteers have the lowest rate
of contributions, yet were working longer hours during initial
enrolment than the other cohorts. The lower pace may be an
effect of relative inexperience, while increased initial activity
may indicate a greater motivation to contribute.
Coordination practices have a marked impact on contributor
retention. Long-term retention was highest for the ER and
MM cohorts which were speciﬁcally set up as more sustained
initiatives, and which relied on a range of volunteer engage-
ment practices such as mapathons and social media use. It
was further found that for the MM cohort, short-term retention
was lowest yet long-term retention was highest: contributors
do not tend to come back on the second day, however they are
more likely to remain active a month or two later. This may
indicate a greater reliance on mapathons, where contributors
do not necessarily return a day later, but at the time of the next
mapathon event. In contrast to this, TH had a large number of
contributors yet the lowest retention rates, likely because of
an absence of any such sustained engagement practices. Its

Figure 5. Survival functions for each cohort, indicating the rate at which
participants with no prior OSM experience ceased contributing. Shaded
regions show 95% conﬁdence intervals.

According to this model, individuals contributed for longer pe-
riods if they had prior OSM experience (βdpre=0.5), and were
given fewer map object types to map (βnum_concepts=-0.15, with
a 95% conﬁdence interval between -0.232 and -0.064).
These coefﬁcients are based on standardised z-scores. The
negative coefﬁcient βnum_concepts indicates that the strongest
response is below the mean value of num_concepts, which be-
fore standardisation is at 2.7. This result suggests that people
remained active for longer on tasks that involved the mapping
of less than three distinct map features.
Other models yielded no improvements in ﬁt. This includes
models that only included OSM newcomers, or only involved
the two signiﬁcant features dpre and num_concepts. The con-
tribution rate c48h was not explained by any regression model.

RQ3: Contributor performance
We found that faster contributors tend to remain active for
longer: a correlation analysis found that the initial contribution
rate cd1 is associated with longer participation in the enrolment
period (Spearman correlation coefﬁcient ρS = 0.15), and with
increased retention in month 2 (ρS = 0.15, both with p < 0.01),
however this effect is slightly reduced in month 3 (ρS = 0.11,
p < 0.05).
During a further analysis we found that contributors who aban-
doned tasks early and those who stayed the longest tended
to contribute more quickly than those in between. We seg-
mented contributors into three engagement classes based on
their initial labour hours l48h, this variable follows a normal dis-
tribution. Segmentation at the 25th and 75th percentile yields
three groups of short-term (under 30 minutes), average, and
long-term contributors (2 hours or more). Figure 6 shows the
distribution of contribution rates for each engagement class.
Short-term contributors tended to contribute at a faster pace:
their median contribution rate (650 edits per hour) was almost
30% higher than that of the average group (515 edits per hour).
This effect was found in all cohorts. A pairwise comparison

115

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

e
t
a
r
 
l
a
v
v
r
u
S

i

0.0

0

10

TH
ER
MM

80

90

30

20
Number of days since initial contribution

40

50

60

70

700

650

600

550

500

e
t
a
r
 
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
n
o
C

<0.5h

0.5-2h

>2h

Labour hours

contributors may have been attracted by a perceived urgency
around the disaster event, however they were not successfully
retained for any subsequent HOT activity.
Complex task designs can be a deterrent for certain contribu-
tor groups: projects involving three or more map object types
saw shorter activity periods for the MM cohort. In other words,
more complex task requirements may be demotivating to ﬁrst-
time contributors, regardless of their prior OSM experience.
We found no evidence of an impact of documentation and
guidance on engagement.
Most ﬁrst-time HOT contributors tend to operate at a fairly
steady pace, however contributors with prior OSM experience
tend to work faster and stay a little longer. This effect is
consistent across cohorts.
Early abandonment is associated with higher contribution
rates. Volunteers who stopped contributing within the ﬁrst
30 minutes tended to contribute at a slightly higher pace than
those who stayed an hour longer. This may suggests an in-
stance of a burnout effect, where some ﬁrst-time contributors
begin their engagement at a relatively high pace but then lose
motivation quickly. The effect was found in all cohorts.
Performance improvements are not associated with increased
retention: contributors whose performance increased within
the enrolment period were not necessarily retained for longer,
suggesting that the presence of performance improvements is
not an early indicator of increased long-term engagement.

Implications
The aim of our study is to understand engagement factors in
crowdsourcing communities that help organisers reason about
how to build and retain volunteer capacity. We believe we have
identiﬁed some key aspects that can inform the design choices
of HOT and related large-scale crowdsourcing systems.
Our ﬁndings suggest that the capacity-building strategies of the
ER and MM cohorts work well, and we encourage organisers
of other initiatives to adopt their practices: a combination of
highly promoted projects over a sustained period, a steady
stream of new efforts, regular mapathons and other training
environments, and the use of email notiﬁcations in the MM
cohort as a means of notifying interested contributors of new
causes. In these two cohorts, a larger share of contributors
kept coming back. In contrast to this, the greater urgency of
the TH initiative (a response to a discrete crisis event) may
have attracted many volunteers, however it did not contribute
to an increase in retention.
These retention effects may further be affected by the marked
difference in cohort constituents, attributable to self-selection
effects and the presence of existing social ties. According to
project descriptions, both ER and MM initiatives were largely
coordinated by representatives of aid organisations, while TH
projects were coordinated by OSM community members. This
may have affected how the initiatives were promoted, and to
whom. It is possible that ER and MM participants already
had existing connections to aid organisations as part of other
outreach efforts, and as a result had a higher motivation to
remain engaged.

116

SESSION: CROWD WORKERS

With one exception, the task designs encountered in our study
were found to be remarkably consistent in their engagement
characteristics. One cohort saw a reduction in activity during
the enrolment period for tasks that requested contributions of
a higher complexity, which suggests that organisers should
limit the number of map feature types requested per project.
This ﬁnding of relatively consistent contributor performance
across designs may also indicate a limitation of our obser-
vational study: we do not compare radically different task
designs, and instead merely observe existing tasks which rely
on the same tools and interfaces for the actual contribution pro-
cess. Additionally, many of these designs have already been
informed by years of prior experience [23]. Consequently we
encourage HOT organisers to also experiment with new task
designs to identify alternative strategies for further improve-
ment. An example of this could be a micro-tasking interface
that offers smaller and simpler tasks, which could allow new-
comers to become productive more easily and quickly.
An alternative interpretation is that current HOT contribution
mechanics do not have a major impact on engagement, and
that other aspects may be more important. In particular our
review of prior work suggests that intrinsic participant moti-
vations, participant enjoyment, association with particular hu-
manitarian causes, and social aspects of the HOT contribution
experience may be more important to contributor engagement
than the speciﬁcs of HOT contribution mechanics.
A further conclusion from our ﬁndings is that the best means
of increasing output capacity is to grow the volunteer base,
particularly considering the vast amount of uncharted territory
that HOT aims to map. We could observe improvements in the
performance of individual contributors, however an increase
in contributors would raise output capacity more quickly.
It remains open what constitutes good training conditions for
absolute newcomers. We believe that given a choice, new-
comers are best placed in projects where they have a higher
likelihood of being retained. In our case this would be the ER
and particularly MM cohorts: projects that are speciﬁcally set
up as long-term initiatives. Additionally there are indications
that particularly the MM cohort was successful at retaining and
training absolute newcomers with no prior OSM experience.

CONCLUSION
We presented an observational study to assess the relationship
between project designs and contributor engagement, with a
speciﬁc focus on the experience of ﬁrst-time contributors. We
compared project designs along three analytical dimensions:
cohort analysis, task analysis, and observation of contributor
performance. Under consideration of these aspects we eval-
uated different projects in their ability to foster contributor
engagement in the short and long term. The analytical di-
mensions yielded plausible ﬁndings: we found that different
coordination practices did have a marked engagement impact,
and that differences in task design can have an impact for some
groups. Additionally, we found that prior domain experience
in ﬁrst-time contributors is likely to increase their engagement.
We believe that these ﬁndings have some external validity:
we encounter similar contributor engagement across different

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

cohorts, but also some differences, and we believe that most
of these differences have been explained by the observable
factors discussed above. For this reason, we suggest that our
ﬁndings are transferrable to other crowdsourcing systems.
The nature of this work and the available evidence however
place limits on our ability to build more nuanced understand-
ing, and there are many aspects which we cannot gauge from
the available data. For example the contributor context is
generally not known: in which situation does mapping take
place? Yet the large scale of this study allow us to identify
some general engagement trends that tend to be shared across
different kinds of projects.

Future work
Our ﬁndings suggest that the participation setting may play
an important role in contributor engagement: mapathons and
other social learning environments can play an important role
in contributor onboarding. Although there is some existing
knowledge on these effects, we believe that their impact war-
rants further study. Some early observations were made by
Hristova et al. in a study of OSM mapping parties. The authors
found that participants sustained engagement even after the
event, however this effect was limited to contributors with at
least some prior experience, and newcomers to OSM could not
be activated by these settings [14]. Other studies have found
evidence that the socialisation experience of ﬁrst-time contrib-
utors in online communities can increase their contributions
and long-term retention. In a recent observational study of
Wikipedia contributors, Ciampaglia et al. ﬁnd that a successful
early socialisation experience is associated with and can some-
times predict increased contributor engagement, however it
was also found that the causal structure between socialisation,
motivation, and participation is not entirely clear [6]. Further
studies identiﬁed similar effects [10, 4, 5].
Furthermore our analysis of task complexity could be aug-
mented with research to understand the actual contribution
process, such as participant observation, usability studies, and
ethnographic studies. Such methods could asses which forms
of guidance are most useful to newcomers, to what extent vol-
unteers spend time reading task instructions before they start
contributing, and related aspects of the contribution process.
We have not studied the impact of project designs on output
quality because it is a separate concern from that of contributor
engagement, but also since it would be signiﬁcantly harder
to measure. These maps are typically the ﬁrst ever of their
kind, which means there is no ground truth data, and a man-
ual quality assessment would require substantial effort at this
scale. Additionally the mapped geographies tend to be differ-
ent across initiatives, which makes it hard to develop intrinsic
quality measures that have validity across different regions of
the world. HOT does have its own validation process, how-
ever it is highly informal and not sufﬁciently consistent for
a rigorous evaluation. Yet there is an opportunity for further
studies to assess how coordination practices affect the quality
of contributions, and whether there are interactions between
quality concerns and contributor engagement.

This work could further be augmented with a broader under-
standing of the contributor experience, by means of partici-
pant observation or surveys. In particular there is currently
no published knowledge on the speciﬁc motivations of HOT
contributors, but also on the role of participant enjoyment,
contributor interactions, and user interfaces, each worthy of a
study of their own.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was funded by the EPSRC and the Intel Collab-
orative Research Institute: Cities. We are grateful to Andrew
Braye, Pete Masters, and countless others in the HOT com-
munity for their support. We would further like to thank the
reviewers for their feedback and suggestions.

REFERENCES
1. Albert Bandura. 1977. Self-efﬁcacy: toward a unifying
theory of behavioral change. Psychological review 84, 2
(1977), 191.

2. Yochai Benkler and Helen Nissenbaum. 2006.

Commons-based peer production and virtue. Journal of
Political Philosophy 14, 4 (2006), 394–419.

3. Nama R Budhathoki. 2010. Participants’ motivations to

contribute geographic information in an online
community. Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign.

4. Moira Burke, Cameron Marlow, and Thomas Lento. 2009.

Feed me: motivating newcomer contribution in social
network sites. In Proc. SIGCHI ’09. ACM, 945–954.
5. Boreum Choi, Kira Alexander, Robert E Kraut, and

John M Levine. 2010. Socialization tactics in Wikipedia
and their effects. In Proc. CSCW ’10. ACM, 107–116.
6. Giovanni Luca Ciampaglia, Dario Taraborelli, and San

Francisco. 2015. MoodBar: increasing new user retention
in Wikipedia through lightweight socialization. In Proc.
CSCW ’15. 734–742.

7. Liat Clark. 2014. The race to contain West Africa’s Ebola
outbreak - Wired UK. http://www.wired.co.uk/news/
archive/2014-04/11/ebola-open-street-map.
(2014).

8. E Gil Clary, Mark Snyder, Robert D Ridge, John

Copeland, Arthur A Stukas, Julie Haugen, and Peter
Miene. 1998. Understanding and assessing the
motivations of volunteers: a functional approach. Journal
of personality and social psychology 74, 6 (1998), 1516.

9. Melanie Eckle and João Porto de Albuquerque. 2015.

Quality assessment of remote mapping in OpenStreetMap
for disaster management purposes. ISCRAM 2015 (2015).

10. Rosta Farzan, Robert Kraut, Aditya Pal, and Joseph
Konstan. 2012. Socializing volunteers in an online
community: a ﬁeld experiment. In Proc. CSCW ’12.
ACM, 325–334.

11. Médecins Sans Frontières. 2014. MSF: the Missing Maps

project. (2014).
http://www.msf.org.uk/missing-maps-project.

117

SESSION: CROWD WORKERS

24. John W Payne. 1982. Contingent decision behavior.

Psychological Bulletin 92, 2 (1982), 382.

25. Lesandro Ponciano and Francisco Brasileiro. 2014.
Finding volunteers’ engagement proﬁles in human
computation for citizen science projects. Human
Computation 1, 2 (2014).

26. Lesandro Ponciano, Francisco Brasileiro, Robert

Simpson, and Arfon Smith. 2014. Volunteers’
engagement in human computation astronomy projects.
Computing in Science & Engineering (2014).

27. Missing Maps Project. 2015. Missing Maps - putting the

world’s vulnerable people on the map.
http://www.missingmaps.org. (2015).

28. Paul G Schervish and John J Havens. 1997. Social
participation and charitable giving: a multivariate
analysis. Voluntas: International Journal of Voluntary
and Nonproﬁt Organizations 8, 3 (1997), 235–260.

29. Manuela Schmidt, Silvia Klettner, and Renate Steinmann.
2013. Barriers for contributing to VGI projects. In Proc.
ICC ’13.

30. Robert Soden and Leysia Palen. 2014. From

crowdsourced mapping to community mapping: the
post-earthquake work of OpenStreetMap Haiti. (2014).
31. Sam Sturgis. 2014. Open-source mapping the world’s

most vulnerable regions will save lives. (2014).
http://www.citylab.com/design/2014/12/open-
source-mapping-the-worlds-most-vulnerable-
regions-will-save-lives/383337/

32. Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team. 2015. Featured

HOT projects. http://hotosm.org/projects. (2015).
33. Loxley Sijia Wang, Jilin Chen, Yuqing Ren, and John

Riedl. 2012. Searching for the Goldilocks zone. In Proc.
CSCW ’12. 989.

34. Clay Westrope, Robert Banick, and Mitch Levine. 2014.

Groundtruthing OpenStreetMap building damage
assessment. Procedia engineering 78 (2014), 29–39.

35. Andrea Wiggins and Kevin Crowston. 2011. From

conservation to crowdsourcing: A typology of citizen
science. Proc. HICSS ’11 (2011).

36. Robert E Wood. 1986. Task complexity: Deﬁnition of the
construct. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes 37, 1 (1986), 60–82.

12. R Stuart Geiger and Aaron Halfaker. 2013. Using edit

sessions to measure participation in Wikipedia. In Proc.
CSCW ’13.

13. Jeff Howe. 2006. The rise of crowdsourcing. Wired

magazine 14, 6 (2006).

14. Desislava Hristova, Giovanni Quattrone, Afra Mashhadi,

and Licia Capra. 2013. The life of the party: impact of
social mapping in OpenStreetMap. In Proc. ICWSM ’13.
234–243.

15. Shashank Khanna, Aishwarya Ratan, James Davis, and

William Thies. 2010. Evaluating and improving the
usability of Mechanical Turk for low-income workers in
India. In ACM DEV.

16. A Kittur, J Nickerson, and M Bernstein. 2013. The future

of crowd work. Proc. CSCW ’13 (2013).

17. Timo Lüge. 2014. GIS support for the MSF ebola
response in Guinea 2014. (2014). Médecins Sans
Frontières, Logistics Department.
http://preparecenter.org/resources/gis-support-
msf-ebola-reponse-guinea-2014.

18. Chris Michael. 2014. Missing Maps: nothing less than a
human genome project for cities - The Guardian. http://
www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/oct/06/missing-
maps-human-genome-project-unmapped-cities.
(2014).

19. Oded Nov. 2007. What motivates Wikipedians? Commun.

ACM 50, 11 (2007), 60–64.

20. OpenStreetMap. 2015a. 2014 West Africa Ebola

Response - OpenStreetMap Wiki.
https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/
2014_West_Africa_Ebola_Response. (2015).

21. OpenStreetMap. 2015b. Missing Maps Project -

OpenStreetMap Wiki. https://wiki.openstreetmap.
org/wiki/Missing_Maps_Project. (2015).
22. OpenStreetMap. 2015c. Typhoon Haiyan -

OpenStreetMap Wiki. https:
//wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Typhoon_Haiyan.
(2015).

23. Leysia Palen, Robert Soden, T Jennings Anderson, and

Mario Barrenechea. 2015. Success & scale in a
data-producing organization: the socio-technical
evolution of OpenStreetMap in response to humanitarian
events. In Proc. SIGCHI ’15. 4113–4122.

118

