CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Articulating Co-Design in Museums:  Reflections on Two 

Participatory Processes 

Luigina Ciolfi*, Gabriela Avramº, Laura Mayeº, Nick Dulake*, Mark T. Marshall*, Dick Van 

Dijk^, Fiona McDermottº 

*C3RI

Sheffield Hallam University 
153 Arundel Street, Sheffield 

S12NU, UK 

[L.Ciolfi; N.Dulake; 

M.Marshall]@shu.ac.uk 

ºInteraction Design Centre 

Dept. of CSIS 

University of Limerick 

Limerick, Ireland 

[Gabriela.Avram; Laura.Maye; 

Fiona.McDermott]@ul.ie 

^Waag Society 

De Waag 

Nieuwmarkt 4 

1012 CR Amsterdam, The 

Netherlands 

Dick@waag.org  

ABSTRACT 
In  this  paper  we  reflect  on  the  process  of  co-design  by 
detailing and comparing two strategies for the participatory 
development  of  interaction  concepts  and  prototypes  in  the 
context  of 
technologically-enhanced  museum  visiting 
experiences. While much work in CSCW, HCI and related 
disciplines has examined different role configurations in co-
design,  more  research  is  needed  on  examining  how 
collaborative design processes can unfold in different ways. 
Here  we  present  two  instances  of  co-design  of  museum 
visiting  aids,  one  stemming  from  an  open  brief,  another 
from an initial working prototype; we discuss the process in 
each  case  and  discuss  how  these  alternative  strategies 
presented  the  team  with  different  possibilities  as  well  as 
constraints,  and  led  to  different  patterns  of  collaboration 
within the design team. Finally, we draw a set of themes for 
discussion and reflection to inform and aid researchers and 
practitioners  participating  in  similar  co-design  processes, 
particularly in the domain of cultural heritage. 

Author Keywords 
Co-design; collaboration; participation; design process; 
museums; cultural heritage. 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous. 

INTRODUCTION 
This  paper  reflects  on  the  process  of  co-design,  and 
particularly  details  and  compares  two  different,  although 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom  use  is  granted  without  fee  provided  that  copies  are  not  made  or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and 
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by 
others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
 CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA  
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819967 

13

of 

and 

approach 

involving 

co-design 

designing 

developing 

related,  ways  to  conduct  participatory  activities  in  the 
context 
interactive 
technologies for museums and other heritage sites.  
The  work  was  conducted  as  part  of  a  large  collaborative 
project where tangible visitor experiences in museums and 
other heritage settings are designed and developed through 
a 
cultural  heritage 
professionals  (CHPs)  [23].  The  project’s  final  aim  is  to 
deliver  a  DIY  toolkit  to  empower  CHPs  to  design  and 
configure tangible installations in heritage settings. One of 
the main goals of the project is to reflect on the process of 
co-design  (particularly  within  cultural  heritage),  on  the 
multiple forms that participation and collaboration can take 
in  this  particular  setting,  and  to  produce  insights  on  how 
technology  design  and  adoption  for  this  domain  may  be 
facilitated by such an approach. 
Much  research  within  CSCW,  HCI  and  Participatory 
Design  has  examined  the  dynamics  of  participation  in 
design,  the  phases  and  techniques  of  the  PD  process,  and 
the  roles  that  different  groups  of  stakeholders,  facilitators 
and  coordinators  can  play  in  the  design  process  [2;  5;  27; 
17].  Here  we  focus  not  on  individual  roles,  but  on  the 
collaborative  process  itself:  how  different  patterns  of 
collaboration  occurred  in  two  different  sets  of  co-design 
activities  conducted  as  part  of  our  project.  We  detail  and 
discuss  how  each  unfolded,  and  the  issues  that  emerged 
around each process that was followed. The paper makes a 
contribution 
the  substantial  community  employing 
participatory  design  methodologies  in  CSCW  and  related 
disciplines,  furthering  the  knowledge  of  how  alternative 
participatory processes occur and unfold and can offer both 
possibilities and constraints.  
Within  our  project,  a  number  of  co-design  techniques  are 
being employed including brainstorming sessions, scripting, 
storyboarding, rapid prototyping, and making and tinkering 
workshops  towards  the  realisation  of  tangible  interactive 
installations for cultural heritage: the eventual goal of these 
activities  is  to  gain  an  in-depth  understanding  of  how 
cultural  heritage  professionals  and  institutions  design  and 

to 

to 

the 

thus 

interactive  experiences, 

develop 
richly  and 
collaboratively  inform  and  develop  the  design  of  the  DIY 
toolkit.  Furthermore, 
interaction  concepts  and 
prototypes  resulting  from  the  co-design  activities  will 
populate  the  toolkit:  these  concepts  and  prototypes  will 
provide examples and blueprints of interactive installations 
developed  by  cultural  heritage  professionals,  and  future 
users  will  be  able  to  appropriate  and  customise  them 
through the toolkit itself. The co-design activities involve a 
varied  group  of  participants: 
three  cultural  heritage 
institutions  are  full  partners  in  the  project,  together  with 
industrial  and  product  designers,  social  scientists  and 
technology  developers;  furthermore,  a  number  of  external 
collaborators  from  the  cultural  heritage  domain  (curators, 
educators, heritage volunteers, etc.) regularly join the team 
for  specific  participatory  activities  such  as  creative 
workshops, hands-on design sessions and technology trials. 
The process resembles, in many ways, the one described by 
Fuks et al. [14], but in our case the collaboration involved 
not only museum professionals, but also professionals from 
other partner institutions. 
In  this  paper  we  focus  on  two  particular  instances  of  co-
design  of  similar  tangible  interactive  heritage  experiences 
that  have  occurred  in  the  project  and  that,  however,  have 
followed two alternative processes: in the first instance, the 
development  of  interaction  concepts  and  of  a  prototype 
began with an open brief developed jointly by heritage and 
design partners on the basis of reflections on the needs and 
wants of a museum; in the second instance, a basic working 
prototype  developed  by  design  and  technical  partners  was 
chosen  out  of  several  by  the  participants  and  used  as 
inspiration  for  the  participatory  ideation  of  interaction 
concepts  for  other  heritage  settings.  There  is  a  connection 
between  these  two  activities  in  the  context  of  the  wider 
project: initially, the project’s workshops were exploratory 
in nature and had the goal of generating broad concepts and 
ideas  for  museums.  As  the  project  evolved,  we  began 
investigating the validity of our ideas and technologies, and 
their  appropriateness  beyond  our  team  and  for  a  wider 
cultural heritage audience. This was reflected in a co-design 
phase  that  mixed  divergent  and  convergent  activities  of 
creative  design,  the  former  exploring  open  themes  in  an 
unconstrained manner, the latter focusing on more specific 
design  goals.  These  two  types  of  activities  continued  for 
some months in parallel so to explore the opportunities and 
challenges offered by the two approaches. Parallel analysis 
of 
indeed  highlighted  key 
challenges, similarities and differences with regards to the 
process  of  design.  The  two  examples  we  describe  here 
occurred  at  different  times  in  the  overall  process  albeit 
within  the  same  co-design  phase  of  the  project,  and  they 
also intentionally adopted different processes, as they were 
also  meant  to  explore  two  different  ways  in  which  CHPs 
design. These two strategies were also employed to enable 
participation in design in the context of the overall project 
activities, and to offer material for reflection on how such 

the 

two  approaches  has 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

processes  can  be  facilitated  and  managed  as  we  progress 
towards  our  goal  of  developing  a  toolkit  for  cultural 
heritage professionals. 
DETAILING PARTICIPATION IN DESIGN 
An existing body of literature is dedicated to examining co-
design  processes,  which  have  been  widely  adopted  within 
CSCW  and  HCI  for  a  number  of  years  and  applied  to  a 
variety  of  domains  including  government  services  [1]; 
health services [8]; the design of persuasive technology [9]; 
the  design  of  new  technologies  for  children  [13];  and  the 
automobile  industry  [21].  However,  to  our  knowledge,  no 
direct  comparisons  have  been  made  between  alternative 
processes  used  and  explored  within  the  same  design  and 
development  project.  Existing  work  has  reflected  on  the 
nature  of  participation  in  design  [27;  17],  examining  the 
participants’  multiple  forms  of  involvement  and  the  role 
that  a  facilitator  can  take  in  participatory  activities,  from 
coordinating,  to  observing,  to  full  participation.  Other 
studies have explored methods and approaches to co-design 
for  successful  user  involvement  and  understanding  [5;  16; 
19] while other research has identified which design goal is
best met by different techniques, particularly in the specific 
domain of designing technologies for children [13].  
The body of work on PD involving children has generated 
substantial knowledge on the role that participants can play 
in 
the  design  process  as  part  of  various  co-design 
techniques  [13].  Druin’s  “onion  model”  focuses  on 
participants’  roles  and  is  an  approach  to  unpacking  the 
process  of  PD  that  resonates  with  other  research  on 
detailing  roles,  power  and  decision-making  in  PD  such  as 
[6; 27]. Druin, however, elaborates further on the model to 
outline  dimensions  of  participants’  involvement  in  the 
technology  design  process  for  each  role:  relationship  to 
developers;  relationship  to  technology;  and  goals  for 
inquiry.  The  second  dimension  is  particularly  relevant  for 
our work as it articulates that the participant’s relationship 
to technology “can range from ideas to prototypes to fully 
developed products” [13], thus linking to complex shifts in 
the roles that participants play, from simple users to fully-
fledged co-designers.  
Similarly, in [6] Bratteteig and Wagner detail the complex 
power  relationships  and  the  intricacies  of  the  decision-
making  process  that  characterise  and  shape  participatory 
projects.  Bratteteig  and  Wagner  analyse  different  cases 
through  a  practice-focused  conceptual  lens  on  decision-
making,  revealing  how  various  factors  in  the  design  team 
and in the broader context of a project are at play in the way 
crucial decisions are taken during the co-design flow. 
Indeed,  these  significant  contributions  have  told  us  much 
about  the  articulation  of  roles  and  relationships  in  PD. 
However  little  has  been  said  about  the  ways  in  which  the 
collaboration processes unfold within the same frame, about 
how  the  activities  can  lead  to  different  design  outcomes, 
and about the possibilities that ensue from the process. 

14

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

to 

to  represent 

Many  co-design  projects  commence  with  an  open  and 
flexible  brief,  with  the  goal  of  forming  relationships  and 
understandings  of  practices,  their  context  and  possible 
solutions to existing challenges [6; 17; 20]. Researchers in 
these cases apply various kinds of exploratory techniques as 
a  means 
facilitate  collaboration  amongst  multi-
disciplinary groups, such as: exploratory design games [3]; 
cultural  probes  as  a  means 
the  users’ 
environment  and  context  in  an  open,  inspiring  way  [15]; 
inspiration  workshops  around  examples  of  interaction 
concepts  and  prototypes  [16];  and  open-ended,  flexible 
scenarios  [26].  Techniques  applied  at  this  stage  of  design 
are dependent on the level of information that is required. 
These approaches often lead to convergent design ideas and 
shared understandings of users’ challenges and desires that 
potential interactive systems can support.  
As well as cases where the process of co-design originates 
from a brief that is often jointly developed within the group 
of participants as in the examples above, many researchers 
have also explored how digital and interactive technologies 
can  be  used  as  prompts, 
tools,  or  development 
environments in the design process. Reasons for using such 
technologies in co-design are varied: they can be based on 
the day-to-day influence they have on the users [19]; their 
potential  for  unearthing  creative  solutions  [5;  22];  as  a 
motivational  factor  for  getting  involved  in  the  co-design 
process  [13]  and  to  demonstrate  existing  prototypes  and 
discuss  potentials  for  re-design  [22;  17].  For  example, 
researchers have explored how technological prototypes can 
be  used  as  probes,  forming  rough  design  concepts  for 
developing tools for urban renewal and placing them in the 
hands  of  users,  leading  to  unexpected  uses  and  ideas  for 
novel technology solutions [22]. Another example includes 
the  use  of  online  journals  by  very  young  design  partners 
(children),  who  were  hesitant  to  use  paper  and  pencil  to 
record  design  ideas,  but  who  embraced  the  process  of 
recording ideas through the means of technology enhanced, 
digital journals [13]. 
Regarding the domain we address in this paper, co-design 
methods and techniques have been deployed in the design 
of technology for cultural heritage as means to create novel 
museum engagement programmes and exhibitions. Some of 
these  cases  have  explored  means  for  applying  co-design 
effectively with particular user groups [2; 25; 28].  In many 
of  these  instances,  CHPs,  visitors  and  designers  were 
involved, beginning with a brief for design and arriving at a 
technological  solution  for  interacting  and  engaging  with 
museum collections and exhibitions. In other instances, the 
starting  point  was  technology-driven;  for  instance,  this 
approach  was  adopted  to  explore  how  the  technologies 
children use on a day-to- day basis can influence the design 
of  an  interactive  exhibition  [10].  Existing  research  has 
explored  these  approaches  separately,  but  it  has  not, 
however,  addressed  how  they  relate  to  each  other,  and 
particularly  how  they  can  serve  different  purposes  and 

15

support  different  forms  of  participation  within  the  same 
complex design process and project team.  
In  the  following  sections  we  present  and  discuss  two 
examples. In the first, the co-design activities that led to the 
realisation  and  testing  of  a  prototype  were  kick-started  by 
an  open  brief,  where  the  particular  theme  for  the  exercise 
was  proposed  by  museum  partners  after  a  process  of 
reflection on their institution’s requirements. In the second 
example,  the  co-design  activities  started  from  an  already 
existing  technology  prototype,  which  was  then  adapted, 
appropriated,  modified  and  contextualised  for  a  museum 
setting  by  design  participants.  Both  instances  revolve 
around  a  similar  interactional  need:  that  of  a  lightweight 
way to direct visitors around a museum. We will describe 
our approach to co-design and each example in detail in the 
following sections. 

co-design 

strategy, 

in  order 

involving  participants  from 

CO-DESIGN METHODOLOGY 
As part of the project, our remit as partners is to participate 
in,  organise  and  facilitate  a  series  of  co-design  activities 
with 
the  cultural  heritage  partners  and  collaborators 
involved. Here we provide a brief description of the overall 
project 
to  properly 
contextualise the two examples we will subsequently focus 
on. In the first 18 months of the project (February 2013 – 
July 2014), we conducted a series of 5 large-scale co-design 
workshops 
the  3  partner 
museums,  as  well  as  other  designers,  social  scientists  and 
technologists  from  within  the  project  consortium.  The 
facilitators had also visited and studied the 3 project partner 
museums,  to  gain  a  thorough  understanding  of  these 
institutions, their goals in engaging visitors, their audiences 
and  the  different  challenges  they  face  in  presenting  their 
collections. In addition to these, in the same period a further 
7  co-design  sessions  were  organised  and  facilitated  by 
various consortium partners involving representatives from 
collaborating  cultural  heritage  institutions  from  their  local 
areas.  
With  regard  to  scheduling  these  activities,  the  project 
consortium co-design workshops were interspersed with the 
local co-design sessions so that we could frame in a broader 
way  how  experiences  with  cultural  heritage  sites  and 
exhibits could be enhanced, and to develop deeper insights 
into  appropriate  co-design  methods  with  the  cultural 
heritage  professionals  (CHPs)  that  are  part  of  the  project 
team.  The  duration  of  the  workshops  varied  from  several 
weeks  (with  activities  involving  partner  museums  taking 
place on several days a week), to 2-3 days (as in the case of 
some of the consortium-wide events), to a full working day 
(approximately  7  hours).  The  workshops  involving  local 
participants  have  tended  to  be  shorter,  due  to  the  limited 
availability  of  CHPs  who  are  not  full  partners  in  our 
project. 
A  number  of  techniques  were  used  during  the  various 
events:  workshops  held  earlier  on  in  the  project  included 
more  open-ended  activities  such  as  brainstorming  around 

(such  as 

keywords  and  around  existing  examples  from  CHPs 
practice,  as  well  as  rapid  prototyping  and  tinkering 
exercises  using  hardware  platforms 
.Net 
Gadgeteer),  so 
that  all  participants  could  familiarise 
themselves  with  a  set  of  technologies  and  with  platforms 
for  rapid  prototyping,  thus  encouraging  them  to  imagine 
how  interactive  installations  could  be  used  to  enhance 
visitor experiences at cultural heritage institutions.  
Later workshops were more focused on the needs of certain 
museums,  and  on  specific  interaction  concepts  that  had 
emerged  during  discussions  with  the  co-design  team  and 
that  were  then  further  developed.  Participants  were  also 
involved  in  activities  such  as  storyboarding,  scripting  and 
realising  short  stop-motion  animations  representing  a 
tangible interaction scenario or concept. 
As we mentioned briefly above, different types of activities 
were  run  in  the  co-design  phase  this  papers  refers  to 
through  convergent  and  divergent  moments  of  design 
exploration.  They  thus  intentionally  adopted  different 
processes  as  they  were  meant  to  explore  slightly  different 
issues and different approaches that the CHPs adopted for 
the design of interactive visitor experiences.  
The activity briefs ranged from broad and exploratory (for 
example “Envisage visitor interactions that would enhance 
their experience at your museum”), to highly focused ones 
(for  example,  “Describe  the  workflow  of  a  Cultural 
Heritage Professional building an interactive installation”). 
This  depended  on  the  theme  and  goals  of  each  workshop, 
and  on  the  specific  participants  attending,  alternating 
divergent and convergent phases of design exploration. For 
a number of the workshops, we asked the CHPs to prepare 
beforehand,  by  choosing  material 
their  own 
institutions  (such  as  objects,  documentation,  and  visitor 
engagement  tools  such  as  educational  toolkits)  to  be  used 
during  certain  activities  at  the  workshops.  On  other 
occasions,  the  facilitators  chose  the  material  to  be  used 
during 
the 
participants. 
As we have explained in the introduction to this paper, the 
overall  goal  of  our  project  is  to  empower  CHPs  to  design 
their  own  tangible  interactive  experiences  for  visitors, 
therefore  we  have  a  strong  focus  on  them  as  primary 
stakeholders  in  co-design  and  we  wished  to  explore  their 
design expertise and their knowledge of visitor engagement. 
The  workshops  explored  the  ways  in  which  CHPs  design 
with  other  collaborators  when  planning  exhibitions. 
Furthermore,  the  design  phase  is  not  only  about  the 
interaction/interactivity  envisioned,  but  also  a  way  for 
CHPs  to  think  about  the  content  relating  to  an  exhibit. 
Visitors  are  very  seldom  included  in  this  process  in  their 
current  practice  [20].  Therefore,  while  we  have  involved 
heritage  visitors  in  other  project  activities,  the  series  of 
workshops  that  this  paper  refers  to  was  focused  on 
unearthing how CHPs make design decisions regarding the 
functionality, interactivity and role that technology can play 

the  workshops  and 

from 

then  presented 

it 

to 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

in an exhibit – thus building (as well as design prototypes) 
shared  representations  of  future  users’  practices,  as 
described in [6, p. 15]. 
All  these  activities  helped  us  to  better  understand  how 
participants with different profiles and goals co-create, and 
which  limitations  and  barriers  have  to  be  considered  and 
possibly removed to support a more engaging and enjoyable 
co-design process for cultural heritage professionals. Some 
of  the  local  activities  were  organized  as  one-off  events, 
while others occurred on a regular basis.  
Throughout all the workshops, designated members of the 
project team carried out observations in order to document 
the process and the involvement of all the participants. The 
sessions  were  documented  through  extensive  note  and 
photo taking, as well as through video recordings whenever 
possible. The data collected has been used to reflect on the 
process adopted, to refine the project’s co-design strategy, 
and  to  plan  for  future  activities.  From  this  variegated  set, 
we  will  now  focus  specifically  on  two  instances  of  co-
design activities in order to describe for each the details of 
the  process  and  to  reflect  on  two  different  approaches  for 
engaging participants and for developing interaction ideas. 
The  two  examples  are  part  of  the  broader  strategy  for  co-
design  that  we  have  outlined  in  this  section,  and  the 
trajectories  in  terms  of  ideation,  engagement  and  decision 
making that each portrays are interconnected.  
In our analysis, we want to focus on each specific case to 
highlight  how  different  ways  to  frame  co-design  activities 
lead to different processes. For each example, we detail the 
activities  conducted,  the  knowledge  and  skills  shared  and 
employed by the co-design team, and how the roles of the 
participants shaped the process. We will then discuss how 
the different processes (summarised in Figure 7) supported 
the  making  and  shaping  of  collaborative  design  decisions, 
particularly  with  respect  to  the  use  of  technological 
prototypes. Our analysis is not aiming to identify which of 
the  two  approaches  is  more  effective  or  successful,  but 
rather  to  illuminate  how  different  processes  may  unfold 
within  the  same  participation  frame,  and  to  point  out  to  a 
number  of  issues  and  concerns  emerging  from  these 
processes in varying ways. In describing the examples, we 
will  use  fictional  names  to  refer  to  participants  so  to 
preserve anonymity. 

EXAMPLE 1 - STARTING FROM AN OPEN BRIEF 
The  majority  of  the  co-design  workshops  started  with  a 
brief  that  focused  on  artefacts,  exhibitions  or  challenges 
that  the  partner  museums  brought  to  the  table.  As  a  rule, 
there  was  always  a  museum  representative 
in  each 
workshop working sub-group. 
The first exemplar we present here involved the team from 
one  design  partner  institution  working  together  with  the 
team of a partner science museum in the same country. The 
lead  designer,  Richard,  visited  the  museum  and  held  an 
initial session with two of the cultural heritage professionals 

16

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

at the museum, Henry and Francis, during April 2013. The 
discussion revolved around the key challenges the museum 
had been encountering: it became apparent that the museum 
was  focusing  on  visitors  “learning  through  a  complete 
experience” (as Henry explained), and not on the collection 
itself.  As  a  science  museum,  it  already  included  a  large 
number  of  interactive  installations  as  part  of  exhibits,  and 
the ambition of the CHPs at the museum was not to add yet 
another exhibit, but to interconnect the existing exhibits in 
personalized  thematic  tours  that  would  further  engage 
visitors  –  mainly  schools  and  families  with  children -  and 
contribute to the overall museum experience. 
One of the challenges identified by Henry, Francis and their 
colleagues was making way finding in the museum easier, 
and  providing  some  guidance  to  visitors  interested  in 
specific themes, as the space occupied is vast and densely 
populated  with  artefacts  and  exhibits.  The  idea  of  an 
augmented compass as a tool for way finding emerged from 
this discussion (e.g. a compass that would not just provide 
directions 
the  user,  but  also  additional  digital 
information),  and  all  the  participants  agreed  that  it  should 
be  turned  into  a  physical  prototype  for  further  creative 
exploration.  
At the following co-design session in May, the design team 
led by Richard presented the museum team a non-functional 
prototype  of  the  compass  for  discussion  and  elaboration 
(Figure 1).  

to 

Figure 1. The augmented Compass concept 

Three  sub-groups  were  formed,  each  including  at  least  a 
designer  and  a  cultural  heritage  professional.  Each  sub-
group  then  moved  through  the  museum  holding  the 
compass and brainstormed about its possible functionalities 
in the physical context of the exhibits. The designers acted 
as  facilitators,  stepping  back  and  allowing  the  CHPs  to 
explore  and  apply  the  concept  according  to  their  own 
vision,  museum  mission,  content  and  audience(s),  and  to 
make contributions and suggestions as to how the concept 
could  be  further  developed  into  a  functional  prototype 
(Figure 2).  
The  CHPs  formed  a  plethora  of  ideas  that  were  further 
investigated by the whole group through scenario-building 
and low-fidelity prototyping after the in situ bodystorming. 

17

Figure 2: One co-design group exploring the compass as 

a way-finding device 

The most well developed scenario was based on the idea for 
a  self-guided  tour:  “Travel  around  the  world  in  80 
minutes”. The CHPs, working together with the designers, 
suggested  that  each  visitor  would  receive  an  augmented 
compass when entering the museum, getting the chance to 
configure  it  according  to  their  preferences.  Their  chosen 
guide  appearing  on  the  face  of  the  compass  could  be,  as 
Henry put it: “a zen monk, a pizza delivery driver, or even 
Superman”.  Visitors  could  link/connect  their  compass  to 
those  of  co-visitors,  allowing  for  shared  experiences.  The 
chosen character would come to life inside the compass and 
give the visitor cues (both text and images) about where to 
go  next  on  their  journey.  As  the  visitor  approached  an 
exhibit  on  his  route  (chosen  based  on  his  profile  and  the 
type of guide selected), the compass needle would indicate 
it and the compass would vibrate slightly. When in front of 
the  exhibit,  the  compass  would  be  used  for  projecting  an 
extra  layer  of  information  on  the  closest  available  white 
surface.  Another  idea  emerged  was  that  of  visitors  being 
able  to  choose  between  a  guided  tour  (like  the  one 
described above), an assignment mode (for school visits) or 
a game mode. The compass would be able to activate itself 
when  the  user  opens  its  lid.  Different  points  of  interest  or 
artefacts  would  hold  an  assignment  for  the  visitor  or 
provide  a  hint  for  finding  the  next  artefact  on  the  route. 
Based  on  the  answers  provided  and  the  route  taken,  the 
compass  could  reveal  a  video  or  a  cipher  allowing  the 
opening  of  a  special  room  or  treasure  chest,  possibly 
through the united efforts of co-visitors. 
In  the  scenario  evaluation  discussion,  the  compass  was 
valued for tackling the way finding challenges, providing a 
way  to  adapt  to  the  visitor’s  preferences  and  to  store  the 
visit’s footprint.  
When 
to  developing  a  functional  compass 
it  came 
prototype, Richard and his design team discussed building 
it: identifying a suitable round screen, embedding required 
processing power, battery needed and so on. Moreover, the 
compass  concept  was  further  critiqued  as  it  could  only 
show  the  connections  between  objects  in  the  museum 
space,  with 
for  providing  additional 
information.  Ensuring  that  visitor  attention  would  remain 
on the museum objects rather than the device, the decision 

scope 

little 

was  made  to  add  Augmented  Reality  content  on  a  screen 
(triggered  by  the  device’s  ability  to  recognise  museum 
artefacts), and to adopt a shape that would put visitors in an 
active position (similar to that of researchers or collectors, 
rather than ‘just’ consumers). The chosen form factor was 
that  of  a  magnifying  glass.  As  time  was  an  issue,  they 
decided  that  the  quickest  way  to  offer  the  required 
functionalities  would  be  to  encase  a  smartphone  into  a 
round  wooden  frame,  as  it  offered  all  that  was  needed  in 
terms  of  functionality  (Figure  3).  By  developing  the 
original concept and technically realising the prototype, the 
original compass turned into the form factor of a loupe. The 
screen  is  larger  and  the  handle  allows  visitors  to  have  a 
strong  grip  on  it  and  point  it  at  artefacts  in  a  comfortable 
way. The loupe is a magnifying glass visually augmenting 
objects or locations in the exhibition space, and providing 
clues  to  visitors  for  moving  to  the  next  point  of  a 
recommended  trajectory:  visitors  use  the  loupe  to  view 
particular objects or location markers; the device recognises 
these  and  provides  visitors  with  content  about  them  and 
with  directions 
is 
displayed on its face.  

to  related  objects/locations,  which 

Figure 3: The Loupe prototype 

An  in  situ  evaluation  of  the  Loupe  with  museum  visitors 
was  jointly  planned  and  conducted  by  Henry,  Francis  and 
Richard  (Figure  4).  Further  development  of  the  prototype 
and its evaluation with visitors within the museum allowed 
Francis, Henry and their museum team to identify some key 
concerns about its effectiveness.   

Figure 4: Testing the Loupe with museum visitors 

18

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

-  STARTING  FROM  A  WORKING 

For instance, Henry, who participated in the design of the 
Loupe  from  the  very  beginning,  voiced  his  doubts  about 
some of the conceptual aspects of the prototype when it was 
tested  in  the  museum,  describing  that  a  loupe  may  not  be 
the best metaphor for a way finding tool and that the device 
appears more to distract attention from the real objects than 
to  enhance  the  visitor’s  interaction  with  the  objects  on 
display.  
Overall,  this  first  example  presented  a  process  that  had 
unfolded  from  an  open-ended  brief,  included  several 
iterations of brainstorming, prototyping and evaluation, and 
was  concluded  with  a  functioning  prototype  tested  with 
museum visitors. We now describe a second example. 
EXAMPLE  2 
PROTOTYPE 
In  a  convergent  moment  of  the  co-design  process,  we 
explored  how  some  of  the  prototypes  developed  earlier 
(through processes similar to that of the Loupe) could be re-
appropriated to support other museum experiences. 
In November 2013, a one day long workshop was organised 
by the same design partner institution with 6 CHPs from 5 
collaborating  museums,  some  of  which  outside  of  the 
project consortium, with foci ranging from archaeology to 
history and science. Richard and Henry participated also in 
this second activity. Each of the CHPs participating in the 
workshop  brought  with  them  a  museum  artefact  (either 
replica or authentic) from their institution. Choosing one of 
5  exploratory  prototypes  that  the  project  had  built,  the 
CHPs,  working  in  groups  together  with  designers  and 
technologists, were encouraged to build on their knowledge 
of  the  museum  artefacts  and  on  their  ideas  for  visitor 
engagement  in  their  own  museum  to  envision  interactive 
experiences for visitors. The CHPs were also asked to think 
about how the prototypes could be physically re-designed -
in  terms  of  form  factor  and  material  -  to  suit  their  needs. 
Every  CHP  collaborated  with  one  of  the  designers  of  the 
exploratory prototype he/she had chosen. Six use cases for 
the prototypes were developed during the workshop; all the 
use cases were showcased and documented at the end of the 
co-design  session.  The  use  cases 
included:  creating 
personalised  museum  experiences;  generating  guided  and 
way finding experiences; and augmenting physical museum 
artefacts with digital information. The theme of way finding 
and  subtly  guiding  visitors  around  heritage  sites  had  been 
voiced  repeatedly  by  all  the  museum  partners  well  before 
the design and realisation of the Loupe. A number of other 
exploratory prototypes addressing this need were developed 
in parallel as a result. In this section, we will describe how 
one specific exploratory prototype (the Way Detector) was 
repurposed  to  support  a  way  finding  experience  at  a 
particular museum. 
The  Way  Detector  (Figure  5)  is  a  white,  oval-shaped 
device.  Its  physical  form  was  designed  to  be  comfortably 
held  in  one’s  hand  and  to  promote  as  little  design 
association with other objects as possible. It guides visitors 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

using  haptic  feedback,  following  a  simple  “hot  or  cold” 
metaphor: as a visitor approaches an artefact or narrative of 
interest,  the  Way  Detector  vibrates  faster  as  a  means  to 
indicate that a point of interest is getting nearer. The Way 
Detector  also  contains  an  NFC  tag,  which  can  be  used  to 
activate personalised content within the museum. When the 
Way  Detector  is  placed  on  top  of  an  NFC  reader 
information  is  read  from  the  tag  and  used  to  trigger  text, 
images,  audio  or  video  content.  At  this  design  workshop, 
speakers  and  tablet  screens  were  available  for  presenting 
content.  The  Way  Detector  was  presented  to  the  cultural 
heritage  professionals  in  the  workshop  as  the  “Egg”:  a 
simple  way-finding  device  that  could  be  used  to  create 
paths for visitors around the museum. 

 

 

Figure 5. The Way Detector 

the  house  during 

Julie,  a  CHP  working  in  a  historic  house  museum,  was 
immediately attracted by the simple appearance of the Way 
Detector;  she  was  interested  in  exploring  the  device  as  a 
means  to  address  the  need  for  lightweight  way  finding  at 
her institution. She talked with the rest of the group about 
the historic house she works in and the object she chose to 
bring  from  her  collection:  a  pie  dish  from  the  nineteenth 
century.  The  historic  house  collection  spans  two  floors; 
however,  visitors  rarely  take  time  to  explore  both  areas. 
Julie felt that the Way Detector could be used not only to 
guide visitors through the history of the making of the pie 
dish, but also to encourage visitors to explore the upstairs 
and  downstairs  of 
their  visit.  In 
collaboration with her team, Julie developed a use case for 
the  Way  Detector  addressing  these  issues.  The  team 
included four other participants: Niall, one of the designers 
of the Way Detector; Mary and Linda, two other designers 
within the project; and Matt, a cultural heritage professional 
from  a  science  museum.  The  team  collaboratively  drafted 
this  scenario  through  sketches  and  storyboards;  once  the 
concept  was  drafted,  the  Way  Detector  prototype  was 
partially modified to mirror the scenario.  
Discussions  began  with  the  team,  brainstorming  potential 
uses  for  the  Way  Detector  in  the  historic  house,  with  the 
prototype  designer,  Niall,  sketching  these  ideas  on  paper 
(Figure  6).  Everyone  in  the  group  had  an  input  in  the 
brainstorming  process:  Julie  shared  some  videos,  original 
house menus, pictures and digital recipe files that described 
how the pie dish was made and used with the group; Niall 
began sketching potential paths in the museum; and all the 
rest  of  the  participants  contributed  ideas  for  the  intended 
scenario.  Together  with 
they 

the  other  co-designers, 

discussed  a  potential  path  for  the  visitors  to  take:  the 
visitors  would  begin  their  journey  in  the  pantry  with  the 
Way  Detector  guiding  them  through  the  kitchen  area 
located  downstairs  in  the  house.  Julie  suggested  that  the 
first point of interest should describe the recipe of the pie to 
the  visitor.  Niall  then  discussed  the  potential  journey  the 
visitor would take in the kitchen area, where the focus was 
on how the pie was made. He was then inspired by some of 
the  digital  content  that  Julie  had  presented,  stating  that 
some of it could be edited to show the recipe for the pie and 
demonstrate how it was made. 
The Way Detector prototype was meant as a “blank canvas” 
in terms of form factor: it was a means to demonstrate the 
functionality  of  design  concept  without 
imposing  a 
particular  look  and  feel,  a  sort  of  template  that  could  be 
modified  by  the  participants.  All  the  same,  as  the  group 
were  storyboarding  the  scenario  for  the  Way  Detector,  it 
was initially challenging to encourage Julie to think about 
the  design  beyond  its  current  physical  appearance.  It  was 
suggested that the physical design could be a replica of the 
pie dish itself – the object that Julie brought with her to the
design workshop. Niall also proposed other forms, such as 
wearable  garment  (hat,  bag,  etc.).  However,  Julie  felt  that 
this could have a negative effect on the visitors’ experience: 
visitors  might  be  more  concerned  about 
their  own 
appearance  when  wearing  a  hat  than  about  the  visit; 
therefore, they may be more willing to hold something like 
the  pie  dish.  Furthermore,  it  was  also  challenging  initially 
to  encourage  Julie  to  suggest  extra  functionality  for  the 
prototype.  Mary  then  suggested  that  the  Way  Detector 
could  also  make  a 
that  would 
communicate  whenever  the  pie  was  ready.  Afterwards, 
Julie  began  suggesting  new 
the  workshop 
progressed,  suggesting  that  smells  could  also  be  added  so 
the  visitors  could  have  a  multi-sensory  experience  of  the 
pie-making process. 

timer-like 

sound 

ideas  as 

 

Figure 6. Niall and Julie working on the pie dish 
scenario: sketching ideas (left) and choosing digital 

content (right) 

The development of the use case scenario adapting the Way 
Detector  to  Julie’s  museum  led  to  several  discussions, 
particularly  with  how  content  would  be  presented  to 
visitors. The designers began discussing ideas for physical 
interaction  with  museum  objects:  for  example,  discussing 
how  by  placing  the  Way  Detector  on  the  kitchen  table  or 
another  surface,  relevant  information  about  the  objects 
related  to  that  space  would  be  given  to  the  visitors. 
However, Julie noted that this was not possible because all 

19

of the objects including the kitchen table were original and 
that  visitors  would  not  be  allowed  to  directly  touch  the 
objects or place anything on them. Julie was also concerned 
with using screens in conjunction with the Way Detector to 
present  the  content  to  visitors:  she  felt  this  would  impose 
too  much  on  the  visitors’  experiences  of  the  museum 
objects.  However,  she  was  not  quite  sure  about  how  to 
present content without screen technology. Niall and Mary 
inspired  Julie  to  think  of  other  options  to  present  content, 
including  the  use  of  a  projector  lamp  that  accompanied 
another  prototype  presented  at 
the  same  workshop. 
Nevertheless,  Julie  felt  this  technology  was  inappropriate 
due  to  power  issues  within  the  museum.  In  the  end,  the 
group agreed that the story of the pie could be projected on 
a glass plate; therefore, complementing the museum’s ethos 
and goals.  
As  soon  as  the  use  case  scenario  for  the  prototype  was 
developed,  the  Way  Detector  was  modified  to  reflect  this 
scenario.  Although  Julie  was  not  actively  involved  in 
technically  modifying  the  prototype,  she  was  involved  in 
selecting the digital content that would be presented to the 
visitors  (Figure  6).  Julie  and  Mary  explored  together  an 
open  source  sound  database  for  sounds  that  would  be 
appropriate for the setting and the use case concept. Niall’s 
responsibility was to implement the ideas generated by the 
group: he edited the digital content and linked it to the code 
operating the Way Detector. Unlike during the development 
of  the  use  case  scenario,  there  wasn’t  too  much  dialogue 
between the members of the group at this stage, each being 
busy  with  their  specific  tasks:  discussions  occurred  only 
when  content  was  chosen,  edited,  or  applied  to  the 
prototype.  
Due  to  time  constraints,  not  all  of  the  ideas  formulated  in 
the use case scenario were translated into practice when the 
prototype  was  modified:  such  as,  for  example, 
the 
projections on glass plates. However, the pie dish scenario 
using the modified Way Detector was demonstrated to the 
other participants at the end of the workshop. 

DISCUSSION 
The descriptions of the examples we have provided in the 
previous  sections  highlight,  first  of  all,  how  the  two 
processes  are  part  of  a  larger  co-design  strategy  and  are 
interconnected:  the  Loupe  example  which  was  developed 
earlier  in  the  co-design  phase  of  convergent/divergent 
exploration,  was  spread  out  in  a  longer  time-frame  and 
involved  participants  only  from  the  project  team.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  Way  Detector  example  took  place  later  in 
the 
involved  also  external 
collaborators and was framed by the much shorter time of a 
one-day  event.  The  two  co-design  processes  (which  are 
summarised  in  Figure  7)  were  planned  and  executed  with 
consideration of these different constraints, and the choice 
of  working  with  an  open-ended  brief  vs.  an  existing 
prototype  reflected  also  the  knowledge  that  the  project 
team, and the workshop facilitators in particular, had gained 

same  co-design  phase, 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

the 

of  the  domain  and  of  the  needs  of  cultural  heritage 
institutions to engage visitors.  
With  this  in  mind,  we  now  discuss  further  what  we  have 
gleaned  from  each  example  regarding  how 
two 
processes unfolded, the challenges of each, which insights 
were best given by which strategy, how the design idea was 
developed in each case, how the participants’ contributions 
to  the  design  concepts  emerged  and  what  were  the 
dynamics of collaboration and participation in each of the 2 
cases.  The  themes  of  discussion  here  have  emerged 
following extensive thematic analysis of the qualitative data 
as  collected  throughout  the  entirety  of  the  co-design 
activities.  We  see  the  themes  of  discussion  and  the  open 
questions  they  address  as  useful  categories  that  other 
CSCW  researchers  can  also  use  for  reflecting  on  and 
refining the co-design process and for preparing to facilitate 
collaborative design activities. 

 

Figure 7. Overview of the two co-design processes 

 
Skills and Knowledge Shared 
How  do  participants  share  different  skills  and  knowledge 
with  collaborators  when  designing  using 
low-tech 
representations  compared  to  high-tech  prototypes?  Co-
design as a discipline has referred to the concept of sharing 
in  various  ways.  For  example,  it  can  refer  to  sharing 
knowledge  required  for  empowering  other  stakeholders, 
e.g. enabling them to contribute further, or differently in the 
design process [7]. Sharing may also be defined as part of 
the  mutual 
learning  process,  whereby  professional 
designers  learn  more  about  the  context  and  needs  of  the 
other  stakeholders,  and  conversely 
their  needs  and 
constraints are made clear [24]. Mutual learning is the only 
way in which mutual respect can be achieved between the 
different  stakeholders;  this  is  imperative  for  maintaining 
trust  in  sharing  information  and  knowledge  effectively 
within co-design teams.  
Speaking of sharing, we refer here to how mutual learning 
progressed during both examples of the co-design process. 
We  detail  how  knowledge  and  information  were  shared 
between the CHPs, designers and technologists, keeping in 

20

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

mind  the  opportunities  provided  for  such  sharing  in  each 
kind  of  co-design  activity.  In  the  Loupe  example,  at  first, 
the  focus  was  on  low-tech  design  techniques  to  allow  the 
CHPs  to  present  their  ideas,  rather  than  on  the  technical 
requirements to realise them. Participants were encouraged 
to come up with new concepts without worrying about what 
is  technologically  possible  and  what  is  not.  For  example, 
the  original  compass  concept  involved  a  round  screen  to 
show a chosen guiding character indicating a direction and 
clues  to  the  next  museum  exhibit,  but  also  included  the 
ability  to  project  information  on  white  surfaces  in  the 
museum.  At  this  point  in  the  process,  designers  and 
technologists refrained from expressing concerns about how 
this  could  be  technically  built  in  the  time  available, 
preferring  to  encourage  the  CHPs  to  express  their  ideas 
freely.  However,  about  halfway  through  the  process,  the 
designers had to find a practical solution to implement the 
compass  idea  at  least  partially,  and  this  saw  the  concept 
transformed into a different form factor, that of the Loupe, 
which  became  the  focus  of  the  process  and  of  subsequent 
developments  and  adjustments  by 
team. 
Paraphrasing  Ehn  &  Kyng,  coloured  cardboard  compasses 
do  not  become  magic  guiding  instruments  by  themselves. 
The  needs  and  constraints  shaping  the  design  had  to  be 
communicated and made understood by the rest of the team. 
The advantage is that “low fi mockups lend themselves to 
collaborative modifications” [12].  
In the second example, the CHPs could see and understand 
from the beginning how the Way Detector worked and what 
possibilities it offered. The technical designers were first to 
share their knowledge and to offer their skills at modifying 
the  prototype  in  whatever  way  the  CHPs  wished.  Clarity 
regarding  the  prototype’s  features  then  enabled  Julie  and 
the rest of the team to develop the scenario focusing on the 
content,  form  factor  and  context  of  use.  Furthermore,  the 
CHPs  also  experienced  first-hand  how 
technological 
solutions can be adapted quickly and in real time to fit their 
own  needs,  and  also  acquired  the  ability  to  envisage  how 
their  existing  digital  content  can  be  re-purposed  to  suit 
these  scenarios.  The  specialised  knowledge  of  the  CHPs 
was shared not only in the initial phases of the discussion 
(e.g.  Julie’s  description  of  the  historic  house),  but  also 
during 
the  scenario  (e.g.  Julie 
explaining  that  the  prototype  could  not  be  directly  placed 
on a table in the house). 

the  development  of 

the  entire 

in 

these  examples, 

Indeed, 
the  process  of  sharing 
knowledge  and  skills  varied  greatly.  However,  it  is 
interesting to see that in both cases the CHPs were eager to 
contribute  their  professional  knowledge  to  inform  the 
design  during  all 
the  activity.  Mutual 
understanding  and  learning  was  built  during  all  stages  of 
the  activity  in  both  scenarios.  Additionally,  while  the 
designers  and  technologists  learned  about  the  challenges 
and  the  practices  of  CHPs,  the  CHPs  had  the  chance  to 
learn  about  co-design  and  acquire  new  collaborative 

stages  of 

21

a 

methods and techniques, as well as a better understanding 
of the state-of-the-art regarding available technologies. The 
decision  regarding  whether  the  technological  know-how 
should  be  shared  earlier  in  the  co-design  process  depends 
on  whether  the  potential  pitfalls  of  placing  boundaries  on 
design ideas are lesser than the advantage of giving all the 
members  of  the  team  a  better  understanding  of  how  the 
technology  works  and  how  it  can  be  integrated  within  a 
design  scenario.  Time  is  certainly  a  concern  in  this  case: 
with  the  Loupe,  the  team  had  a  longer  time  frame  to 
develop ideas, refine scenarios and identify the appropriate 
technology to realise it; with the Way Detector, the limited 
time  available  was  focused  on  the  development  of  the 
specific scenarios based on the existing prototype. 

ideas 

and 

ad-hoc  materialisation  of 

Influence of the Prototypes’ Form  
How did the form of the prototypes used during the process 
influence participation in the development of design ideas? 
In Example 1, the concept of the augmented compass was 
translated into a physical object that reminded but did not 
closely reproduce the shape of an actual compass, making 
the object pleasant to hold in one’s hand, but also providing 
some  space  for  the  technological  elements  to  be  built  in 
later  on.  This  non-functioning  prototype  gave  free  rein  to 
the participants’ imagination and allowed them to come up 
with  wishful  thinking  ideas.  The  paper  used  for  sketching 
the  content  of  the  round  screen  in  different  scenarios 
allowed 
for 
documenting the process. 
In Example 2, although the shape of the Way Detector was 
meant to be as neutral as possible (a blank white ‘egg’) and 
the  participants  were  informed  that  the  shape  of  this 
prototype could be easily altered, Julie still had difficulties 
imagining the technology actually embedded in a different 
shell, i.e. the pie dish. Once this was achieved thanks to the 
skills of the designers in the team and after a lengthy group 
discussion, the ideas started flowing freely. Working with a 
functioning prototype, albeit an intentionally “generic” one, 
requires  a  stretch  of  imagination  in  regard  to  adapting  the 
form  to  the  context.  Once  the  new  form  is  identified  and 
appropriated,  new  functionalities  can  be  envisaged  to 
complement  the  existing  ones  (such  as  adding  a  smell 
component proposed by Julie). 
Openness vs. Defined Concept 
How 
support 
interpretation?  Is  a  functioning  prototype  less  open  to 
interpretation than a low-tech representation or idea, as a 
low-tech representation provides a broader picture of how 
the  prototype  may  work  and  what  technologies  may  be 
applied?  In  our  cases,  a  metaphor  such  as  the  one  of  the 
compass  afforded  a  broader  exploration  of  desired 
functionalities  and  served  as  a  prop  for  eliciting  more 
information  from  the  CHPs  tacit  knowledge  of  their 
visitors.  This  way,  designers  also  gained  a  better 
understanding of the challenges encountered by the CHPs. 
Openness is desirable when the partners do not know each 

non-functioning 

prototype 

does 

other very well and time is not an issue. On the other hand, 
a  defined  concept  (and  a  functioning  prototype)  can  make 
the  design  process  addressing  a  specific  challenge 
encountered  by  a  museum  more  immediate  and  focused, 
such  as  in  the  case  of  the  Way  Detector.  In  [16]  Halskov 
and  Dalsgård  discuss  how  the  use  of  Technology  Cards 
(abstract  representations  of  technological  platforms)  in 
combination  with  broader  Domain  Cards  encouraged 
participants  in  a  co-design  workshop  to  bring  actual 
examples  of  designs  from  their  own  domain  and  re-
contextualise  them  within  the  activity.  Similarly  in  our 
example, Julie selected the Way Detector as the prototype 
that suggested the most potential to her, and developed her 
ideas by adapting the characteristics of the Way Detector to 
the  historic  house.  Therefore,  while  presenting  the  CHPs 
with  a  specific  defined  concept  in  isolation  might  be 
problematic in the early stages of the co-design strategy, it 
seems  that  offering  a  choice  from  a  portfolio  of  such 
concepts can provide good scaffolding for their ideation in 
relation to their domain and interests.  
Alternating  divergent  to  convergent  thinking  as  part  of  a 
design flow is a strategy to move back and forth from open 
to  more  specific  solutions:  in  the  2nd  workshop  the 
facilitators were already thinking about implementation and 
consequences for the CHPs handling prototypes. 
Again,  the  time  frame  of  the  process  is  key  when 
considering whether to start with an example of technology 
so  to  give  participants  an  idea  of  what  is  possible,  or  to 
leave the technical realisation out of the brief. When time is 
limited,  the  presence  of  an  already  functioning  prototype 
can  also  provide  more  time  to  discuss  other  ideas  and 
concepts,  although  the  prototype  has  to  be  introduced  and 
framed carefully at the beginning of the activities.  
Shaping of Design Decisions 
How did the two processes support the shaping and making 
of design decisions? Which activities occurred in each case 
to underpin design development? 
In 
and 
bodystorming were critical at the beginning to shape a brief 
and to focus the subsequent work on scenario development. 
In  the  Way  Detector  example,  the  process  began  with  the 
CHPs  choosing  a  prototype  that  could  potentially  solve 
problems  for  their  museum,  followed  by  a  brainstorming 
session  to  allow  the  participants  to  come  up  with  ideas 
featuring  the  prototype  in  their  museum.  While  the 
technical  development  of  the  Loupe  had  to  take  place 
separately  before  the  working  prototype  could  be  brought 
back 
the 
customisation and adaptation of the Way Detector to Julie’s 
historic house scenario could happen in real-time during the 
workshop. The actual design scenario evolved in both cases 
through a dialogue among all the members of the team that 
alternated  open-ended  proposals  (e.g.  the  addition  of  a 
certain interaction, or the introduction of particular content) 
and  discussion  of  how  they  would  fit  in  the  envisioned 
scenario. 

example,  open  brainstorming 

for  adjustments, 

the  museum 

the  Loupe 

team 

to 

22

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

were 

crucial 

specification 

the  participants 

to  propose  more 

In both the examples we presented, open brainstorming and 
technical 
activities. 
Brainstorming revolved around the challenges encountered 
by  the  museums  in  both  examples,  however  while  in  the 
first  case  the  design  space  was  vast  and  completely 
uncharted  territory,  in  the  second  case  the  brainstorming 
stemmed  from  museum  challenges  already  identified. 
Regarding  technical  specification,  with  the  Loupe  it  drew 
certain  boundaries  around  a  scenario  (e.g.  the  size  of  the 
screen, and the difficulties of projecting content in the way 
envisioned  by  the  CHPs);  with  the  Way  Detector  it 
encouraged 
ideas 
regarding  form  factor  and  additional  functionalities,  using 
the  description  of  the  current  prototype  as  an  example  to 
show the potential of the technology and of physical design.  
Also, in the particular context of a large project, the goals 
and  power  relationships  in  the  two  examples  (which  are 
interlinked with decision-making, as argued in [6] and [27]) 
were influenced by the overarching goal of the project. In 
the  Loupe  example,  based  on  technology  constraints,  the 
designers  and  technologists  decided  for  a  shift  from  the 
main issue pointed out by the CHPs – way finding – and the 
compass  concept,  in  order  to  build  a  prototype  that  was 
both  technically  feasible  in  the  amount  of  time  available 
and  offering  a  wider  range  of  functionalities.  They  were 
able  to  bring  major  modifications  to  the  original  concept 
because, at that point, coming up with a series of functional 
prototypes  to  populate  the  toolkit  was  one  of  main 
challenges in the project. In the Way Detector example, the 
participating  CHPs  taking  part  in  the  process  contributed 
their knowledge, their content and their time and gained an 
understanding  of  the  prototypes’  potential  for  adaptation 
and  appropriation.  Participation, 
in  both  cases,  was 
configured [27] to suit the needs of the project team, who 
initiated and directed the process and who held the “bigger 
picture” behind the co-design activities.  
There  seems  to  be  a  delicate  balance  to  find  between  the 
more open and creative activity, and the more constrained 
one:  the  framing  of  both  brainstorming  and  technical 
specification 
in 
establishing how the subsequent collaborative development 
of  ideas  and  decision-making  will  occur.  The  placing  of 
these activities at particular moments of the process is also 
a crucial decision by the facilitators. 
Participants’ Roles and Involvement  
How were the roles and the involvement of the participants 
affected  by  the  two  processes?  Although  the  focus  of this 
paper  is  on  process  rather  than  on  individual  roles,  the 
accounts  we  have  presented  provide  some  material  for 
reflection on the nature of the participants’ involvement. 
Both  examples  show  how  the  composition  of  the  team  – 
cultural heritage professionals, designers and technologists 
-  allowed  for  sharing  information  across  professional  and 
disciplinary  boundaries.  In  both  cases,  the  co-design 
activities  were  facilitated  by  design  project  partners,  who 

the  co-design  process 

is  critical 

in 

the 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

created space for the decisions and contributions of CHPs. 
However it was CHPs who were in charge of choosing the 
challenges  to  work  with,  and  thinking  of  interactions  to 
implement. Henry and Francis came up with the augmented 
compass  idea,  and  Julie  was  the  one  who  chose  the  Way 
Detector  to  work  with  from  the  5  available  prototypes. 
Applying Druin' s ‘onion model’ [11] to these two scenarios 
would situate the CHPs between the Informant and Design 
Partners roles of the model, signifying that they have been 
involved  at  multiple  stages  of  the  design  process  using 
technology.  When  moving  from  the  inner  circle  of  the 
onion  model  to  the  outer  circles,  the  involvement  of 
participants  in  design  changes  in  two  ways.  They  become 
more  active  and  responsible  in  their  participation,  and 
furthermore the participation takes place in more stages of 
the  design  process.  Looking  at  our  two  examples,  in  both 
cases  the  involvement  of  participants  changed  as  the 
process evolved, both regarding their relationship with the 
technology and with the developers (in our cases, designers 
and  technologists),  although  the  time  frame  of  the  two 
processes  was  different.  This  indicates  that  even  within 
phases of co-design, and within specific activities/exercises, 
roles ad forms of involvement are continuously shifted and 
re-defined  as  the  process  evolves  and  as  collaborators 
jointly make decisions and share expertise. This shifting of 
roles  does  not  just  apply  to  the  non-technical  participants 
(e.g. the CHPs in our case), but to all participants.  In the 
case  of  the  Way  Detector,  technologists  had  to  play  their 
part in facilitation as well, due to the need of clarifying the 
technology’s 
the  Loupe  example, 
technologists  were  not  heavily  involved  in  the  initial 
phases,  however 
the  phase  of  prototype 
development that occurred halfway through the process. In 
this case, following the initial co-design phases of concept 
development,  bodystorming  and  brainstorming  sessions 
between  the  CHPs  and  technologists,  internal  discussions, 
time  and  budget  constraints  led  Richard’s  design  team  to 
alter the original concept and deliver this practical solution 
for  evaluation.  The  decision  as  made  by  the  participating 
designers to replace the compass idea with the Loupe was 
made  without  the  real-time  input  of  the  CHPs.  The 
consequence  of  this  facilitator-driven  decision-making  (as 
we  explained  in  the  previous  section)  and  subsequent 
prototype development resulted in the overshadowing of the 
primary  functionality  of  the  original  concept  as  conceived 
of by Henry and Francis and making it difficult for them to 
accept the new concept, although they subsequently agreed 
to testing the Loupe with the public in their museum. While 
the  first  example  describes  an  earlier  activity  in  the  co-
design  phase,  when  members  were  learning  about  each 
other’s  field  and  exploring  a  wide  range  of  ideas  and 
prototyping  supported  this  endeavour  (divergence),  the 
second  one  shows  a  case  were  what  was  learned  was 
already incorporated in generic exploratory prototypes and 
allowed  a  much  faster  design  and  development  cycle 
(convergence). 

functionality. 

they  drove 

In 

23

its  goals 

institutions 

from  heritage 

CONCLUSIONS 
This paper has presented a reflection on two different and 
somewhat  alternative  participatory  processes  within  the 
same  large  project  (which  is  aimed  at  the  co-design  of  a 
toolkit  for  tangible  interactive  museum  installations)  by  a 
team  of  designers,  CHPs,  social  scientists  and  technology 
developers.  The  two  examples  we  have  detailed  involved 
participants 
in  developing 
concepts  for  interactive  visitor  experiences  which  will 
illustrate the type of interventions the CHPs wish to offer at 
their  institutions,  and  which  will  populate  the  toolkit’s 
the  project’s  overall 
‘library’.  We  have  outlined 
participatory  design 
strategy 
and 
and, 
subsequently, described two instances of co-design of two 
prototypes  both  addressing 
issue  of  providing 
lightweight  guidance  around  museum  exhibits:  the  first 
unfolded  around  an  open  brief  focusing  on  a  science 
museum, and led to the realisation of the Loupe; the second 
developed an existing and fully working technical prototype 
called the Way Detector, which was chosen out of a set of 
options  and  was  then  adapted  and  reconfigured  to  suit  a 
historic house museum. We have analysed and reflected on 
the two examples focusing on a number of aspects of how 
the process unfolded in each: we reflected on the skills and 
knowledge that were shared by the team members in order 
to contribute to the design, on the influence of the form of 
the prototypes on the collaborative ideation process, on the 
tension  between  openness  and  definition  of  design 
concepts, on the activities that shaped design decisions and, 
finally,  on  the  dynamics  of  participants’  involvement  in 
each instance and in driving and shaping the design in two 
instances  of  a  collaborative  team,  with  particular  attention 
on the composition of the team. While existing research has 
examined  the  process  of  co-design  and  the  strategies  that 
facilitators  and  coordinators  of  participatory  activities  can 
adopt, our original contribution lies in the parallel analysis, 
reflection  and  discussion  of  two  alternative  processes  that 
were deployed within the same project frame and the same 
co-design  phase,  aiming  at  alternating  moments  of 
divergent and convergent design thinking. We did not adopt 
an experimental approach in order to conduct a controlled 
comparison,  but  rather  purposefully  explored  alternative 
processes  within  the  same  design  phase  characterised  by 
convergent  and  divergent  moments.  We  do  not  see  these 
two  approaches  as  mutually  exclusive,  but  both  useful  to 
support  valuable  participatory  practices  within  the  same 
frame. 
This  approach  to  documenting  and  reflecting  different 
instances  of  our  co-design  strategy  is  novel  and  useful  in 
order  to  highlight  which  aspects  of  co-design  are  shaped 
and  re-configured  in  specific  activities  under  the  same 
project,  and  how  similar  methods  and  techniques  can 
nonetheless  lead  to  different  forms  of  participation  and 
collaborative 
instance. 
Furthermore, we see our analysis themes as a useful set of 
issues to aid other CSCW researchers to refine and reflect 

decision-making 

in 

each 

in  order 

to  develop  mutual 

on  the  co-design  process  seen  as  a  complex  instance  of 
collaborative  work,  particularly  in  complex  participatory 
efforts  featuring  a  variety  of  dedicated  activities  and  of 
stakeholders and contributors. 
We  found  that  each  way  to  frame  a  co-design  activity 
presents opportunities and challenges, and that the choice of 
either  or  both  frames,  and  their  timing  and  management, 
should be dependent on the specific requirements and goals 
of the design process and the participants. The roles of an 
open brief vs. an existing prototype are particularly crucial 
in  this  respect:  while  an  open  brief  allows  for  broader 
exploration  of  ideas  but  necessarily  adds  pauses  in  the 
collaborative  process  to  allow  for  technical  development, 
existing  prototypes  can  frame  and  focus  the  ideation 
process in a more constrained way, but allow for continued 
joint work among the team members who are all grounded 
on an existing basis.  
We  also  saw  how  the  participants  share  their  skills  and 
expertise 
learning  and 
understanding at different times and at different degrees in 
each  example,  adapting  to  the  flow  of  discussion  and 
contributing  at  points  where  it  is  understood  is  necessary 
and/or appropriate. 
The importance of the time frame of co-design processes is 
another  important  finding:  not  only  regarding  the  need  to 
time  carefully  the  duration  of  an  activity  in  itself  (e.g.  a 
longer  process  lasting  days  or  weeks  vs.  a  one-day 
workshop),  but  also  with  respect  to  planning  subsequent 
subsets or phases of the overall co-design strategy. Our goal 
was  that  of  alternating  divergent  and  convergent  design 
thinking: while the two examples feature similar techniques 
in  how  the  co-design  activities  were  conducted,  they  are 
different instances of the participatory process due to their 
different intended roles in our strategy. 
The goals of reflecting on our process in a detailed way are 
twofold:  firstly  providing  examples  and  drawing  insights 
that can be relevant for other researchers and projects of a 
similar  scope  approached  through  co-design,  particularly 
for  the  domain  of  museums  and  exhibitions;  secondly  we 
aim  to  empower  cultural  heritage  professionals  to  become 
more  active  players  in  the  ideation  and  realisation  of 
digitally-enhanced  visitor  experiences,  and  offering  them 
accounts  and  in-depth  discussion  on  the  design  process  is 
part of facilitating their participation as designers, and not 
simply as informants.  

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This  work  is  supported  by  the  EU  FP7  project  meSch  – 
Material  EncounterS  with  Digital  Cultural  Heritage 
(http://mesch-project.eu),  under  Grant  Agreement  600851. 
We  thank  all  the  participants  in  the  co-design  activities 
described in this paper.  

REFERENCES 
1. Leo  G. Anthopoulos,  Panagiotis  Siozos  and  Ioannis  A.(cid:3)
Tsoukalas.  2007.  Applying  participatory  design  and

24

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

collaboration in digital public services for discovering 
and re-designing e-Government services. Government 
Information Quarterly 24, 2: 353 – 376. 

2. Claus Bossen, Christian Dindler and Ole S. Iversen.(cid:3)
2012. Impediments to user gains: experiences from a(cid:3)
critical participatory design project. In Proceedings of(cid:3)
the 12th Participatory Design Conference: Research(cid:3)
Papers - Volume 1 (PDC ‘12), 31 – 40.(cid:3)http://
doi.acm.org/10.1145/2347635.2347641.

3. Eva Brandt. 2006. Designing exploratory design games:(cid:3)
a framework for participation in Participatory Design?In 
Proceedings of the ninth conference on Participatory(cid:3)
design: Expanding boundaries in design - Volume 1
(PDC(cid:3)’06),(cid:3)(cid:24)(cid:26)(cid:3)(cid:177)(cid:3)(cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:17)
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1147261.1147271.

4. Susanne Bødker and Ole S. Iversen. 2002. Staging a(cid:3)
professional participatory design practice: moving PD(cid:3)
beyond the initial fascination of user involvement. In(cid:3)
Proceedings of the Second Nordic Conference on(cid:3)
Human-Computer Interaction (NordiCHI ’02), 11 – 18.(cid:3)
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/572020.572023.

5. Tone  Bratteteig  and  Ina  Wagner.  2012.  Spaces  for

participatory creativity. Co-Design 8, 2-3: 105 – 126.
6. Tone Bratteteig and Ina Wagner. 2014. Disentangling(cid:3)

Participation. Power and Decision-making in(cid:3)
Participatory Design. London: Springer.

7. Tone Bratteteig, Keld Bodker, Yvonne Ditrich and(cid:3)
Preben Holst Mogensen. 2013. Methods: organizing(cid:3)
principles and general guidelines for Participatory(cid:3)
Design projects. In Routledge Handbook of(cid:3)
Participatory Design (1st ed.), Jesper Simonsen and(cid:3)Toni 
Robertson (eds.). Routledge, NY, USA, 117 – 144.

8. Jane Clemensen, Simon B. Larsen, Morten Kyng and(cid:3)
Marit Kirkevold. 2007. Participatory design in health(cid:3)
sciences: Using cooperative experimental methods in(cid:3)
developing health services and computer technology.(cid:3)
Qual Health Res 17, 1: 122 – 130.

9. Janet Davis. 2012. Early experiences with participation(cid:3)
in persuasive technology design. In Proceedings of the(cid:3)
12th Participatory Design Conference: Research Papers(cid:3)
- Volume 1 (PDC ‘12), 119 – 128.(cid:3)http://
doi.acm.org/10.1145/2347635.2347653.

10. Christian Dindler, Ole S. Iversen, Rachel Smith and(cid:3)
Rune Veerasawmy. 2010. Participatory design at the(cid:3)
museum: inquiring into children's everyday engagement(cid:3)
in cultural heritage. In Proceedings of the 22nd(cid:3)
Conference of the Computer-Human Interaction Special(cid:3)
Interest Group of Australia on Computer-Human
Interaction(cid:3)(OZCHI(cid:3)’10),(cid:3)(cid:26)(cid:21)(cid:3)(cid:177)(cid:3)(cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:17)
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1952222.1952239.

11. Allison Druin, 2002. The role of children in the design(cid:3)

of new technology. Behaviour and Information(cid:3)
Technology (BIT) 2, 1: 1– 25.

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Rosson. 2004. Participatory design in community 
computing contexts: tales from the field. In Proceedings 
of the eighth conference on Participatory design: Artful 
integration: interweaving media, materials and 
practices - Volume 1 (PDC ’04), 1 – 10. http://
doi.acm.org/10.1145/1011870.1011872.  

22. Christina  Mörtberg,  Tone  Bratteteig,  Ina  Wagner,
Dagny Stuedahl and Andrew Morrison. 2010. Methods 
That Matter in Digital Design Research. In Exploring 
Digital Design: Computer Supported Co-operative 
Work (1st ed.), Ina Wagner, Tone Bratteteig and Dagny 
Stuedahl (eds.) Springer, London, UK, 107 – 147. 

23. Daniela  Petrelli,  Luigina  Ciolfi,  Dick  van  Dijk,  Eva

Hornecker, Elena Not and Albrect Schmidt. 2013. 
Integrating Material and Digital: A New Way for 
Cultural Heritage, ACM Interactions, July+August 
2013. 

24. Toni  Robertson 

and 

Jesper  Simonsen. 

2013.

Participatory Design: an introduction. in Routledge 
Handbook of Participatory Design. In Routledge 
Handbook of Participatory Design (1st ed.), Jesper 
Simonsen and Toni Robertson (eds.). Routledge, NY, 
USA, 1 – 18. 

25. Maria  Roussou,  Elina  Kavalieratou  and  Michael
Doulgeridis. 2007. Children designers in the museum: 
applying participatory design for the development of an 
art education program. In Proceedings of the 6th 
international conference on Interaction design and 
children(cid:3)(IDC(cid:3)’07), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:3)(cid:177)(cid:3)(cid:27)(cid:19)(cid:17)
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1297277.1297292. 

26. Hanna  Strömberg,  Valtteri  Pirttilä  and  Veikko  Ikonen.

2004. Interactive scenarios—building ubiquitous 
computing concepts in the spirit of participatory design. 
Personal Ubiquitous Computing 8, 3-4: 200 – 207. 

27. John  Vines,  Rachel  Clarke,  Peter  Wright,  John

McCarthy and Patrick Olivier. 2013. Configuring 
Participation: on how we involve people in design. In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’13), 429 – 438. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2470654.2470716.  

28. Gustav  Taxén.  2004.  Introducing  Participatory  Design
in Museums. In Proceedings of the eighth conference on 
Participatory design: Artful integration: interweaving 
media, materials and practices - Volume 1 (PDC ’04), 
204(cid:3)(cid:177)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:3) 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1011870.1011894. 

12. Pelle Ehn and Morten Kyng. 1991. Cardboard(cid:3)

Computers: Mocking-it-up or Hands-on the Future. In(cid:3)
Design at Work (1st ed.), Joan Greenbaum, J and Morten(cid:3)
Kyng (eds.). L. Erlbaum Associates Inc., Hillsdale, NJ,(cid:3)
USA, 169 – 195.

13. Jerry Alan Fails, Mona Leigh Guha and Allison Druin.
2013. Methods and Techniques for Involving Children(cid:3)in 
the Design of New Technology for Children. In(cid:3)
Foundation and Trends in Human-Computer Interaction
– Volume6, No.2 (2012) 85-166.

14. Hugo Fuks, Heloisa Moura, Debora Cardador, Katia(cid:3)
Vega, Wallace Ugulino and Marcos Barbato. 2012.(cid:3)
Collaborative museums: an approach to co-design. In(cid:3)
Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on Computer(cid:3)
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW '12), 681 – 684.(cid:3)
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2145204.2145307.

15. Bill  Gaver,  Tony  Dunne  and  Elena  Pacenti.  1999.

Cultural probes. Interactions 6, 1: 21 – 29.

16. Kim Halskov and Peter Dalsgård. 2006. Inspiration Card

workshops. In DIS’06 – Proceedings of the Sixth(cid:3)
Conference on Designing Interactive Systems, 2-11.(cid:3)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1142405.1142409.

17. Hilary  Hutchinson,(cid:3) Wendy  Mackay,  Bo  Westerlund,

Benjamin B. Bederson, Allison Druin, Catherine(cid:3)
Plaisant, Michel Beaudouin-Lafon, Stéphane Conversy,(cid:3)
Helen Evans, Heiko Hansen, Nicolas Roussel and Björn(cid:3)
Eiderbäck. 2003. Technology probes: inspiring design(cid:3)
for and with families. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI(cid:3)
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI(cid:3)’03),(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:26)(cid:3)(cid:177)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:17)
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/642611.642616.

18. Finn Kensing, Jesper Simonsen and Keld Bødker. 1998.
MUST:  A  Method  for  Participatory  Design.  Human-
Computer Interaction 13, 2: 167 – 198.

19. Maaike  Kleinsmann  and  Rianne  Valkenburg.  2008.
Barriers and enablers for creating shared understanding
in co-design projects. Design Studies 29, 4: 369 – 386.

20. Laura  A.  Maye,  Fiona  E.  McDermott,  Luigina  Ciolfi

and Gabriela Avram. 2014. Interactive Exhibitions(cid:3)
Design – What Can We Learn From Cultural Heritage(cid:3)
Professionals? In Proceedings of the 8th Nordic(cid:3)
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Fun,(cid:3)Fast, 
Foundational (NordiCHI ’14), 598 – 607.(cid:3)http://
doi.acm.org/10.1145/2639189.2639259.

21. Cecelia  B.  Merkel,  Lu  Xiao,  Umer  Farooq,  Craig  H.
Ganoe,  Roderick  Lee,  John  M.  Carroll  and  Mary  B.

25

