CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Not at the Dinner Table: Parents’ and Children’s 

Perspectives on Family Technology Rules 

Alexis Hiniker 

University of Washington 

Seattle, WA, USA 
alexisr@uw.edu 

Sarita Y. Schoenebeck 
University of Michigan 
Ann Arbor, MI, USA 

yardi@umich.edu 

Julie A. Kientz  

University of Washington 

Seattle, WA, USA 
jkientz@uw.edu 

ABSTRACT 
Parents  and  children  both  use  technology  actively  and  in-
creasingly, but prior work shows that concerns about atten-
tion,  family  time,  and  family  relationships  abound.  We 
conducted a survey with 249 parent-child pairs distributed 
across 40 U.S. states to understand the types of technology 
rules (also known as restrictive mediation) they have estab-
lished in their family and how effective those rules are per-
ceived to be. Our data robustly show that children (age 10-
17) are more likely to follow rules that constrain technology
activities (e.g., no Snapchat) than rules that constrain tech-
nology use in certain contexts (e.g., no phone at the dinner 
table). Children find context constraints harder to live up to, 
parents  find  them  harder  to  enforce,  and  parents’  most 
common challenge when trying to enforce such rules is that 
children “can’t put it down.” This is consistent with the idea 
that  banning  certain  technologies  is  currently  easier  than 
setting  more  nuanced  boundaries.  Parents  and  children 
agree that parents should also unplug when spending time 
with  family,  while  children  alone  express  frustration  with 
the  common  parent  practice  of  posting  about  children 
online. Together, our results suggest several mechanisms by 
which designers and families can improve parent-child rela-
tionships around technology use. 
Author Keywords 
Family; technology; rules; parents; children; teenagers. 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: User Inter-
faces - Interaction styles. 
INTRODUCTION 
Parents  and  children  have  long  struggled  to  integrate  new 
technologies  into  family  life.  The  introduction  of  radios, 
televisions, and video games into households brought with 
them  new  discussions—and  sometimes  panics—about  the 
impact  those  technologies  would  have  on  the  family 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or  classroom  use  is  granted  without  fee  provided  that  copies  are  not  made  or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and 
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for com-ponents of this work owned 
by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. 
To  copy  otherwise,  or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists, 
requires  prior  specific  permission  and/or  a  fee.  Request  permissions  from 
Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02 $15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819940 

[7,58,64].  Parents,  in  particular,  have  worried  about  their 
children’s  eager  adoption  and  heavy  use  of  technology, 
fearing  that  it  might  limit  children’s  development  and  ex-
pose children to advertisements, predators, harassment, and 
other  potential  dangers  [12,42,44,50,67].  In  response,  par-
ents have sought to create and enforce rules about how their 
children  use  technology  [18,37,39,65].  Rules  have  often 
focused on how long technology can be used for and what 
content can be consumed [35,54,66].  
However, as technology has become pervasive in children’s 
lives, establishing and enforcing rules has become increas-
ingly challenging for parents [37,41,42,71]. American chil-
dren  are  avid  technology  users  [33]  and  spend  more  time 
using technology than engaged in any other activity besides 
sleeping [36]. And while technology use is associated with 
a  number  of  risks,  it  is  also  associated  with  positive  out-
comes,  including  academic  success  and  healthy  develop-
ment [55]. Thus, parents must support children in the com-
plex  task  of  finding  a  healthy  balance  of  technology  use, 
rather than the comparatively simpler options of banning or 
permitting all activities. 
This challenge is exacerbated by the fact that parents them-
selves may be struggling to set and abide by the rules they 
set for themselves for technology use  [1,25,31]. Extensive 
prior work has documented children’s behaviors with tech-
nology as well as parents’ concerns about technology [48], 
while other research has explored the effectiveness of dif-
ferent  kinds  of  parental  mediation  strategies,  especially 
around  television  watching  and  PC  use  [4,14,17,18,39]. 
However, little research has investigated what rules parents 
establish  for  the  whole  family  around  technology  use–
especially  newer  technologies  like  tablets  and  mobile 
phones–or how parents and children respond to those rules. 
Even less research has been conducted on how children feel 
about their parents’ use of technology.  
We  conducted  a  survey  with  249  parent-child  pairs  in  the 
United  States  to  investigate  family  technology  rules  and 
perceptions of those rules from both parents’ and children’s 
perspectives.  We  examined  participants’  open-ended  de-
scriptions of: 

•
•
•
•

Rules for children, as reported by children
Rules for children, as reported by parents
Rules for parents generally, as reported by children
Rules for parents generally, as reported by parents

1376

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

•  Enforcement challenges, as reported by parents 

as  well  as  their  quantitative  responses  to  prompts  about 
fairness, ease of compliance, and other properties of these 
rules. 
We find that rules for children are divided roughly evenly 
into two types of restrictions: activity constraints, which set 
boundaries on the specific activities children can engage in 
when  using  technology  (such  as  rules  that  prohibit  using 
social  media,  swearing,  or  sharing  nude  photos),  and  con-
text  constraints,  which  set  boundaries  on  the  social  and 
physical contexts in which technology can be used (such as 
rules  that  require  children  to  complete  chores  and  home-
work  before  turning  on  the  TV,  or  prohibit  texting  at  the 
dinner table). Our child participants are less likely to follow 
these  context  constraints  and  report  that  doing  so  requires 
more effort. Our child participants indicated that they find it 
easier  to  refrain  from  sexting,  withhold  identifiable  infor-
mation, avoid prohibited websites and games, and even give 
parents access to their social media accounts, than they do 
to  put  their  phones  away  during  meals,  at  school,  and  at 
night. 
We report several other findings, including: children’s con-
cerns about the information parents share on social media, a 
small  taxonomy  of  rule-types  that  accounts  for  the  over-
whelming  majority  (more  than  90%)  of  family  rules,  and 
practices  and  relationship  factors  that  predict  rules’  effec-
tiveness. We explore these patterns and suggest approaches 
for  helping  families  to  better  manage  technology  use  in 
family life.  Understanding how families establish and fol-
low technology rules promises to help parents raise children 
in  a  digital  age,  to  help  children  make  thoughtful  and  in-
formed choices about their own technology use, and to help 
designers  create  technologies  that  consider  not  only  the 
needs of the user but also of his or her greater social sys-
tem. 
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 
Families’ Historical Technology Ownership and Use 
Major advances in consumer-facing technologies have rou-
tinely been accompanied  by both adoption and integration 
into  American  family  life.  In  the  1970s,  television  owner-
ship among families had long been pervasive and viewing 
was  frequently  a  regular  and  communal  activity,  drawing 
together the entire family to consume the same content [6]. 
Though independent viewing has increased as families have 
acquired multiple television sets [6], a substantial body of 
prior work over several decades has documented that televi-
sion, VCRs, cable, and related technologies have continual-
ly catalyzed socialization within families by creating topics 
of  common  interest  for  conversation  and  opportunities  for 
shared experiences [20,22,46]. 
By  2001,  family  homes  were  becoming  more  media  rich, 
with  separate  physical  spaces  carved  out  for  television 
viewing and for computer use [46]. Teens were more likely 
to  have  media  access  in  their  bedrooms,  including  VCRs 

and  cable  television,  which  increased  their  ability  to  per-
sonalize  their  entertainment  media  and  to  retreat  from  the 
family [38]. However, families continued to report that they 
watched television socially with other family members, and 
by this point had begun to socialize with individuals outside 
the home through email [46]. 
While  television  and  email  remain  fixtures  in  American 
life,  today’s  media  landscape  offers  families  an  array  of 
additional  options.  In  2012,  77%  of  children  between  12 
and 17 owned cell phones, including 87% of those age 14 
and older, while 23% of children in this age range owned a 
smartphone  [34].  Parents  of  children  are  also  heavy  tech-
nology users; today, 91% own a cell phone and two-thirds 
use  social  network  sites  [74].  A  number  of  recent  studies 
show how parents use technology and social media in their 
everyday  lives  [1–3],  while  other  recent  research  surfaces 
some  of  the  challenges  they  experience  in  managing  their 
own technology behaviors [25].  
Parents’ Concerns, Rules, and Mediation Strategies 
Though  consumer-facing  technologies  have  had  tremen-
dous  success  and  steady  adoption  by  American  families, 
they have also introduced parental and societal fears about 
their impact on children and family life. For example, par-
ents have worried that television content is too violent [32], 
oversexualized [58], and advertising-heavy [50]. Prior work 
documents parents’ concerns that the Internet exposes chil-
dren to predators [39], facilitates bullying [42], and increas-
es experiences with inappropriate sexual content [63].  
Prior  work  has  found  many  of  these  fears  to  be  well-
founded,  tying  exposure  to  violent  media  content  to  in-
creases  in  hostility  and  hostile  attribution  bias  [56,69],  in-
creases in total screen-time to health risks [59], and media 
multi-tasking  to  negative  long-term  emotional  outcomes 
[52].  Other  work  has  documented  that  media  use  can  dis-
rupt interpersonal family relationships, with romantic part-
ners reporting that cell phone use undermines their commu-
nication  and  relationship  satisfaction  [40],  children  saying 
that  parents’  phone  use  during  after-school  pick-up  and 
school  performances  is  disappointing  and  impedes  close-
ness [62], and family members showing resentment of one 
another’s solitary use of technology [46]. Further work has 
documented that parents feel unprepared to raise children in 
a media-rich world [71]. 
Yet despite these risks, families find the net impact of tech-
nology on daily life and well-being to be positive [5], and 
many  technology-related  behaviors  are  beneficial  to  chil-
dren and conducive to healthy development [55,67]. Social 
media use has been shown to provide a number of benefits 
such  as  social  capital,  wellbeing,  and  job  opportunities 
[9,10,60].  Thus,  parents  are  faced  with  the  challenge  of 
defining  and  enabling  healthy  technology  engagement,  ra-
ther than the comparatively more-straightforward choices of 
either opting out or permitting unrestricted use. Understand-
ing  families’  bounds  on  technology  use,  and  the  extent  to 

1377

which children stay within these limits, is an area of active 
investigation. 
Parental Mediation Practices 
One of the most effective means [26,57] of reducing chil-
dren’s  risk  of  negative  effects  of  technology  is  parental 
mediation, a term used to describe the practice of oversee-
ing  a  child’s  exposure  to  and  use  of  technology  and  mass 
media.  Increases  in  mediation  lead  to  reductions  in  total 
screen time [8] and selection of higher-quality content [69]. 
Prior work has documented that three types of parental me-
diation  are  common  across  a  variety  of  technologies:  1) 
active  mediation,  where  parents  and  children  discuss  and 
reflect on content and usage; 2) restrictive mediation, where 
parents set limits on permitted activities; and 3) co-viewing, 
where  parents  and  children  consume  content  together 
[37,65]. Though many parents have adopted such strategies, 
roughly half of all families have no household rules or ex-
pectations about technology use at all [41]. 
By  reducing  total  screen  time  and  exposure  to  media  vio-
lence, parental mediation improves children’s social behav-
iors,  academic  performance,  and  sleep  habits  [17].  Active 
mediation  is  also  associated  with  long-term  reductions  in 
aggression and fear of victimization [13,56]. The benefits of 
mediation have been shown to apply to both young children 
[66]  and  teens  [54].  Yet  despite  its  beneficial  effects,  1) 
some  common  mediation  strategies  are  relatively  ineffec-
tive (e.g., discussing content with children has more protec-
tive effects than passively viewing it with them [37]), 2) the 
effectiveness of mediation practices likely depend in part on 
parent  and  child  demographics  [35]  and  individual  differ-
ences  in  child  behavior  [67],  and  3)  children  continue  to 
encounter risky and unpleasant situations when using tech-
nology  even  when  their  parents  engage  in  mediation  rou-
tinely [42,70]. Thus, while mediation is well-established as 
a  recommended  and  effective  means  of  fostering  healthy 
behavior, defining personal mediation practices is far from 
straightforward.  Our  study  explores  family  practices  that 
fall  under  the  umbrella  of  restrictive  mediation—the  rules 
and expectations families establish around technology use.  
Mediating Parents’ Use of Technology 
Prior work has documented that family rules about technol-
ogy typically concern the content children consume and the 
total  amount  of 
technology 
[35,47,54,58,66]. By comparison, there has been very little 
exploration of household guidelines about adults’ technolo-
gy  use,  despite  the  fact  that  parents’  media  habits  predict 
children’s  media  habits  [24].  Some  research  suggests  that 
adults do reflect on this topic and consider their technology 
use through the lens of its potential impact on children and 
child  behaviors  [1,25].  Adults  also  consider  the  impact  of 
their technology use on other family members, such as ro-
mantic partners negotiating technology use in the context of 
its impact on relationship quality [11,40]. We build on prior 
work  by  documenting  the  technology  rule-types  that  are 
prevalent  today,  the  alignment  between  parents’  and  chil-

they  spend  with 

time 

1378

SESSION: PARENTS AND CHILDREN

dren’s perspectives on these rules, and the degree to which 
families extend these expectations to parents. 
METHODS 
We prepared two related but independent surveys with one 
version  designed  for  parents  and  a  second  corresponding 
version designed for children. These surveys were intended 
to  elicit  information  about  family  rules  and  expectations 
regarding technology use. We intentionally left it to partici-
pants to interpret “technology” as they saw fit. Our analysis 
of their free responses suggests that most reflected on tech-
nologies  like  mobile  phones,  television,  computers,  and 
other  Internet-enabled  devices.  We  included  additional 
modules in the survey to collect data on topics beyond the 
scope of this investigation; this data is not reported here.  
Parent Survey: The parent survey began by asking parents 
the  first  name  of  the  child  who  was  participating  and  the 
age of that child. In the recruitment, if the parent had more 
than one child, they were asked to pick one child who was 
between the ages of 10-17 and to think of that one through-
out  the  survey.  The  child’s  first  name  was  coded  into  the 
rest  of  the  survey  questions  to  ask  the  parent  specifically 
about that child.  
Each  parent  was  asked  to  describe  two  rules  regarding 
technology  use  they  have  for  this  target  child.  The  parent 
reported  each  rule  through  a  free-recall,  open-ended  re-
sponse. For each rule, we then asked a series of Likert ques-
tions probing: 

•  Whether the child knows about this rule 
•  How often the child follows it 
•  How difficult it is to enforce 
•  How acceptable it is for the child to break it 
•  How much input the child had in establishing it 

We further asked the parent to provide an open-ended de-
scription of the biggest challenge they experience, if any, in 
trying to enforce each preference or rule. Finally, we asked 
each  parent  to  provide  two  open-ended  descriptions  of 
technology-related  rules  they  believe  parents  in  general 
should follow.  
For each adult, we also measured parenting satisfaction and 
parenting  self-efficacy  using  the  Parenting  Sense  of  Com-
petence Scale (PSOC). This scale was originally developed 
by Gibaud-Wallston and Wandersman (1978) for parents of 
infants and was later adapted by Johnston and Marsh (1989) 
for  parents  of  older  children  [30].  The  17-item  validated 
instrument  measures  parenting  frustration,  anxiety,  and 
motivation (satisfaction) and competence, problem-solving 
ability, and capability (efficacy) [51]. The final set of ques-
tions were demographic in nature and drew on survey items 
used in Pew Research Center surveys.  
Child Survey: The child survey was structured similarly to 
the parent survey, first asking the child’s age and relation-
ship to his or her adult counterpart (e.g., “Mother,” “Stepfa-
ther,” etc.), which we coded into the rest of the questions. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

We then asked each child for an open-ended description of 
two preferences, expectations, or rules that his or her parent 
has about how he or she uses technology. Using a series of 
Likert-style questions, we followed up on each rule, asking: 

•  How often the child follows the rule 
•  How difficult it is to follow 
•  How acceptable it is not to follow this rule 
•  How much input the child had in establishing it 
•  How fair the child believes it is 

As  with  parents,  we  asked  each  child  for  an  open-ended 
description of two rules about technology use that he or she 
believes parents should follow.  
Each child then completed the Parent-Adolescent Relation-
ship Scale (PARS) [19], a validated 8-item instrument that 
measures  the  quality  of  the  parent-child  relationship  from 
the child’s perspective. The first three questions investigate 
the child’s identification with  their parent (e.g., “S/he is a 
person  I  want  to  be  like”)  and  the  next  five  measure  per-
ceived parental supportiveness (e.g., “How often does s/he 
praise  you  for  doing  well?”).  Finally,  we  collected  demo-
graphic information on the child’s grade in school, gender, 
family composition, and average academic grades.  
Recruitment and Analysis 
Participants  were  recruited  through  a  national  recruitment 
service.  An  email  solicitation  invited  one  parent  and  one 
child  per  family  to  participate  in  an  online  survey  about 
technology  use.  Once  the  parent  completed  the  survey, he 
or she was presented with a new unique URL linking to the 
child survey described above. The parent was asked to pro-
vide this URL to his or her child and to give the child pri-
vacy while he or she completed the survey.  
In  total,  1,917  parents  clicked  on  the  recruitment  message 
to open the survey. Of those, 766 clicked through the con-
sent process to begin the survey. We filtered out incomplete 
surveys, surveys answered only by one member of the dy-
ad,  surveys  with  a  large  proportion  of  invalid  (e.g.,  non-
sense) responses, and surveys with implausibly high agree-
ment  between  parent  and  child  (such  as  identical  lengthy 
descriptions of the rules) suggesting the child did not com-
plete his or her survey independently. Our final sample in-
cluded 249 dyads representing 498 participants.  
Participants were distributed across 40 different U.S. states. 
California,  New  York,  Florida,  New  Jersey  and  Ohio  had 
the  highest  rates  of  participation,  roughly  consistent  with 
the  geographic  distribution  of  the  U.S.  population  [76]. 
Mothers  participated  more  than  fathers,  and  the  median 
reported parent age was 43 (ranging from 27 to 76). Among 
child  counterparts,  55%  were  female,  and  the  median  re-
ported age for children was 13 (ranging from 10 to 17). We 
refer to this sample as “children” (rather than pre-teen, teen, 
or  adolescent)  throughout,  to  capture  the  10-17  age  range 
and  to  highlight  the  parent-child  relationship  in  this  fram-
ing.  

Parent age 

Parent race 

Parent  
education 

Parent  
political views 

Parent gender  Male (31%), Female (69%) 
Mean (sd) = 43.3 (8.8) years 
Minimum = 27, Maximum = 76 
Non-Hispanic White (78%), Black (8%), 
Hispanic (7%), Asian (4%), Mixed Race 
(1%), Other (2%) 
High School or Less (18%), Some College 
(34%), Bachelor’s Degree (25%), Some 
Graduate (9%), Graduate Degree (14%) 
Very Conservative (10%), Conservative 
(22%), Moderate (45%), Liberal (16%), Very 
Liberal (6%) 
Married (71%), Living with a Partner (9%), 
Divorced (10%), Separated (1%), Widowed 
(1%), Never Married (8%) 
Employed (47%), Employed Part-Time 
(13%), Stay-at-Home Parent (31%), Looking 
for Work (4%), Retired (3%), Student (2%), 
Unable to Work (2%) 
Male (45%), Female (55%) 
Mean (sd) = 13.3 (2.3) years 
Minimum = 10, Maximum = 17 
A (28%), A/B (46%), B (13%), B/C (10%), 
C/D (2%), School Does not Use Grades (1%) 
< $30K (14%), $30-50K (23%), $50-75K 
(25%), > $75K (38%) 

Parent  
marital status 

Child GPA 

Household 
income 

Parent  
employment 

Child gender 

Child age 

Table 1. Participant demographics (n=249 dyads) 

Our  data  oversampled  white  Americans,  who  currently 
 
make up 64% of the U.S. population [75] but 78% of our 
sample.  It  also  oversampled  families  with  two  partnered 
adults (80% compared to 61% nationally) [73]. 47% of par-
ents reported an annual household income between $30,000 
and $75,000, consistent with census data reporting a median 
household  income  of  $52,250  in  the  United  States  [49]. 
Comprehensive  demographic  information  is  reported  in 
Table 1. 
We  coded  all  open-ended  responses  iteratively  using  a 
grounded-theory  approach  to  qualitative  analysis  [61].  We 
coded the following participant responses for themes: 

•  Rules for children, as reported by children 
•  Rules for children, as reported by parents 
•  Rules for parents generally, as reported by children 
•  Rules for parents generally, as reported by parents 
•  Enforcement challenges, as reported by parents 

We  repeatedly  recoded  data  to  accommodate  emerging 
themes.  Responses  were  initially  coded  by  a  single  re-
searcher who established code categories with examples in 
a communal code book. The code book was reviewed and 
revised  iteratively  by  the  research  team.  After  coding  was 
complete,  a  second  researcher  coded  a  randomly  selected 
10% of the data (25 dyads) across all responses. Cohen’s κ 
was .703 for rules and .850 for enforcement challenges. 

1379

RESULTS 
Technology Rules for Children 
Rules  for  Children  as  Reported  by  Children:  Of  our  249 
child  participants,  6%  reported  that  their  parents  have  no 
rules  or  expectations  about  technology  use  at  all.  Another 
4% only described one rule or expectation. Thus, our child 
participants  described  a  combined  455  unique  rules.  Of 
these, 91% fit neatly into one of 12 thematic categories (see 
Table  2).  Of  the  rule  descriptions  that  we  were  unable  to 
categorize, the majority were too vague to capture a specific 
rule  (e.g.,  “Keep  it  appropriate,”  “Use  it  wisely”).  A  few 
others described rules that were not specific to technology 
(e.g.,  “No  staying  out  late,”  “No  boyfriends”).  Of  the  full 
set  of  455  child-reported  rules,  only  eight  were  specific, 
technology related, and outside the themes listed in Table 2 
(e.g.,  one  rule  about  keeping  the  phone  charged,  another 
about keeping the volume turned down). 
Rules for Children as Reported by Parents: Adults’ reports 
about rules and expectations for their children were similar. 
Of our 249 adult participants, 2% reported that they have no 
rules or expectations about how their child uses technology, 
and another 2% only described one rule or expectation. A 
Wilcoxon signed ranks test revealed that children were sig-
nificantly more likely than parents to report having no rules 
at  all  (Z  =  -2.673,  p  =  .008),  consistent  with  prior  work 
showing  that  parents  report  more  technology  monitoring 
than their children [16,68].  
Altogether, our parent participants described a total of 481 
rules  for  their  children.  As  with  data  collected  from  chil-
dren,  437  (91%)  of  these  parent-reported  rule  descriptions 
fell  under  the  same  12  categories.  Though  the  frequency 
with which adults mentioned each category differed slightly 
from the frequency with which each category was reported 
by  children  (Figure  1  shows  ranked  frequency  for  each 
group), the categories of rules and the salience of each cat-
egory were well-aligned between children and adults. 
Of the rule descriptions from adults that did not fit any of 
these themes, the majority either were too vague to convey 
a specific rule (“Be cautious”), described a rule that was not 
related to technology, or made a statement about technolo-
gy usage habits that was not related to family rules. Of the 
481 rules described by parents, only 16 described technolo-
gy-related rules that did not align with any of the dominant 
themes (e.g., “He can’t let other people use his phone”). 
Activity Constraints and Context Constraints 
Prior  work  has  documented  parents’  concerns  about  the 
activities children engage in with technology (e.g., [12,37]). 
Our data suggests that parents also establish rules about the 
context  of  the  technology  use.  That  is,  in  addition  to  re-
strictions  on  what  children  do  with  technology,  families 
also have expectations about when, where, and how they do 
it. Accordingly, we divided the 12 themes described above 
into  those  that  constrain  the  ways  in  which  children  use 
technology  (e.g.,  requiring  that  they  post  respectful  com-

1380

SESSION: PARENTS AND CHILDREN

ments or withhold personally identifiable information) and 
those that constrain the contexts in which children are per-
mitted to use technology at all (e.g., putting it away in cer-
tain  social  contexts  or  after  a  time-limit  has  elapsed).  We 
labeled  these  categories  activity  constraints  and  context 
constraints. We found that rules reported by children were 
almost  perfectly  split  between  these  two  categories,  with 
213 activity constraints and 200 context constraints. Simi-
larly,  both  categories  were  well-represented  among  rules 
Constraint  

Category 

Description: Example 
No technology at all in a certain 
social context:  “I am not al-
lowed to use anything during 
dinner, including TV.  My dad is 
pretty strict about that.” 
Protect identity and personal 
information: “To be safe and not 
give anyone my real name or 
where I live.” 
No technology after bedtime: “I 
can't have my cell phone in my 
bed when I'm sleeping.” 
Real-time check-ups by parents: 
“My parents are allowed to 
check my phone anytime.”  
Ban on a site, game, activity, or 
device: “He made me stop play-
ing grand theft auto” 
No technology until certain obli-
gations are fulfilled: “I can’t 
play with my computer games 
till I finish my school work.” 
No producing, sharing, or view-
ing sexually explicit media: 
“Absolutely no racy pictures is 
his staunch rule.” 
Fixed time limits: “Even if I’m 
in the middle of a game, when 
my time is up that's all the time I 
get.” 
Use technology in moderation 
and balanced with other activi-
ties: “Limit games during the 
weekend, go outside instead.” 
No hurtful comments about oth-
ers: “I should always think about 
the possible consequences of my 
actions, would I like the post if it 
were about me?” 
Specific restrictions to save 
money: “No data without wifi.” 
No sexually explicit language or 
swear words: “I can’t cuss 
online or in texting.” 

Context 

Activity 

Context 

Activity 

Activity 

Context 

Activity 

Context 

Context 

Activity 

Activity 

Activity 

Be present 

Privacy 

Not at night 

Parent  
audit 

Content  
restrictions 

Responsibil-
ities first 

No sexual 
content 

Time-bound 

Moderate 
use 

Be kind 

Cost  
restrictions 

No bad  
language 

Table 2. Taxonomy of rules for children and sample de-

scriptions from children 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

18 
16 
14 
12 
10 
8 
6 
4 
2 
0 

 

 
s
e
l
u
R
d
e
t
r
o
p
e
R

 
f
o
%

 

Parent-Reported Rules 

Child-Reported Rules 

Figure 1. Theme frequencies for children and parents 

 

reported  by  parents,  with  254  activity  constraints  and  183 
context constraints. 
Enforcing and Following Rules for Children 
Across all rule categories, children reported that they follow 
83% of these rules “most” or “all” of the time. They report-
ed that 64% of rules were either “a little bit easy” or “very 
easy”  to  follow.  Like  children,  parents  felt  that  children 
were generally compliant and reported that children follow 
87%  of  these  rules  either  “most  of  the  time”  or  “always.” 
Similarly, they reported that 70% of these rules were either 
“a little bit easy” or “very easy” to enforce. We examined 
the relation- 
ship  between  children’s  input  into  rule-setting,  children’s 
perceptions of the fairness of the rules, children’s compli-
ance with rules, and how easy children feel it is to follow 
rules.  We  found  highly  significant  correlations  among  all 
four of these measures (see Table 3). 
To model these collinear relationships with higher fidelity, 
we drew on recent research demonstrating that individuals 
are more committed to contracts when they have input into 
contract  definition,  as  active  participation  leads  to  percep-
tions of contract-fairness which in turn increase compliance 
[15]. A Sobel test confirmed that, within our sample, chil-
dren’s  perceptions  of  rule-fairness  completely  mediate  the 
relationship  between  children’s  input  into  rule  setting  and 
their ability to follow these rules (see Figure 2). This sug-
gests  both  that  a  child’s  perception  that  a  rule  is  fair  in-

  
Follows rule  
Rule is easy to 
follow  
Had input in 
setting rule  

Rule is 
easy to 
follow 
.563** 
- 

- 

Had input 
in setting 

rule 

.070 
.173** 

-  

Believes 
rule is 
fair 
.433** 
.582** 

.292** 
**p < .001 

Table 3. Correlations among children’s beliefs about rules 

1381

Figure 2. Children’s perceptions of rule-fairness completely 
mediate the relationship between child-input into rule setting 

and their ability to follow the rule 

 

 

creases his or her commitment to follow it, and that involv-
ing the child in the rule-setting process is one effective way 
of fostering a sense of fairness. 
Child Compliance and Rule Type 
We  also  examined  how  the  type  of  rule  affects  children’s 
ability to follow it. We compared children’s perceptions of 
activity  constraints  (where  children  were  asked  not  to  en-
gage  in  specific  activities  when  using  technology)  with 
children’s  perceptions  of  context  constraints  (where  chil-
dren were asked not to engage with any technology in cer-
tain contexts). An independent samples t-test revealed that 
children were significantly more likely to follow rules about 
activity  constraints  (mean  =  3.46,  sd  =  .733)  than  about 
context constraints (mean = 3.08, sd = .789, t = 5.02, p < 
.001).  Similarly,  children  reported  feeling  that  rules  about 
activity  constraints  were  significantly  easier  to  follow 
(mean  =  3.42,  sd  =  .787)  than  rules  about  context  con-
straints (mean = 2.72, sd = 1.01, t = 7.77, p < .001). Thus, 
children reported finding it easier to comply with rules that 
restrict  them  to  particular  technology  activities  than  rules 
that  prohibit  them  from  using  technology  at  all,  even  for 
short periods of time (such as during a family meal). 
We further examined the relationship between rule type and 
children’s  compliance  in  light  of  the  high  collinearity  be-
tween children’s compliance and other rule-properties. We 
created  a  linear  regression  model  that  included  rule  type 
(i.e.,  activity  constraint  or  context  constraint),  child  age, 
child gender, strength of parent-child relationship (as meas-
ured  by  the  identification  and  supportiveness  subscales  of 
PARS), the degree to which the child had input into setting 
the rule, the degree to which the child believes the rule is 
fair,  and  the  degree  to  which  the  child  believes  his  or  her 
parent would be tolerant of the child breaking the rule, as 
independent  variables.  We  used  the  degree  to  which  the 
child follows the rule as the dependent variable.  This mod-

Coefficients 
Intercept 
Rule type 
Believes rule is 
fair 
Had input in 
setting rule 
Identifies with 
parent 
Parent  
supportiveness 
Child age 
Child gender 
Average grades 

B 
1.18 
-.28 

SEB 
.42 
.07 

β  
 
-.18 

p 
.006 
< .001 

.39 

.05 

.38 

< .001 

-.06 

.03 

-.08 

.09 

.10 

.27 

-.01 
.123 
-.03 

.05 

.09 

.02 
.07 
.03 

.09 

.081 

.16 

-.04 
.08 
-.06 

.001 

.367 
.07 
.174 

B = unstandardized regression coefficient;  β  = standardized coefficient 

Table 4. Regression analysis predicting whether a child will 

follow a rule 

el explained a significant amount of variance in the degree 
to which the child followed the rule (F(8, 404) = 20.24, p < 
.001).  
Parent supportiveness, believing a rule is fair, and whether 
a rule is an activity constraint or a context constraint each 
explained a significant amount of variance in rule-following 
(see Table 4). Thus, even after controlling for fairness, in-
put,  age,  gender,  and  parent-child  relationship,  whether  or 
not a rule requires a child to put technology away for a cer-
tain period of time remains a highly significant predictor of 
whether he or she will follow it.   
To  understand  whether  parents  also  perceived  a  gap  in 
compliance based on rule type, we also examined the effect 
of  rule  type  on  parents’  ability  to  enforce  rules.  An  inde-
pendent samples t-test revealed that parents find it harder to 
enforce rules about context constraints (mean = 2.91, sd = 
.977) than rules about activity constraints (mean = 3.38, sd 
= .862, t = 5.21, p < .001). And they agree with their chil-

Activity Constraints 

Context Constraints 

 
 
t
n
e
m
e
e
r
g
A

 
f
o
 
l
e
v
e
L

 
)
4
 
-
 

1
 
:
e
l
a
c
S
 
t
r
e
k
i
L
(

4.0 

3.5 

3.0 

2.5 

2.0 

Follows 

Rule 

Rule is Easy 
to Follow 

Figure 3. Children’s ability to follow rules by rule type (ac-
tivity or context constraint) and the effort they expend to 
achieve this level of compliance. Error bars = 95% CI. 

 

1382

SESSION: PARENTS AND CHILDREN

dren that children are less likely to follow rules about con-
text  constraints  (mean  =  3.12,  sd  =  .763)  than  rules  about 
activity constraints (mean = 3.57, sd = .707, t = 6.31, p < 
.001).  
These  results  suggest  that  rules  that  create  a  context  con-
straint are harder for children to follow than rules that cre-
ate  an  activity  constraint.  From  this,  we  hypothesized  that 
when children are able to abide by these context constraints, 
doing so will require extra effort relative to the effort neces-
sary to comply with activity constraints. To test this predic-
tion, we ran a repeated-measures ANOVA with the degree 
to which a child follows a rule and the degree to which the 
child feels the rule is easy to follow as two different meas-
urements of compliance. We treated rule type (activity con-
straint or context constraint) as a between-subjects’ factor. 
We predicted that we would see a bigger gap between how 
easy it is to follow a rule and how often the child follows 
when the rule is a context constraint, reflecting the greater 
effort required to comply with rules which require a period 
of time when technology must be put away.  
As  shown  in  Figure  3,  we  found  the  predicted  interaction 
effect between rule type and compliance measure. Though 
our child participants are significantly less likely to comply 
with rules about context constraints than rules about activity 
constraints (F(1, 394) = 54.71, p < .001), they are working 
harder to achieve this lower rate of compliance (F(1, 394) = 
15.57, p < .001). 
Compliance Challenges 
To better understand families’ perspectives on the possible 
driving forces behind compliance and non-compliance, we 
looked  to  parents’  self-reported  enforcement  challenges. 
For  381  of  the  437  meaningful  rules  reported  by  parents 
(87%), the greatest enforcement challenge aligned with one 
of nine major themes (see Table 5). 
Of the challenges that did not align with these themes, the 
majority  were  not  specific  enough  to  be  categorized  (“He 
doesn’t always listen,” “A bit of a challenge”). Others were 
not truly descriptions of challenges but rather more general 
discussions  of  the  respective  rules  (“Only  during  some 
emergency  can  this  be  broken”).  Of  the  437  meaningful 
rules  reported  by  parents,  14  were  accompanied  by  a  de-
scription of a specific enforcement challenge that fell out-
side the themes listed in Table 2 (such as inconsistent en-
forcement  between  two  different  parents  or  difficulty  ask-
ing a child to follow a rule when parents do not). 
We also examined the effect of rule type on the type of en-
forcement  challenges  parents  reported.  A  chi-square  test 
revealed highly significant differences in the types of chal-
lenges parents face when trying to enforce an activity con-
straint compared to a context constraint (χ2(8) = 51.7, p < 
.001).  Post-hoc  contingency-table  analysis  revealed  that 
specifically, parents are more likely to report that they have 
few or no challenges if they are trying to enforce an activity 
constraint (Z = 4.00, p < .001), and they are more likely to 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Challenge 

None (57%) 

Hard to 
monitor 
(12%) 

Can’t put it 
down (7%) 

Extrinsic 
motivation 
(7%) 

Ideology 
(6%) 

Peer  
influence 
(4%) 
Work-
arounds 
(4%) 
Time-bound 
(2%) 

Technology 
influence 
(1%) 

Description: Example 
Parents reported having no challenges enforcing 
this rule: “Not many [challenges]. He always 
comes and talks to me when he thinks he may 
be doing something questionable.”  
Parents feel unable to monitor their child’s 
technology use: “I can't be with him all the time 
when he's using electronics, nor can I control 
what happens at other people's houses.”  
The child is unable to disengage from technolo-
gy: “She always wants it.  She never wants to 
put it down.”  
Children only comply if faced with rewards and 
punishments: “Sometimes he doesn't listen until 
I take the device from him.” 
Children disagree about whether these rules 
should be in place: “[She] wants to follow her 
own rules, she thinks she knows very well to 
take her own decisions.”  
Children’s friends make it difficult to comply 
with rules: “She sometimes hears about things 
from her friends and thinks it's ok.” 

Children have found ways to obviate parent 
monitoring: “Deleting history of sites visited.”  

Forgets the rules: “He forgets to shut down.”  

Features of the technology encourage children 
to ignore rules: “Even if she tries not to pay 
attention to the phone it is always beeping with 
texts and she finds difficult to control the urges 
to text back.”  

Table 5. Enforcement challenges reported by parents 

achieve this level of compliance. Error bars = 95% CI. 

 
report  that  they  struggle  to  enforce  the  rule  because  their 
Figure 3. Children’s ability to follow rules by rule type (Ac-
child  “Can’t  Put  it  Down”  if  they  are  trying  to  enforce  a 
tivity or Context Constraint) and the effort they expend to 
context constraint (Z = 6.40, p < .001). There were no sig-
nificant differences between activity and context constraints 
with  respect  to  any  other  enforcement  challenges.  A  Bon-
ferroni correction was applied to all comparisons. 
Rules and Expectations for Parents 
Separately,  we  examined  both  child  and  parent  reports 
about  the  rules  or  expectations  about  technology  use  that 
they believe are appropriate for parents. We found that the-
se differed substantially from the expectations families set 
for  children.  We  report  separately  on  children’s  and  par-
ents’ expectations for parents.  

Children’s Expectations for Parents 
Of the 249 children in our sample, 43 (17%) reported that 
they believe adults should not be held to any rules or expec-
tations about their technology use, saying things like “they 
are adults, they can do whatever they want.” Of the remain-
ing 203 children, 29 only described one rule or expectation. 
Thus, children described 383 rules for parents. Of these, 42 
(11%) were not specific enough to be meaningful (“No in-

appropriate stuff”), 8 discussed technology but did not de-
scribe a rule, and 7 described a rule that was not technolo-
gy-specific. This left 326 specific rules for parents. Of the-
se, 92% fell into one of 7 major themes or 5 minor themes. 
The  major  themes  are  described  in  Table  6.  The  minor 
themes (which each composed less than 3% of all reported 
rules) were Time-bound (3%), Not at Night (2%), Be Kind 
(2%),  No  Sexual  Content  (2%),  and  Responsibilities  First 
(2%).  An  additional  22  rules  about  technology  use  (7%) 
were unique and fell outside the themes listed above. These 
one-off rules varied widely (e.g., “Type with two thumbs,” 
“Play games with me,” “Always check news media”). How-
ever, the overwhelming majority of rules were thematic and 
fit within a small set of major themes. 

Parents’ Expectations for Other Parents 
Parents and children reported similar views on the types of 
technology use that are appropriate for parents. Of our 249 
parent participants, 5 felt that parents should not be held to 
any  rules  while  9  described  only  one  rule  or  expectation, 
and 2 chose not to respond. Thus, our participants reported 
475 rules for parents. Of these, 49 were not specific enough 
to be meaningful and another 14 either did not apply to par-
ents, did not apply to technology, or did not describe a rule 
or expectation. Of the 412 meaningful rules, 91% fell into 
one of 10 themes: Be Present (25%), Supervise (21%), Pri-
vacy  (9%),  Moderate  Use  (7%),  No  Oversharing  (7%), 
Model  appropriate  use  for  children  (7%),  Time-bound 
(5%), Not while Driving (3%), Be Kind (3%), and No Sex-
ual Content (3%). 
Adult responses surfaced 8 of the same themes that children 

Be present 
(19%) 

No  
oversharing 
(18%) 

Child  
autonomy 
(11%) 

Moderate use 
(10%) 

Supervise 
children 
(7%) 

Not while 
driving (6%) 

No hypocrisy 
(6%) 

No technology at all in a certain social con-
text: “Pay attention/put down the phone 
when your child is trying to tell you some-
thing important”  
No sharing information about children with-
out explicit permission: “Don't post anything 
about me without asking me”  
Allow children to make their own decisions 
about their technology use: “Let kids have 
their private time on social media without 
their interference.”  
Use technology in moderation and balanced 
with other activities: “Don't spend all your 
free time on this stuff.”  
Establish and enforce technology-related 
rules for children: “I think parents should 
check out websites before kids my age use 
because there are a lot of bad people out 
there.”  

“Don't text at red lights.”  

Parents should follow the rules they set for 
children: “Practice what they preach, stay off 
internet during mealtimes.” 

Table 6: Taxonomy of Technology Rules for Parents 

1383

reported,  and  the  most  common  theme  among  children’s 
expectations  for  parents,  “Be  Present,”  was  also  the  most 
common  expectation  among  parents.  Like  children,  adults 
said  that  they  believe  parents  should:  “Put  all  technology 
down when eating meals and talking with the kids,” “Not be 
on social media when you can be spending time with fami-
ly,” and “When you're spending time with family you should 
not be on electronics.”  
While  adults’  and  children’s  perspectives  were  largely 
aligned, the frequency with which they reported certain rule 
types differed significantly (χ2(13) = 158.5, p < .001). Post-
hoc  contingency-table  analysis  revealed  that  adults  were 
more likely than children to state that parents should estab-
lish rules for their children’s technology use (Z = 5.50, p < 
.001), less likely than children to denounce oversharing (Z 
= -4.27, p < .001), were not concerned with differentiated 
rules for children and for parents (which children perceived 
as hypocritical) (Z = -4.91, p < .001), were more likely to 
bring up the importance of modeling appropriate technolo-
gy  use  for  children  to  emulate  (Z  =  4.77,  p  <  .001),  and 
were less concerned with respecting children’s technologi-
cal autonomy (Z = -6.75, p < .001). A Bonferroni correction 
was applied to all comparisons. 
DISCUSSION 
Our results demonstrate that a well-defined set of common 
concerns govern the rules and expectations around modern 
technology  use  within  families.  Children  and  adults  are 
largely  in  agreement  about  the  expectations  that  are  most 
salient,  and  they  independently  report  the  same  types  of 
household rules. Though children and adults report similar 
pictures  of  the  world,  the  rules  they  describe  for  children 
and the rules they describe for adults are quite different. We 
discuss each of these sets of expectations in turn. 
Rules for Children 
Reported  rules  for  children  were  divided  roughly  evenly 
between activity constraints, which limit the behaviors chil-
dren  can  engage  in  when  using  technology,  and  context 
constraints, which limit the contexts where technology use 
is permitted. Thus, for our families, defining the bounds of 
appropriate use means both characterizing what children do 
with technology as well as when they do it. 
This  is  consistent  with  prior  work  demonstrating  that 
household rules about technology are driven by its effect on 
the  family  social  system  [46].  Historically,  this  has  led  to 
rules that focus primarily on the content children consume 
and  the  total  amount  of  time  they  spend  with  technology 
(e.g., television, video games, desktop personal computers)  
[12,37,66] with less emphasis on the context in which it is 
used. Today, families appear to be equally concerned with 
the content and social context of children’s technology use, 
a  difference  that  might  be  explained  by  the  more  portable 
and personal nature of technology today that makes context 
more important (e.g., texting at the dinner table) [27].  

1384

SESSION: PARENTS AND CHILDREN

Our results show that child buy-in predicts compliance irre-
spective  of  rule  type,  and  giving  children  input  into  the 
rule-setting process was strongly correlated with children’s 
ability  to  follow  rules.  The  fact  that  this  relationship  was 
mediated by children’s perceptions that these rules are fair 
suggests that establishing this sense of fairness could play a 
causal role in increasing children’s compliance.  
This data is consistent with the intuition that collaborative 
rule-setting  with  children  is  an  effective  mechanism  for 
engendering perceptions of fairness [15]. Given the mediat-
ing  influence  of  fairness  on  child  input,  these  results  are 
also  consistent  with  the  possibility  that  other  mechanisms 
that build up children’s perceptions of fairness and establish 
ideological consistency between parent and child could be 
similarly effective in increasing compliance. Our data sug-
gest  that  discussing  the  reasoning  behind  rules,  holding 
parents to similar standards when appropriate, and applying 
rules consistently may all be successful approaches for in-
creasing child compliance.  
Recent work implementing technological supports for fami-
ly rule-setting touched on these relationships between child 
input,  fairness,  and  compliance  by  proactively  including 
children in the rule-setting process [23]. Our results support 
this approach and lay the groundwork for creating a predic-
tive model of rule-setting practices, child beliefs, and rule-
compliance.  Future  work  is  needed  to  develop  these  find-
ings into formal theory that could be used to guide the crea-
tion of such tools. 
Regardless  of  whether  children  believe  rules  are  fair,  our 
results repeatedly show that it is more challenging for them 
to  abide  by  context  constraints  than  activity  constraints. 
Children reported that they were less likely to follow such 
rules  and  that  they  were  working  harder  to  follow  them. 
This difficulty persisted even after controlling for age, gen-
der, academic grades, parent-child relationship, the child’s 
perception of the fairness of the rule, and whether the child 
had input into setting the rule.  
Adults  agreed;  they  reported  that  they  expend  more  effort 
enforcing  context  constraints  than  activity  constraints  and 
that  children  are  less  likely  to  comply  with  such  rules. 
When  discussing  context  constraints,  parents  were  more 
likely to say that their greatest challenge was that their child 
just cannot seem to disconnect, and they were less likely to 
report having no enforcement challenges at all.  
These results suggest that not only is the context in which 
technology is used a concern that now accounts for roughly 
half  of  all  family  technology  rules,  it  is  also  the  largest 
source  of  technology-related  non-compliance  and  disa-
greement  between  parents  and  children.  Though  parents 
reported  no  difference  in  children’s  awareness  of  family 
expectations of context constraints as compared to activity 
constraints, the inability to unplug makes this type of rule 
particularly challenging for children and a source of tension 
for families.  

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

A  large  body  of  prior  work  outside  family  contexts  has 
shown that it is difficult for adults to set aside technology, 
even when they believe continued connectivity is inappro-
priate or unnecessary [21,29,40,43]. Our results suggest that 
this theme extends to children as well, and that this draw is 
so powerful that resisting the urge to check in is more diffi-
cult  than  complying  with  any  other  kind  of  technology-
related boundary. 
Finally, these results suggest that all-or-nothing approaches 
to mediation are currently easier to maintain than more nu-
anced  positions.  Our  child  participants  found  it  easier  to 
follow rules that prohibited them from owning smartphones 
or  using  social  networking  sites  than  rules  that  required 
them to put away smartphones and refrain from social net-
working  in  specific  contexts.  This  suggests  that  designing 
to  support  context-specific  use  could  improve  families’ 
experiences  enforcing  context  constraints  and  facilitate 
family  rules  that  limit,  rather  than  ban,  various  technolo-
gies.  
Rules for Parents 
In most respects, expectations for adults differed from ex-
pectations for children. Adults were censured for using their 
phones while driving, modeling inappropriate behaviors for 
children, failing to live up to the family-wide rules they set 
themselves,  and  sharing  content  about  children  without 
permission,  none  of  which  emerged  as  common  concerns 
about children.  
Though  parents  and  children  surfaced  many  of  the  same 
themes  about  appropriate  adult  use  of  technology,  there 
were  several  ways  in  which  their  perspectives  differed. 
Children  were  twice  as  likely  to  report  that  adults  should 
not  “overshare”  by  posting  information  about  children 
online without permission. Children were also significantly 
more likely to report that adults should be held to the same 
rules  as  children  and  that  adults  should  respect  children’s 
autonomy with technology. Adults were significantly more 
likely  than  children  to  say  that  parents  should  supervise 
their  children’s  use  of  technology  and  model  appropriate 
usage behavior.  
While most of these discrepancies are consistent with ten-
sions over shifts in authority that characterize adolescence, 
children’s  frustrations  with  parents’  oversharing  stands 
apart as a challenge that transcends existing power dynam-
ics.  Child  participants  reported  that  they  find  this  content 
embarrassing and feel frustrated that parents publicly con-
tribute  to  their  online  presence  without  permission.  Prior 
work  has  shown  that  teenagers  have  such  concerns  about 
their  peers  as  well  and  establish  contracts  within  friend 
groups, such as agreeing not to tag one another in photos or 
doing  so  only  with  explicit  consent,  to  mitigate  this  chal-
lenge [28]. Our results suggest that children’s need to con-
trol their online image is undermined by the common parent 
practice  of  sharing  information  about  children  online,  a 
result that echoes recent works suggesting that parents feel 
other parents overshare as well [72].  

Prior  work  has  shown  that  adults  routinely  share  infor-
mation  about  their  children  on  social  network  sites  during 
infancy and early childhood [31,45] and that these parents 
worry  about  how  children  will  perceive  such  posts  in  the 
future [72]. Our data suggest that older children do indeed 
have  concerns  about  this  practice,  and  further,  that  a  dis-
crepancy  exists  between  the  extent  to  which  children  and 
parents find it problematic. This data calls for future work 
to understand how families negotiate the terms of accepta-
ble information-sharing, whether adults feel this behavior is 
appropriate,  and  the  long-term  effects,  if  any,  of  routine 
oversharing.  Future  work  is  also  needed  to  explore  how 
children’s perspectives change with age. 
Despite  the  differences  in  rules  for  parents  and  rules  for 
children, the most commonly reported expectation for both 
groups  was  that  they  put  all  technology  away  in  certain 
social  contexts,  such  as  family  meals  or  during  conversa-
tions,  indicating  that  this  concern  applies  to  family  mem-
bers of all ages. Parents and children alike feel that all fami-
ly members should be expected to set aside devices during 
dedicated periods of time. Children say that parents should 
be  responsive,  initiate  family  time,  and  follow  their  own 
rules about banning devices at the dinner table, despite the 
fact  that  these  same  children  report  struggling  to  follow 
such rules themselves.  
Our results suggest that families are wrestling with an unre-
solved challenge of how to live up to their own ideals about 
contextually  appropriate  technology  use,  consistent  with 
prior work suggesting that parents struggle to pay attention 
to physically present family members while using technol-
ogy [25,40,53]. Our results further suggest that families are 
aware that technology compromises their attention and that 
they  are  actively  holding  one  another  accountable  for  this 
divided attention. Both adults and children report that they 
1) value parents’ ability to attend to their physical surround-
ings,  2)  believe  that  adults  should  set  technology  aside 
when the social context demands it, and 3) hold these ex-
pectations for both their own family members and for par-
ents generally. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Our results indicate that families in the U.S. struggle with 
common challenges around technology use. Children find it 
difficult  to  comply  with  requests  to  disconnect,  parents 
share more information online than their children are com-
fortable with, and the most salient concern among both par-
ents and children is the desire for all family members, re-
gardless of age, to pay attention to one another when in one 
another’s company. Our results also indicate common pat-
terns  of  harmony  within  families  and  common  tools  for 
improving tension over technology use. Parents report less 
difficulty  enforcing  rules  about  the  content  children  can 
access, and rule-setting processes that involve children are 
associated  with  improved  ideological  agreement  between 
parent and child as well as increased commitment to abid-
ing by rules. 

1385

This work suggests a need for future investigation to exam-
ine the source of the discrepancy between complying with 
activity constraints and context constraints. Though parents 
reported that, for children, this struggle stems from the fact 
that they just “can’t put it down,” we did not probe which 
technological and social affordances of children’s technolo-
gies (e.g., texting, selfies, social media sites) make context 
constraints uniquely challenging. Further work in this area 
promises to inform the design of technologies that facilitate 
contextually appropriate usage. Today, commercially avail-
able supports for family technology rules, such as Net Nan-
ny  or  iOS  Restrictions,  primarily  address  activity  con-
straints. Our results show that a design opportunity exists to 
address  context  constraints,  rules  that  children  and  adults 
alike report are a struggle for families. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We 
(HCC 
#1318143) for support. Any opinion, findings, and conclu-
sions  or  recommendations  expressed  in  this  material  are 
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views 
of the National Science Foundation. 
REFERENCES 
1.  Tawfiq Ammari, Priya Kumar, Cliff Lampe, and Sarita 
Schoenebeck. 2015. Managing Children’s Online Iden-
tities. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual SIGCHI Con-
ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 
’15), 1895–1904.  

the  National  Science  Foundation 

thank 

2.  Tawfiq Ammari and Sarita Schoenebeck. 2015. Under-
standing  and  Supporting  Fathers  and  Fatherhood  on 
Social Media Sites. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI ’15), 1905–1914.  

3.  Tawfiq  Ammari  and  Sarita  Schoenebeck.  2015.  Net-
worked empowerment on Facebook groups for parents 
of  children  with  special  needs.  In  Proceedings  of  the 
33rd Annual SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI ’15), 2805–2814. 

4.  Erica Weintraub Austin. 1993. Exploring the effects of 
active parental mediation of television content. Journal 
of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 37, 2, 147–158.  

5.  Barna Group. 2011. The Family & Technology Report. 
from 

Retrieved 
https://www.barna.org/component/virtuemart/faith-
spirituality/the-family-technology-report-
detail?Itemid=0 

6.  R.T.  Bower.  1973.  Television  and  the  public.  Holt, 

Rinehart, and Winston, New York, New York, USA. 
J  Alison  Bryant.  2001.  Television  and  the  American 
family. Routledge. 
J Van den Bulck and B Van den Bergh. 2000. The in-
fluence  of  perceived  parental  guidance  patterns  on 
children’s  media  use:  gender  differences  and  media 

7. 

8. 

1386

SESSION: PARENTS AND CHILDREN

displacement.  Journal  of  Broadcasting  &  Electronic 
Media 44, 3, 129–148. 

9.  Moira Burke and Robert Kraut. 2013. Using Facebook 
after losing a job. In Proceedings of the 2013 confer-
ence  SIGCHI  on  Computer  Supported  Cooperative 
Work (CSCW ’13), 1419-1430.  

10.  Moira  Burke,  Cameron  Marlow,  and  Thomas  Lento. 
2010. Social network activity and social well-being. In 
Proceedings of the 28th annual SIGCHI conference on 
Human factors in computing systems (CHI ’10), 1909. 
11.  Sarah  M.  Coyne,  Dean  Busby,  Brad  J.  Bushman, 
Douglas  A.  Gentile,  Robert  Ridge,  and  Laura  Stock-
dale.  2012.  Gaming  in  the  Game  of  Love:  Effects  of 
Video Games on Conflict in Couples. Family Relations 
61, 3, 388–396.  

12.  Vauna  Davis.  2012.  Interconnected  but  underprotect-
ed?  parents’  methods  and  motivations  for  information 
seeking on digital safety issues. Cyberpsychology, be-
havior and social networking 15, 12, 669–74. 

13.  Roger  Jon  Desmond,  Jerome  L.  Singer,  Dorothy  G. 
Singer,  Rachel  Calam,  and  Karen  Colimore.  1985. 
Family mediation patterns and television viewing. Hu-
man Communication Research 11, 4, 461–480. 

14.  Matthew  S.  Eastin,  Bradley  S.  Greenberg,  and  Linda 
Hofschire.  2006.  Parenting  the  Internet.  Journal  of 
Communication 56, 3, 486–504.  

15.  Dennis  D  Fehrenbacher  and  Burkhard  Pedell.  2015. 
More  than  a  screening  device:  the  influence  of  self-
selection on planned effort and fairness perception. Re-
trieved from https://www.business.unsw.edu.au/About-
Site/Schools-Site/Accounting-Site/Documents/D-
Fehrenbacher-More-than-a-screening-device.pdf 

16.  Douglas  A.  Gentile,  Amy  I.  Nathanson,  Eric  E.  Ras-
mussen, Rachel A. Reimer, and David A. Walsh. 2012. 
Do You See What I See? Parent and Child Reports of 
Parental Monitoring of Media. Family Relations 61, 3, 
470–487.  

17.  Douglas  A.  Gentile,  Rachel  A.  Reimer,  Amy  I.  Na-
thanson,  David  A.  Walsh,  and  Joey  C.  Eisenmann. 
2014.  Protective  Effects  of  Parental  Monitoring  of 
Children’s Media Use. JAMA Pediatrics, 1–6.  

18.  Douglas A. Gentile and David A. Walsh. 2002. A nor-
mative  study  of  family  media  habits.  Journal  of  Ap-
plied Developmental Psychology 23, 2, 157–178. 

19.  Elizabeth  C.  Hair,  Kristin  Anderson  Moore,  Sarah  B. 
Garrett, Akemi Kinukawa, Laura H. Lippman, and Erik 
Michelson.  2005.  The  Parent-Adolescent  Relationship 
Scale. In What Do Children Need to Flourish?, Kristin 
Anderson Moore and Laura H. Lippman (eds.). Spring-
er US, 183–202.  

20.  L  Haran.  1995.  Families  together  differently  today. 

Advertising Age 66, 43, 1. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

21.  Ellie Harmon and Melissa Mazmanian. 2013. Stories of 
the smartphone in everyday discourse: Conflict, tension 
&  instability.  In  Proceedings  of  the  31st  Annual 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI '13), 1051–1060. 

22.  Michael  G  Harvey  and  James  T  Rothe.  1986.  Video 
cassette  recorders-their  impact  on  viewers  and  adver-
tisers. Journal of Advertising Research 25, 6, 19–27. 

23.  Yasmeen Hashish, Andrea Bunt, and James E Young. 
2014.  Involving  Children  in  Content  Control:  A  Col-
laborative  and  Education-oriented  Content  Filtering 
Approach. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual SIGCHI 
Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems 
(CHI '14), ACM, 1797–1806. 

24.  Meizi He, Leonard Piché, Charlene Beynon, and Stew-
art  Harris.  2010.  Screen-related  sedentary  behaviors: 
children’s and parents' attitudes, motivations, and prac-
tices. Journal of nutrition education and behavior 42, 
1, 17–25.  

25.  Alexis  Hiniker,  Kiley  Sobel,  Hyewon  Suh,  Yi-Chen 
Sung, Charlotte P. Lee, and Julie A. Kientz. 2015. Tex-
ting  while  parenting:  how  adults  use  mobile  phones 
when  caring  for  children  at  the  playground.  In  Pro-
ceedings  of  the  33rd  Annual  SIGCHI  Conference  on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ‘15), 727–
736. 

26.  Itziar Hoyos Cillero and Russell Jago. 2010. Systemat-
ic review of correlates of screen-viewing among young 
children. Preventive Medicine 51, 1, 3–10. 

27.  Mizuko Ito, Misa Matsuda, and Daisuke Okabe. 2005. 
Personal, portable, pedestrian: mobile phones in Jap-
anese life. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 

28.  Carrie James and Henry Jenkins. 2014. Disconnected: 

Youth, New Media, and the Ethics Gap. MIT Press. 

29.  Sirkka L. Jarvenpaa and Karl R. Lang. 2005. Managing 
the Paradoxes of Mobile Technology. Information Sys-
tems Management 22, 4, 7–23.  

30.  Charlotte Johnston and Eric J. Mash. 1989. A Measure 
of Parenting Satisfaction and Efficacy. Journal of Clin-
ical Child Psychology 18, 2, 167–175. 

31.  Priya Kumar and Sarita Schoenebeck. 2015. The Mod-
ern Day Baby Book. In Proceedings of the 18th Annual 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
(CSCW ‘15), 1302–1312. 

32.  Lawrence Kutner and Cheryl Olson. 2008. Grand theft 
childhood:  the  surprising  truth  about  violent  video 
games and what parents can do. Simon and Schuster. 
33.  Alexis R. Lauricella, Drew P. Cingel, Courtney Black-
well,  Ellen  Wartella,  and  Annie  Conway.  2014.  The 
mobile  generation:  youth  and  adolescent  ownership 
and  use  of  new  media.  Communication  Research  Re-
ports 31, 4, 357–364.  

34.  Amanda  Lenhart.  2012.  Cell  phone  ownership.  Re-
from 

trieved 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2012/03/19/cell-phone-
ownership/ 

35.  Carolyn A. Lin and David J. Atkin. 1989. Parental me-
diation and rulemaking for adolescent use of television 
and VCRs. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Me-
dia 33, 1, 53–67.  

36.  Sonia  Livingstone  and  Moira  Bovill.  2013.  Children 
and  their  changing  media  environment:  a  European 
comparative study. Routledge. 

37.  Sonia Livingstone and Ellen J. Helsper. 2008. Parental 
mediation of children’s Internet use. Journal of Broad-
casting & Electronic Media 52, 4, 581–599. 

38.  Sonia  Livingstone.  2007.  From  family  television  to 
bedroom culture: Young people’s media at home. Me-
dia studies: Key issues and debates, 302–321. 

39.  May O. Lwin, Andrea J. S. Stanaland, and Anthony D. 
Miyazaki.  2008.  Protecting  children’s  privacy  online: 
how  parental  mediation  strategies  affect  website  safe-
guard  effectiveness.  Journal  of  Retailing  84,  2,  205–
217. 

40.  Brandon  T  McDaniel  and  Sarah  M  Coyne.  2014. 
“Technoference”:  the  interference  of  technology  in 
couple relationships and implications for women’s per-
sonal and relational well-being. Psychology of Popular 
Media Culture. 

41.  Kelly  Mendoza.  2009.  Surveying  parental  mediation: 
connections, challenges and questions for media litera-
cy. Journal of Media Literacy Education, 28–41. 

42.  Gustavo  S.  Mesch.  2009.  Parental  mediation,  online 
activities,  and  cyberbullying.  Cyberpsychology  &  be-
havior: the impact of the Internet, multimedia and vir-
tual reality on behavior and society. 12, 4, 387–393. 

43.  Catherine A. Middleton. 2007. Illusions of balance and 
control  in  an  always-on  environment:  a  case  study  of 
BlackBerry  users.  Continuum:  Journal  of  Media  and 
Cultural Studies 21, 2, 165-178.  

44.  Kimberly  J.  Mitchell,  David  Finkelhor,  and  Janis 
Wolak.  2005.  Protecting  youth  online:  Family  use  of 
filtering  and  blocking  software.  Child  Abuse  and  Ne-
glect 29, 7, 753–765. 

45.  Meredith  Ringel  Morris.  2014.  Social  networking  site 
use  by  mothers  of  young  children.  In  Proceedings  of 
the 17th annual SIGCHI conference on Computer Sup-
ported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’14), 1272–1282. 

46.  Margaret  Morrison  and  Dean  M.  Krugman.  2001.  A 
look at mass and computer mediated technologies: un-
derstanding the roles of television and computers in the 
home. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 45, 
1, 135–161.  

1387

47.  Amy  I.  Nathanson  and  Mong-Shan  Yang.  2003.  The 
effects of mediation content and form on children’s re-
sponses  to  violent  television.  Human  Communication 
Research 29, 1, 111–134.  

48.  Margaret  K  Nelson.  2010.  Parenting  out  of  control: 

anxious parents in uncertain times. NYU Press. 

49.  Amanda Noss (U.S. Census Bureau). 2014. Household 
Income: 2013. American Community Survey Briefs, 1–
6. 
from 
http://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/pu
blications/2014/acs/acsbr13-02.pdf 

Retrieved 

January 

1, 

2015 

50.  Caroline  Oates,  Nicki  Newman,  and  Anthanasia 
Tziortzi. 2014. Parents’ beliefs about, and attitudes to-
wards,  marketing  to  children.  In  Advertising  to  Chil-
dren: New Directions, New Media, Mark Blades, Caro-
line  Oates,  Fran  Blumber  and  Barrie  Gunter  (eds.). 
Palgrave Macmillan, 115–136. 

51.  Jeneva  L.  Ohan,  Debbie  W.  Leung,  and  Charlotte 
Johnston.  2000.  The  parenting  sense  of  competence 
scale: evidence of a stable factor structure and validity. 
Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science/Revue cana-
dienne des sciences du comportement 32, 4, 251–261.  
52.  Roy Pea, Clifford Nass, Lyn Meheula, et al. 2012. Me-
dia use, face-to-face communication, media multitask-
ing,  and  social  well-being  among  8-  to  12-year-old 
girls. Developmental psychology 48, 2, 327–36.  

53.  Jenny S Radesky, Caroline J Kistin, Barry Zuckerman, 
et al. 2014. Patterns of mobile device use by caregivers 
and children during meals in fast food restaurants. Pe-
diatrics 133, 4, e843–9. 

54.  Ernesto R. Ramirez, Gregory J. Norman, Dori E. Ros-
enberg, et al. 2011. Adolescent screen time and rules to 
limit  screen  time  in  the  home.  Journal  of  Adolescent 
Health 48, 4, 379–385. 

55.  Daniel  Romer,  Zhanna  Bagdasarov,  and  Eian  More. 
2013. Older versus newer media and the well-being of 
united states youth: results from a national longitudinal 
panel. Journal of Adolescent Health 52, 5, 613–619. 

56.  Lawrence  I.  Rosenkoetter,  Sharon  E.  Rosenkoetter, 
Rachel A. Ozretich, and Alan C. Acock. 2004. Mitigat-
ing the harmful effects of violent television. Journal of 
Applied Developmental Psychology 25, 1, 25–47. 

57.  Marie Evans Schmidt, Jess Haines, Ashley O’Brien, et 
al.  2012.  Systematic  review  of  effective  strategies  for 
reducing  screen  time  among  young  children.  Obesity 
20, 7, 1338–54.  

58.  Deborah  Schooler,  Janna  L.  Kim,  and  Lynn  Sorsoli. 
2006. Setting rules or sitting down: Parental mediation 
of  television  consumption  and  adolescent  self-esteem, 
body image, and sexuality. Sexuality Research and So-
cial Policy 3, 4, 49–62.  

59.  Aric  Sigman.  2012.  Time  for  a  view  on  screen  time. 

Archives of disease in childhood 97, 11, 935–42.  

1388

SESSION: PARENTS AND CHILDREN

60.  Charles Steinfield, Nicole B. Ellison, and Cliff Lampe. 
2008. Social capital, self-esteem, and use of online so-
cial  network  sites:  A  longitudinal  analysis.  Journal of 
Applied Developmental Psychology 29, 6, 434–445.  

61.  Anselm  Strauss  and  Juliet  M  Corbin.  1990.  Basics  of 
qualitative research: grounded theory procedures and 
techniques. Sage Publications, Inc. 

62.  Sherry  Turkle.  2012.  Alone  together:  why  we  expect 
more from technology and less from each other. Basic 
Books. 

63.  Joseph  Turow  and  Andrea  L  Kavanaugh.  2003.  The 
wired homestead: An MIT Press sourcebook on the In-
ternet and the family. ERIC. 

64.  Gill  Valentine  and  Sarah  Holloway.  2001.  On-line 
dangers?:  geographies  of  parents’  fears  for  children's 
safety in cyberspace. The Professional Geographer 53, 
1, 71–83.  

65.  Patti M Valkenburg, Marina Krcmar, Allerd L Peeters, 
and Nies M Marseille. 1999. Developing a scale to as-
sess  three  styles  of  television  mediation:  “instructive 
mediation,”  “restrictive  mediation,”  and  “social 
coviewing.”  Journal  of  Broadcasting  &  Electronic 
Media 43, 1, 52–66.  

66.  E.  A.  Vandewater.  2005.  “No--you  can’t  watch  that”: 
parental rules and young children’s media use. Ameri-
can Behavioral Scientist 48, 5, 608–623.  

67.  J.  Mitchell  Vaterlaus,  Troy  E.  Beckert,  Sarah  Tulane, 
and  Clare  V.  Bird.  2014.  “They  always  ask  what  I’m 
doing  and  who  I'm  talking  to”:  parental  mediation  of 
adolescent  interactive  technology  use.  Marriange  and 
Family Review 50, 8, 691-713. 

68.  Rong Wang, Suzanne M. Bianchi, and Sara B. Raley. 
2005.  Teenagers’  Internet  use  and  family  rules:  a  re-
search  note.  Journal  of  Marriage  and  Family  67,  5, 
1249–1258.  

69.  Barbara J. Wilson. 2008. Media and children’s aggres-
sion, fear, and altruism. Future of Children 18, 1, 87–
118. 

70.  Pamela  J.  Wisniewski,  Heng  Xu,  Mary  Beth  Rosson, 
and John M. Carroll. 2014. Adolescent online safety. In 
Proceedings of the 17th annual SIGCHI conference on 
Computer  Supported  Cooperative  Work  (CSCW  ’14), 
1258–1271.  

71.  Sarita  Yardi  and  Amy  Bruckman.  2011.  Social  and 
technical  challenges  in  parenting  teens’  social  media 
use. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual SIGCHI Con-
ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 
‘11), 3237-3246. 

72.  Parents on social media: Likes and dislikes of sharent-
http://mottnpch.org/reports-

ing.  Retrieved 
surveys/parents-social-media-likes-and-dislikes-
sharenting 

from 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

73.  2010. The Decline of Marriage and Rise of New Fami-
lies.  Pew  Research  Report.  Retrieved  May  6,  2015 
from 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/files/2010/11/pew-
social-trends-2010-families.pdf 

74.  2011. Teens’ parents and their technology profile. Re-
from 

trieved 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2011/11/09/teens-parents-
and-their-technology-profile/ 

75.  2011.  Overview  of  Race  and  Hispanic  Origin:  2010. 
2010  Census  Briefs.  Retrieved  May  6,  2015  from 
https://www.census.gov/prod/cen2010/briefs/c2010br-
02.pdf 

76.  2014.  Florida  Passes  New  York  to  Become  the  Na-
tion’s Third Most Populous State, Census Bureau Re-
ports.  U.S.  Census  Bureau.  Retrieved 
from 
http://www.census.gov/newsroom/press-
releases/2014/cb14-232.html 

 

1389

