CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Designing for Those who are Overlooked –  

Insider Perspectives on Care Practices and Cooperative 

Work of Elderly Informal Caregivers  
Marén Schorch, Lin Wan, David Randall, Volker Wulf 

University of Siegen, Institute for Information Systems and New Media 

{maren.schorch, lin.wan, dave.randall, volker.wulf}@uni-siegen.de   

57068 Siegen, Germany 

 

ABSTRACT 
This paper focuses on the complex and intimate setting of 
domestic home care. The majority of care for chronically ill 
people  is  realized  by  non-professionals,  the  relatives,  who 
are often overlooked. Many of these informal caregivers are 
also  elderly  and  face  multiple,  seriously  demanding 
challenges in the context of informal care 24/7. In order to 
support  this  increasing  user  group,  their  cooperative  work 
and coordination adequately, it is essential to gain a better 
understanding of their care practices and needs. This paper 
is based on ethnography in ten households in Germany. It 
combines data from the analysis of participant observations 
over eight months, interviews and cultural probes. Besides 
detailed  descriptions  of  two  cases,  the  central  features  of 
informal  care  experience  and  implications  for  design  are 
discussed:  the  self-concept  of  the  caregivers  as  being  care 
experts,  the  need  for  social  support,  timing  issues  and 
coordination with other actors in this field.  
Author Keywords 
Aging society; caregiver; cooperation; health; ethnography 
ACM Classification Keywords 
D.2.10 [Design]: Methodologies. 
H.5.2. [User Interfaces]: Theories and Methods, User-
Centered Design.  
J.3. [Computer and Society]: Computer-related health 
issues. 
INTRODUCTION 
That  the  population  is  aging  is  a  statistical  fact  for  many 
countries worldwide: one in every nine people in the world 
is  60  years  of  age  or  older,  and  the  projected  number  of 
people over the age of 60 will reach 2 billion by 2050 [62]. 
Along  with  this  development,  the  proportion  of  elderly 
people  that  have  to  cope  with  physical  and  mental 
limitations  or  even  chronic  diseases  that  necessitate  care 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for 
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA  
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819999 

 

infrastructure  available  struggle 

will  also  increase  (for  Germany,  see  [18]:  356-362,  [19]). 
Healthcare  expenditure  throughout  western  countries  has 
reached significant levels. The United States spent 18% of 
their gross domestic product (GDP) on health care in 2013 
[12].  In  six  EU  member  states  (France,  the  Netherlands, 
Germany, Denmark, Belgium and Austria) it exceeded 10% 
by  2011  [17].  The  majority  of  care  in  Germany  is  still 
realised in the private homes of the patients, in most cases 
by  their  relatives  (spouses,  children,  etc.):  In  2011,  two 
thirds of the 2.5 million chronically sick were cared for at 
home,  against  just  30%  in  professional  care  institutions 
[19]. There are several reasons for this: Firstly, the public 
finance  and 
to  meet 
increasing  demand.  Secondly  (and  understandably),  many 
elderly,  chronically  ill  people  choose  to  stay  at  home  in 
familiar surroundings where they can be cared for by their 
relatives.  Thirdly,  the  cost  of  care  in  a  nursing  home  in 
Germany, as elsewhere, (see [41] for a comparative review) 
is nearly twice as high as the cost of home care combined 
with external care services (e.g. [58]).   
The  research  we  describe  below  is  an  interdisciplinary 
research  project  (“TOPIC”,  The  Online  Platform  for 
Informal  Caregivers) 
information 
scientists,  sociologists  and  media  scientists  together  with 
partners from professional care institutions. The overall aim 
of the project is to understand the care practices of informal 
caregivers and how they relate to opportunities for support 
by designing a web-based care platform that could integrate 
various  services,  including  information  provision,  social 
networking and coordination tools (e.g. a digital calendar). 
In  this  paper,  we  present  the  results  of  a  qualitative  study 
conducted in the early phase of the project, investigating the 
following research questions: 1) The Practice: What are the 
major  characteristics  of 
the 
coordination  work  of 
informal  caregivers?;  2)  The 
Problems:  What  are  the  main  issues  with  which  elderly 
informal  caregivers  are  faced  when  practicing  care?;  3) 
Challenges  &  Opportunities:  What  are  the  most  important 
challenges  for  the  caregivers  in  respect  to  their  own  well-
being?  and  4)  The  Design:  What  implications  for  design 
can  we  make  from  learning  more  about  care  practice?  In 
our paper, we will present and discuss results from our data 
analysis  of  participant  observation  conducted  over  eight 

undertaken  with 

the 

routine  care  and 

787

the  work  of  caregivers  and 

months,  along  with  open  and  semi-structured  interviews 
and  cultural  probes.  After  describing  the  data  collection 
methods  used,  we  will  describe  two  cases  in  which  our 
informal caregivers and their care situation are detailed. In 
relation to our first three research questions, the following 
section will deal with the central features of informal care 
experience:  (I)  the  self-concept  of  the  caregivers  as  care 
experts;  (II)  their  crucial  need  for  social  support  and  (III) 
timing  issues  and  coordination  with  other  actors.  Along 
with the features, implications for design for such complex 
situations  will  be  presented  and  discussed.  This  work 
contributes  to  CSCW  not  only  by  providing  fine-grained 
understanding  of 
the 
implications  for  appropriate  support,  but  also  through 
methodological  reflection  intended  to  contribute  to  the 
creation of sensitizing concepts for the general purpose of 
better supporting transferability of findings from a specific 
context, as in this case [69]. 
STATE OF THE ART  
Growing awareness of demographic changes in relation to 
the aging population has led to a blossoming of technology 
to support healthcare. A large body of work in the general 
field  of  health  care,  and  more  specifically  around 
coordination  and  cooperation  in  domestic  home  care,  now 
to  a  better 
exists.  These  works  contribute  both 
understanding  of  how  healthcare 
is  collaboratively 
achieved, and to the designing of assistive technologies to 
support the caregiving. Designing in this field faces subtle 
requires  a 
yet  complex  challenges  and  normally 
comprehensive 
tailored 
methodology [20]. Recent research within the CSCW/ HCI 
purview  spans  a  large  spectrum  from  professional  care 
centres,  e.g.  hospitals,  to  the  support  of  individuals 
suffering  from  chronic  diseases  in  their  own  homes.  ICT 
development  for  institutional  care  tries  to  support  the 
intrinsically  cooperative  manner  of  institutional  care,  such 
as  in  the  case  of  the  introduction  of  Electronic  Patient 
Records  (EPR)  [33].  In  the  home  context,  research  has 
focused  on  empowering  people  so  that  they  can  live  at 
home  as  long  as  possible  (ageing  in  place).  Such  work  is 
focusing  increasingly  on  supporting  social  interaction  and 
the sense of belonging for the elderly [23, 35, 47, 63, 66] in 
order to for them to continue living independently, even in 
circumstances  where  older  people  experience  cognitive 
and/or physical decline. 
Recent  studies  on  healthcare  technologies  have  moved 
towards a better understanding of the socio-technical facets 
of  the  problem  [2,  6,  20,  36].  For  home-based  healthcare, 
instance, 
for 
the 
communication 
cooperation  needs  of  various 
stakeholders in chronic illness treatment [5, 42, 51, 53, 56, 
61, 70], for example through support for coordination work 
within a family with the help of digital calendars [3, 4, 5, 
12, 34]. Some recent research has shown (in a randomized 
study)  that  a  group  of  informal  caregivers  with  access  to 
online  support  were  less  likely  to  suffer  from  clinical 

requirement  analysis  and  a 

themes 
and 

evolved 

around 

have 

788

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

depression than those who did not [39]. It has been shown 
that  the  values  and  attitudes  of  each  stakeholder  play  an 
important  role  in  appropriation  and  usage  of  ICT  [3]. 
Research work in the context of cognitive issues has aimed 
at key problems such as the role of various stakeholders in 
the  care  process  and  has  dealt  with  such  issues  as 
“whereabouts” or “biographical” awareness [1, 13, 48, 49, 
68] and monitoring [15, 43, 54]. 
According  to  the  statistics,  it  is  also  a  fact  that  informal 
caregivers  do  a  significant  amount  of  work,  and  research 
has  shown  that  such  caring  places  a  significant  burden  on 
caregivers (see e.g. [9, 14, 16, 40, 65]). Eckwall et al. are 
primarily concerned with quality of life issues and derived 
results from a postal survey, as did Van Ruyn et al. In the 
latter instance, in a study of the care of cancer patients, it 
was pointed out that 50% of caregivers received no training 
and 50% also did paid work outside the home. The authors 
suggest,  “Future  research  should  explore  the  potentially 
high  yield  of  addressing  caregiver  needs”  ([65]:  44)  and 
furthermore  stress  that  little  is  known  about  the  kinds  of 
social  support  or  community  resource  that  might  be 
available to caregivers. In a similar vein, Deeken et al. [14] 
review  various  metrics  for  assessing  caregiver  needs  and 
argue  “Many  researchers  have  failed  to  explicitly  define 
what  they  mean  by  a  caregiver  need.”  ([14]:  937).  Such 
quantitative survey studies (see also [64] and [6]) go some 
way  towards  setting  out  at  a  fairly  general  level  what 
caregiver  needs  might  be  and  how  one  might  measure 
quality  of 
the  stresses  of 
caregiving  or  the  impact  of  the  caregiver’s  personality  on 
her/his  mental  and  physical  health  [34].  There  are  still, 
however, 
few  qualitative  studies  with  an 
ethnographic  “sensibility”  [4,  21]  or  which  are  geared 
towards  the  longer  term  to  fully  depict  the  subtleties  and 
nuances  of  the  field,  and  how  strikingly  different  the 
practices of caregiving can be. The studies that exist tend to 
focus on collaboration between the unpaid and professional 
caregivers  [55],  on  the  “narratives”  [37,  38]  produced  by 
male  caregivers,  or  on  domestic  abuse.  Most  pertinent  for 
our purposes is the study by Gooberman-Hill and Ebrahim 
[32], which emphasizes the need to think about caregiving 
in relational terms.  
Because  of  the  richly  situated,  sensitive  and  continuously 
evolving nature of healthcare, we have chosen a qualitative 
research approach here (ethnography). We adopt a broadly 
Grounded  Theoretical  perspective  for  our  work,  largely 
predicated on Glaser and Strauss’ early formulations. Their 
motivation 
about 
qualitative  research  processes  had  been  largely  influenced 
by  their  observations  in  hospitals  that  resulted  in  “The 
Awareness of Dying” [26]. Their research then focused on 
the  social  and  psychological  problems  accompanying  the 
care  of  dying  patients.  They  were  particularly  concerned 
with  the  interaction  between  professionals  (medical  and 
nursing  personnel),  the  patients,  and  their  relatives,  and 
developed  concepts  such  as  that  of  the  “loss  rationale”.  

systematizing 

indicators, 

relatively 

including 

thoughts 

life 

for 

their 

first 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

We  are  proposing  something  similar  here,  in  arguing  that 
greater attention to the social and psychological issues that 
accompany  long-term  informal  caregiving  is  needed  when 
intending to design for this context. This type of  informal 
caregiving  is  sociologically  defined  as  “unpaid  care,  both 
affective  and  instrumental,  provided  in  the  domestic  or 
private  arena,  often  by  women  and  often  for  family 
members.” ([22]: 196). The gender bias has to be qualified 
as  there  are  a  growing  number  of  men  that  care  for  their 
wives  (also  comprised  in  our  study).  In  including  male 
carers,  we  shed  light  on  relatives  (wives,  husbands  or 
children)  who  have  to  manage  a  role  shift  to  become  an 
informal  caregiver  over  time.  Their  way  of  dealing  with 
these demands is basic to our understanding of the needs of 
unskilled  caregivers  who  often  became  care  “expert”  over 
time. An important feature of this lies in the “moral career” 
[29]  or  identity  construction  process  of  caregivers  as  they 
move  from  an  untutored  position  to  relative  expertise.  In 
other words, how they learn to adopt a new social role and 
integrate this into their “role-set” [44].  
EMPIRICAL METHODS AND DATA COLLECTION  
As  stated,  we  use  Grounded  Theory  (GT)  as  a  research 
paradigm  reference,  meaning  that  we  mainly  share  the 
epistemological  approach  associated  with  Glaser  and 
Strauss’  early  works  [27],  especially  in  respect  to  the 
iterative  rationale  of  our  data  collection  and  the  desire  to 
conduct comparative work across a number of cases. In this 
respect, we favour the view of GT as an “abductive” rather 
than  inductive  approach.  That  is,  the  approach  works  to 
generate a “best fit” between data and theory- or category- 
generation  rather 
logical 
relationship  between  the  particular  and  the  general.  This, 
we argue, is consistent with Glaser and Strauss’ demand for 
“plausibility”,  and  demands  less  in  respect  of  the  coding 
mechanisms later outlined by Strauss and Corbin ([10]).  
The  data  material  is  based  on  an  ethnographic  stance, 
composed  of  participant  observation,  along  with  informal 
and semi-structured interviews. For fairly obvious reasons, 
there  are  limits  to  participatory  observation  in  home  care 
situations; so after some months, we also enlisted “cultural 
probes”  in  the  sense  offered  by  [11].  These  included  a 
variety  of  different  methodological  instruments  to  support 
self-description  and  self-observation  (see  below).  The 
feedback  to  the  cultural  probes  was  considerably  more 
positive than expected. We used this material (diary entries 
and pictures) mainly as a stimulus in the later interviews to 
encourage the caregivers to explain their entries in detail.  
1. Ethnography and Context Information   
This paper is based on data analysis from our first phase of 
data collection (one year), focusing on care practices, daily 
routines  and  the  needs  of  informal  caregivers.  By  paying 
attention  to  the  high  and  growing  percentage  of  informal 
care  situations,  the  research  took  place  not  in  care 
institutions, but in the homes of ten families, living in rural 
areas in Germany.  

than  demonstrating  a  strict 

789

to 

this  was 

the  presumption 

author,  who  performed 

Access to this private and sensitive field was very difficult 
to  manage  as  our  research  concept  aimed  not  just  at 
interviews  on  one  or  two  occasions  (like  most  former 
studies,  see  e.g.  [7,  9,  32,  50,  70]),  but  at  a  through  and 
detailed  participant  observation  in  the  homes  of  the 
caregivers.  Feedback  indicated  that  the  care  situation  is 
intimate  and  time-consuming  and  can,  moreover,  entail 
embarrassing  and  sometimes  humiliating  circumstances. 
Linked 
that  university 
researchers might be too “distanced”. We eventually made 
contact  with  the  assistance  of  “gatekeepers”:  Professional 
caregivers from care services who have daily contact with 
families  affected  by  care  introduced  us  to  families  by 
providing  our  contact  information,  flyers  etc.  Interested 
caregivers then contacted us and we met in person.  
A  slow  process  of  trust  building,  based  on  numerous 
meetings  in  the  home  and  careful  explanations  of  our 
objectives, eventually resulted in ten volunteer households. 
The 
the  participant 
observations  and  conducted  all  the  interviews,  had  prior 
experience  with  informal  as  well  as  formal  care  situations 
with patients suffering from dementia, Parkinson’s disease 
and multiple sclerosis. This seemed to have a positive effect 
on  the  development  of  relationships  with  the  elderly 
caregivers.  Furthermore,  the  researchers  are  experienced 
and  trained  ethnographers.  These  experiences  also  helped 
us  to  evaluate  situations,  react  adequately  and  build  up 
trustful relationships that remain on-going even after a long 
period.   
Older age might be defined in multiple ways, using diverse 
criteria such as specific cohorts, generations, health issues, 
employment status etc. (see [22]: 18ff.). In reference to our 
study,  we  set  the  inclusion  criteria  as  age  (over  60  years 
old)  and  being  a  full-time,  untrained  caregiver.  Our  ten 
participant caregivers are aged between 60 and 85 years old 
(most of them in their late 60s), and are retired or gave up 
their  job  because  of  the  care  situation.  All  but  three  are 
female and had grown-up children. Two caregivers care for 
a parent and one for her chronically ill, grown up child, but 
the  majority  of  our  informal  caregivers  care  for  their 
spouses. Three of them  have dealt with care  provision  for 
ten years now (i.e. “long-term” caregivers), the others for a 
period  between 
(“short-term” 
caregivers).  Despite 
these  diverse  characteristics,  one 
common  attribute  that  we  are  interested  in  is  care  for  a 
relative  suffering  from  a  chronic  and  progressive  illness 
without  any  realistic  chance  of  recovery:  dementia  and 
Alzheimer’s  disease  (often  accompanied  by  additional 
medical  conditions  such  as  strokes,  depression  or  heart 
failure),  Parkinson’s  disease  and  strokes.  We  base  our 
insights on data collected from all ten families, but mainly 
cite  data  here  from  eight  months’  observational  work 
undertaken with five of them: Three of these are long-term 

two  and 

four  years 

caregivers (of dementia patients and one case of irreparable 
brain damage respectively); one of them will be introduced 
in detail later on (Mrs Wolff*). The other two participants 
were short-term caregivers, one of whom will be examined 
later (Mrs Kunze).  
Beginning in October 2013, the first author and one student 
assistant were engaged in observations and interviewing in 
the  families.  This  tandem  of  researchers,  one  very  care- 
experienced person with another who was less experienced, 
allowed  us  to  combine  and  complement  two  perspectives, 
observation positions, etc. which resulted in very rich data 
material (field notes during the observation and observation 
protocols produced after the visits). It is in the nature of the 
domestic care situation that such observations are episodic. 
Typically,  visits  to  caregivers  lasted  several  hours  a  day 
(four  or  five  hours  on  average)  and  entailed  both 
accompanying caregivers as they went about their tasks and 
asking  questions  where  appropriate.  This  participation 
included going to whatever location in the household where 
the caregiver and patient happened to be as well contact to 
other members of the household (like children), friends that 
visited and professional care staff.   
In some cases, we visited the households weekly. Others we 
visited  biweekly  or  once  a  month  over  a  period  of  eight 
months and also alternated the days to gain a more complex 
insight into daily routines. Due to the inherent logic of the 
field and our research position, we didn’t schedule the visits 
for the caregivers, but adapted our observation times to the 
caregivers’  wishes.  As  mentioned,  building  trust  was 
critical  here  and  as  relationships  evolved,  observation 
sessions  became  longer.  Being  experienced  in  sensitive 
research fields, we were aware of the need to take great care 
around  the  interplay  between  involvement  and  distance 
with caregivers.   
Our  approach,  we  stress,  is  an  ethnographic  [57,  21]  in 
terms of its sensibility, seeking to uncover the meaningful 
practices of actors, and the attitudes and values that inform 
them,  and  combining  different  qualitative  methods.  We 
should  mention  that  nearly  all  the  caregivers  in  our  study 
raised  concerns  about  standardized  questionnaires  in  early 
meetings  as  they  associated  these  with  the  questionnaires 
that are used by health insurers to define levels of care.  
2. Cultural Probes  
We used cultural probes [11, 24] as an adjunct to our other 
enquiries,  enabling  a  degree  of  self-observation  by 
caregivers  during  the  times  that  we  were  not  around.  We 
prepared the different probes carefully and with attention to 
their “look and feel”. We explained to our participants that 
they were entirely free to use any or none of the probes we 
gave  them.  In  the  pictures  below  (Figure  1-4),  some 
                                                             
* All names and references from the data material cited here 
are pseudonyms.  

790

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

examples of the cultural probes are shown: a diary, smiley 
stickers and Polaroid pictures taken by one of the caregivers 
(Mrs Wolff). The cultural probes stayed in the families for 
two  weeks.  All  the  families  used  tools  from  the  box,  in 
some  cases  across  the  whole  of  the  two-week  period.  In 
most cases, the descriptions of the daily routines remained 
reasonably  consistent  over  time,  with  just  a  few  minor 
alterations in routine. Preferences varied; for example, one 
of the male caregivers didn’t wish to keep a diary, but used 
the  camera,  the  stickers  and  short  notes,  whereas  three  of 
the women engaged with the diary enthusiastically (one of 
them, Mrs Wolff, was writing a care diary anyway).  

    

  

 

 

Figure 1-4. Examples from the cultural probes in one 

family (Mrs Wolff): a diary, smiley stickers, and Polaroid 
pictures of care situations, external care staff, taken and 

authorized by the caregiver 

interviews  were 

3. Interviews  
As  participant  observation  had  certain  limitations  in  the 
domestic  context  reported  here, 
interviews  were  an 
additional  choice.  We  conducted  different  kinds  of 
interviews  according  to  specific  circumstances  [21]:  In 
some  cases, 
informal  and  arose 
spontaneously  during  observation,  for  instance  when  the 
researcher  failed  to  fully  understand  unfolding  events. 
These  informal  talks  were  noted  down  in  situ.  In  later 
stages of our fieldwork, we conducted loose semi-structured 
interviews after a) collecting the cultural probes back and b) 
at the end of the data collection phase after one year with 
each  caregiver  (one-on-one-interview  or  sometimes  with 
both the observing researchers). This yielded an additional 
20  semi-structured  interviews,  lasting  between  one  and  a 
half  hours  and  four  hours  each.  All  the  semi-structured 
interviews  were 
transcribed.  

tape-recorded  and 

later 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

findings,  modified  our 

The  major  subject  areas  covered  in  the  semi-structured 
interview  guide  were  based  on  the  initial  analysis  carried 
out  during  earlier  observations:  care  situation,  interaction 
between  the  caregiver,  care  receiver,  family  and  external 
care  staff,  mobility,  time  management  and  monitoring  of 
the health condition of the care receiver.  
4. Data Material and Analysis  
During  the  first  year,  a  substantial  amount  of  data  was 
collected  from  the  ten  families:  extensive  field  notes  and 
observation  protocols,  cultural  probe  material,  audio 
recordings from the interviews and transcripts. As pointed 
out  above,  our  approach  is  based  on  an  iterative  research 
process  without  a  clear  separation  of  the  data  collection 
phase  and  analysis  of  the  material,  but  in  constant 
comparison.  That  means  that  we  started  the  analysis  after 
the first observations with open coding of the material, went 
back to the field, analysed again, discussed consistencies in 
the 
focus  and  so  on.  We 
collaboratively analysed and discussed the data material in 
our project team as well as with another qualitative analysis 
group.  We  used  MAXQDA  as  a  tool  to  integrate  all  the 
data, which allowed us to progressively code the data, add 
memos  to  it,  and  work  asynchronously  when  necessary.  
We describe some of the main findings below, but first we 
provide details of the care context of two of our participants 
in order to illustrate the complexity of such situations.  
TWO CASES 
We chose two examples to reflect the different stages of the 
“moral  career”  of  the  caregivers  and  the  way  in  which  it 
reflects the progressive learning of a role. On the one hand, 
we  describe  the  experience  of  someone  who  has  been 
dealing  with  these  issues  for  less  than  three  years  (Mrs 
Kunze) and on the other someone who has been involved in 
domestic caregiving for over ten years (Mrs Wolff).  
Mrs Kunze: Struggling with the New “Normality” 
This family is an exemplar of a short-term-care situation in 
multiple ways: The 65-year-old caregiver takes care of her 
70-year-old  husband who was diagnosed with frontal lobe 
dementia three years ago and additionally with Parkinson’s 
disease just five months ago. The caregiver has a healthy, 
sporty  and  conscious  lifestyle.  One  of  her  two  daughters 
lives  in  the  house  next  door  with  her  family  and  supports 
the  caregiver  whenever  possible.  The  caregiver  helps  her 
husband  with  almost  every  routine  activity:  washing, 
getting dressed, drinking/eating, communication, everyday-
organization,  administrative  matters  etc.  The  care  receiver 
is  able  to  walk  and  to  follow  conversations  in  part,  but 
cannot  enunciate  verbally  or  manage  any  of  the  ordinary 
manual skills (like opening doors). The caregiver is retired 
and takes care of her husband most of the time. The family 
receives  financial  help  for  caring  and  uses  this  money  for 
external  care  services  such  as  day  care  service  twice  a 
week.  In  the  talks  with  her,  the  caregiver  stresses  the  fact 
that these times off are essential for her to manage some of 
the practical aspects of the situation (organization of every-
day life), but also for her self-care (sport).  

791

Mrs  Kunze,  by  her  own  account,  struggles  with  the 
situation  that  became  a  new  “normality”  in  her  family.  In 
comparing her previous life with her husband to the present 
situation, she refers to feelings of shame that she had never 
anticipated.  She  finds  it  difficult  to  adjust  to  the  changed 
public  behaviour  of  her  husband,  for  example  when  he 
demonstrates his enjoyment for jumping up and down in the 
street like a child. Feeding him, for instance, when they go 
to a restaurant, is also embarrassing for her. This learning 
process  whereby  caregivers  adjust  their  expectations  little 
by  little,  struggling  with  divergence  from  a  previously 
assumed  normality  or  with  dealing  with  the  “stigmatized 
identity”  of  her  husband  as  a  sick  person  and  herself  as  a 
caregiver [31], is typical of the process. 
A  second,  and  too-little  remarked  on  feature  of  domestic 
caregiving,  is  that  caregivers  themselves  are  often  elderly 
and  have  to  learn  to  cope  with  their  own  deteriorating 
health  at  the  same  time  as  they  learn  to  cope  with  their 
partner’s  developing  issues.  In  Mrs  Kunze’s  case,  she  fell 
ill  and  has  recently  been  diagnosed  with  diabetes.  As  she 
said,  until  her  diagnosis  she  had  not  had  any  significant 
problems with her health. Up until that point, she had been 
focused  entirely  on  her  husband’s  health  situation  (field 
notes, July 2014). Mrs Kunze described how she had tried 
to accustom herself to her husband’s frontal lobe dementia 
and  get  the  best  treatment  for  him  over  the  three-year 
period.  When  he  was  additionally  diagnosed  with 
Parkinson’s  disease  in  summer  2014,  she  had  to  start  all 
over again to find out what she could about the disease, but 
also about her own condition; to re-organize and re-adjust 
their  life  in  the  light  of  these  new  circumstances.  She 
explained to us that she sometimes feels that everything is 
too  much,  especially  with 
the  on-going  balance  of 
dependency, with the lack of time for herself, but also the 
fact that the spouses are no longer on equal terms.  
Our purpose in recounting this history is to demonstrate that 
caregiving is an evolving and dynamic matter. Mrs Kunze 
is  engaged  in  a  challenging  and  burdensome  learning 
process with few guidelines on how to manage it. She has 
some  limited  support  for  the  practical  problems  she 
encounters,  but  little  or  none  for  the  emotional  and  social 
adjustments that she has to make.  
Mrs Wolff: Doing Being the Ideal Caregiver  
This caregiver is 64 years old and cares for her 68-year-old 
husband  who  has  suffered  from  advanced  Alzheimer’s 
disease  since  2003.  His  medical  condition  deteriorated 
dramatically after a stroke in 2006. Since then, the patient 
has  been  completely  dependent  on  care,  being  entirely 
bedridden, 
to 
communication.  Her  receives  the  highest  level  of  care  in 
respect of health insurance standards. He relies on help with 
every  aspect  of  daily  life  (washing,  getting  dressed, 
drinking/eating etc.) and his wife feeds him on liquids five 
times a day.  
The health insurance contributes money and they also have 

unresponsive 

completely 

and 

is 

instance,  Mrs  Wolff 

a  care  service  that  supports  the  caregiver  twice  a  day  for 
washing  and  dressing.  Compared  to  the  other  family 
(Kunze),  this  family  has  financial  problems  and  cannot 
afford  any  extra  care  services  to  relieve  pressure  on  the 
caregiver.  Mrs  Wolff  just  takes  one  or  two  “weeks  off”  a 
year.  During  that  time,  the  care  receiver  is  based  in  a 
professional  care  institution,  covered  by  their  health  and 
care insurances.  
Mrs  Wolff  talks  about  the  physical  stresses  of  caregiving 
and  problems  she  has  with  her  own  significant  weight 
problems  as  well  as  knee  and  back  pains  that  became 
chronic. She refused to undergo necessary surgery because 
of  her  responsibilities  to  her  husband.  From  her  point  of 
view,  no  one  is  capable  of  caring  for  her  husband  in  the 
way that she can, that she “does the best that she possibly 
can” in her situation (informal interview, November 2013). 
This  self-positioning  underlines,  in  her  view,  a  level  of 
accumulated  expertise.  She  points  out  that  she  knows  her 
husband  best,  knows  how  she  can  cater  for  his  needs. 
External care, she suggests, would often fail to ensure that 
the patient gets enough to drink during the day. The point 
here  is  that  although  from  the  outside  such  diseases  have 
generic elements, from the point of view of caregivers, they 
are  also  unique  in  their  character  and  require  intimate 
knowledge of the patient’s needs. One consequence is that 
it is surprisingly difficult to accept outside help. During her 
time  off,  for 
to  choose 
destinations close by so that she can visit her husband at the 
nursing  home  and  care  for  him.  Comments  such  as  “I’m 
foolish  enough  not  to  choose  distant  destinations.”  (field 
notes,  informal  interview,  November  2013)  suggest  the 
interpretation  that  she  is  aware  of  the  costs  of  her  policy, 
but  at  the  same  time  she  seems  to  be  trapped  in  her  own 
role as the perfect caregiver. Mrs Wolff, like many of our 
participants,  demands  a  very  high  standard  of  herself, 
despite the extremely demanding nature of the role she has 
adopted. She remains highly conscious of what she has lost, 
including  the  companionship  associated  with  her  previous 
life and the activities they shared. From her point of view, 
she no longer has what she calls a “real husband” in terms 
of  a  communicative  human  being,  husband,  father,  and 
sexual partner.  
Like  almost  all  our  respondents,  she  confesses  to  being 
stressed  and  has  to  adjust  to  her  loneliness  and  lack  of 
freedom.  She  admits  that,  at  times,  she  “wishes  he  would 
die”  (field  notes,  January  2014).  She  also  speaks  of  the 
things  one  gets  used  to,  including  silence.  It  is  seldom 
remarked  on  that  routine  family  life  is  a  noisy  affair.  The 
absence  of  communication  with  a  partner  radically  alters 
that.  Mrs  Wolff  uses  YouTube  to  keep  herself  and  her 
husband “busy” (ibid.).  
Another  result  of  our  analysis  is  that  long-term  caregivers 
like  Mrs  Wolff  often  describe  themselves  as  protecting 
other members of the family from the daily grind. This self- 
identified expertise can be further isolating. In Mrs Wolff’s 

tends 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

case,  she  is  keen  to  ensure  that  her  two  sons  (aged  early 
twenties)  do  not  have  to  contribute  to  their  father’s  care. 
Despite the fact that there are potential sources for support 
in the household, she is not inclined to include them. Here, 
her  other  social  role  (as  a  mother)  is  dominant  and  she 
wants to protect her children, as she put it.  
One last feature that bears a similarity to Mrs Kunze and to 
other participants is a dependence on computer technology. 
Mrs Wolff uses online banking because it is useful for the 
attendance allowance settlement and similar things. This is 
also  in  line  with  her  self-perception  that  she  needs  “to  be 
effective”, cannot afford to let herself go or have times-out. 
She  organizes  her  life,  the  care  and  the  household  in 
accordance  with  very  clear,  almost  ritualized  rules.  This 
strategy was also found in our other participants’ routines, 
which brings us to the next section and the presentation of 
central aspects of care practices.  
FEATURES OF THE INFORMAL CARE EXPERIENCE   
In the data material, we found a wide range of aspects that 
are  relevant  for  all  the  ten  participants  and  their  care, 
regardless  of  the  concrete  disease  or  situation.  In  the 
following,  we  will  present  and  discuss  three  central 
features,  illustrate  them  with  data  material  and  integrate 
relevant  implications  for  design.  The  features  represented 
here  have  been  developed  as  core  categories  during  the 
process of data analysis.  
I. Self-concept as a Care-expert  
One of the most important findings so far has been the self-
description  and  self-positioning  of  the  informal  caregivers 
as  care  experts  over  time.  We  described  this  above,  after 
Goffman, as involving a “moral career”. Goffman [28, 31] 
shows, in a different context, how mental patients and other 
stigmatized individuals experience the stages of their career 
in a variety of ways but typically in the “pre-patient” phase 
experience “losing control”, provoking emotional responses 
such  as  anxiety.  Moreover,  this  phase  is  accompanied  by 
contact  with  mediators  -  agencies  that  affect  progress  and 
negotiate  a  role  with  family  and  friends.  The  “patient” 
phase is characterized by regimentation and routine and the 
development of strategies to cope with loss of freedom. We 
will  argue,  by  analogy,  that  this  describes  the  evolving 
experience  of  the  caregiver  well.  Caregivers  experience 
stigmatization, early anxieties and feel a loss of control over 
their domestic life. Their progress is marked by interaction 
with professionals and institutions, and the development of 
coping  strategies  that  are  embedded  in  routines.  Goffman 
also  introduces  the  notion  of  “comrades  in  suffering”, 
people who are able to give moral support or tips on how to 
manage. This, we argue, is something largely absent from 
the  moral  career  of  the  caregiver.  As  we  have  seen,  quite 
the  opposite  can  be  seen,  as  caregivers  attempt  to  shield 
family members from the burden.   
Sociologists  are  familiar  with  the  structured  nature  of 
familial roles and have noted the way in which changes in 
household structure, gender roles, and so on have impacted 

792

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

on  the  family.  This  is  just  as  true,  if  not  more  so,  for 
caregivers as they learn how to negotiate new roles. They 
experience  a  “role  shift”  [28,  31]  from  being  mainly  a 
wife/husband,  mother/father  or  daughter,  to  new  and,  to 
begin  with,  ill-defined  obligations  as  full  time  caregivers. 
They receive no professional training in that field of work 
and so are forced into the “learning” of new practices. Such 
learning is evolutionary and takes place over a long period 
of  time.  It  is,  in  large  part,  composed  of  two  equally 
important elements. The first entails “coping” with the new 
reality,  especially  as  there  is  little  or  no  chance  of  things 
changing for the better. Coping here refers not only to the 
obvious  burdens  but  also 
to  new  experiences  of 
stigmatization. This includes shame, feeling uncomfortable 
or being embarrassed by a partner. Mrs Kunze, for instance, 
points out that she tries to avoid certain public places that 
do not offer any intimacy (like big restaurants) (field notes, 
November  2013)  or  – if  that  is  impossible  –  she  positions 
her husband with his back to other members of the public 
so his behaviour is relatively invisible (field notes, February 
2014). This, it scarcely needs to be said, also entails radical 
revisions of relationships with relatives, friends, neighbours 
and acquaintances.  
Over  time,  this  new  reality  becomes  more  fixed.  There 
seems to be, in other words, a progressive acceptance of a 
role.  Where  short-term  caregivers  are  engaged  in  coping 
with  the  novel  situation,  learning  what  that  role  might  be 
and adjusting to changing circumstances, “old hands” have 
acquired a self-image of a clearer and arguably more fixed 
kind.  As  described  above  for  Mrs  Wolff,  our  long-term 
caregivers  position  themselves  as  care-experts,  also  in 
contrast to professionals. Mr Jacob (80 years old, caring for 
his wife with dementia for ten years now) even stressed his 
perfect  care  of  his  wife’s  body  and  that  her  condition 
“would  be  significantly  worse  if  she  was  in  a  nursing 
home”  (informal  interview,  January  2014).  Mrs  Hermann, 
the  mother  of  a  nearly  fifty-year  old  man  suffering  from 
irreparable  brain  damage  and  severe  epilepsy,  also  often 
referred 
to  negative  experiences  with  external  care 
institutions. From her point of view (as was also expressed 
by many of our other caregivers), nursing homes and their 
medical staff in particular do not have the adequate framing 
conditions and competences to really understand individual 
needs  and  respond  to  them  properly.  They  only  perform 
their  “run-of-the-mill”  procedures  as  she  says,  she  has 
experienced  more  than  once  with  her  own  son  (informal 
interview,  Mrs  Hermann,  October  2013).  An  exception  to 
this  observation  is  the  fact  that  most  of  our  long-term 
caregivers  report  positive  relationships  with  individual 
external  care  professionals  who  visit  regularly  and  who 
seem  to  share  their  understanding  of  the  necessary  care 
routine. Most of the time, these people do their job in the 
family  over  years  and  stick  to  the  care  routines  and 
preferences  the  informal  caregivers  have  established  over 
time  (field  notes  from  Mrs  Wolff,  Mr  Jacobs  and  Mrs 
Hermann).  

the 

II. The Crucial Need for Social Support 
One  major  aspect  of  informal  caregivers’  lives  can  be 
identified  as  their  social  isolation.  Caregivers  often  spoke 
about  their  reduced  opportunity  to  chitchat  with  other 
people  on  a  regular  basis,  but  also  to  get  in  contact  with 
other people facing a similar situation. In large part, this has 
to do with increasing isolation, for short-term as well as for 
long-term  caregivers.  It  becomes  even  more  difficult  to 
share experiences, identify common problems and solutions 
and  gather  information.  There  is,  in  short,  an  absent 
network in this sense, despite the fact that our participants 
have offline social networks consisting of close family and 
friends.  These  networks  can  sometimes  be  activated  as 
support  networks  in  order  to  afford  time  off  for  the 
caregivers;  Mrs  Kunze  and  Mr  Jacob,  for  instance,  both 
place  great  value  on  the  two  or  three  hours  a  week  when 
they meet acquaintances in their respective sports clubs. All 
the  contacts  with  the  nuclear  family  and  friends  are 
important  for  them  and  represent  a  kind  of  “self-care”  for 
informal  caregivers;  but  they  also  expressed  the  desire  to 
communicate  with  people  outside  their  own  family  and 
network without any obligations or on a more “anonymous 
basis”.  
Care  staff  visits  are  also  opportunities  for  caregivers  to 
retain  some  social  contact  outside  the  family.  As  pointed 
long-term  caregivers  rely  on 
out  before,  all  of 
cooperation  with  professional  care  organizations 
that 
support them on a daily basis. The level of intensity varies 
amongst  the  observed  families,  but  in  most  of  the  cases, 
professional  caregivers  visit  the  families  twice  a  day  for 
some minutes. As the work of the professional care staff is 
highly  regulated  due  to  economic/financial  restrictions 
based  on  the  individual  care  level  of  the  patient,  the  time 
available in the respective household is low. Consequently, 
the shared care work is underpinned by very clear rules and 
routines  (organization  of  the  equipment,  roles,  etc.).  Here, 
mutual understanding and trust between the involved actors 
is most important to maintain a functioning and satisfying 
situation not just for the patient, but also for the responsible 
informal caregiver. Often, the informal caregivers prefer a 
certain professional caregiver who, in their view, shares an 
understanding  of  the  individual  and  the  sensitive  situation 
often due to a long period of collaboration. 
These  limited  opportunities  do  not,  however,  solve  the 
major problem of organizing free time for meeting friends 
and keeping up regular appointments. Options for meeting 
people outside the house are limited – which is particularly 
difficult to manage in rural areas, and for elderly caregivers 
who are not very mobile. The feeling of being isolated from 
life and feeling lonely accompanies most of our long-term 
caregivers;  for  instance  Mrs  Hermann,  who  has  cared  for 
her  son  for  decades:  “Sometimes,  one  feels  like  one  is 
buried  alive,  if  one  doesn’t  see  anyone  else  or  talk  to 
anyone  else  but  the  professional  care  service  in  the 
morning.” (Mrs Hermann, field notes, October 2013). Over 
the month of observation in her home, we recognized that 

793

her motivation to participate in our study was mainly driven 
by the hope for more communication with other caregivers 
in the long run.  
III. Timing Issues and Coordination  
In our field of research, the importance of daily routines is 
evident. Even when caregivers are themselves retired (as in 
our  study),  they  are  faced  with  multiple,  demanding  tasks 
due  to  the nature of full-time care. These  embrace  mainly 
care-related  activities  such  as  the  personal  care  of  the 
patient’s body (washing, dressing, moving from one side to 
the other and feeding several times a day, giving medicine 
etc.)  which  is  time-consuming  and  challenging  because 
most  of  the  patients  are  (completely  or  partly)  immobile, 
bed-ridden all the time, unable to interact or even respond 
to  their  caregivers  and  so  on.  All  other  activities  such  as 
appointments  with  doctors,  professional  care  staff  or 
insurance  companies,  organisation  of  medical  aid,  the 
patient’s  financial  and  legal  issues,  cooking,  shopping, 
washing clothes, cleaning the house/flat, etc. also have to be 
managed  by  the  informal  caregiver.  Not  forgetting  her  or 
his  own  needs.  Mr  Jacob  (80  years  old),  for  instance, 
pointed  out  that  “he  is  now  controlled  more  by  outside 
influences  and  busy  with  the  care  job  than  he  was  during 
his working life” (informal  talk,  January  2014), especially 
because  he  is  “on  call”  24/7  whether  his  wife  is  feeling 
unwell  or  whether  her  medical  condition  has  deteriorated 
etc.  Consequently,  a  common  characteristic  of  all  the 
participating  caregivers  is  their  intense  need  to  structure 
time in detail and to coordinate their activities with others 
(the  relatives,  their  social  network,  the  professional  care 
staff  etc.).  Most  of  them  accomplish  this  by  using  a 
calendar (in paper form) to keep track of all their activities.  
Our  respondents  consistently  report  that  they  find  the 
management  of  time  very  difficult.  Firstly,  long-term  care 
of  patients  with  progressively  deteriorating  conditions 
involves  considerable  coordination  with  professionals  of 
one  kind  or  another.  Professional  people,  unsurprisingly, 
have an entirely different set of commitments to deal with; 
they cannot easily “drop” one patient in order to deal with 
another  and  often  have  fixed  commitments.  A  significant 
part of the formal support given involves visits to external 
clinics.  This  means  that  for  the  most  part,  informal 
caregivers  must  fit  in  with  professional  schedules  rather 
than  the  other  way  round.  Secondly,  the  provision  of 
medication  in  a  systematic  and  controlled  manner;  the 
management  of  exercise  regimes;  dealing  with  sanitary 
requirements, organizing meals and so on all require careful 
planning, especially when the caregiver is, more often than 
not,  solely  responsible.  Thirdly,  depending  on 
their 
condition,  the  cared-for  person  often  cannot  be  left  alone 
for more than a few minutes at a time and thus caregiving 
has to be carefully dovetailed with other activities such as 
meetings  with  relatives  and  friends,  shopping 
times, 
employment  or  the  minimal  leisure  time  of  the  informal 
caregivers themselves (for sport, time-off etc.). This is even 

794

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

more important for elderly caregivers and the maintenance 
of their own health.  
The  paper  calendars  are  full  of  scribbled  detail.  Our 
participants  all  described  the  calendar  as  an  essential  tool 
for  their  time  management.  The  tasks,  activities,  other 
actors  and  routines  that  have  to  be  managed  are  highly 
complex and – as Mrs Kunze pointed out – they have to be 
managed by the caregivers themselves as their partners, the 
care receivers, cannot support them: “in partnerships, one 
could  divide  the  tasks  etc.,  but  that’s  not  possible  any 
more”  (informal  talk,  February  2014).  This  quote  also 
underlines the difference in coordination and collaboration 
in families as such; in childcare, for instance, as – ordinarily 
–  these  tasks  can  be  divided  between  the  parents/partners. 
In  this  situation,  time  management  is  a  far  from  trivial 
matter.  Deviation  from  the  plan,  in  this  context,  is  often 
very consequential and disruptive. Most of our participants 
stressed  that  they  depended  as  much  as  possible  on 
predictability,  especially  of  the  professional  care  staff. 
Contingencies  that  arise  (e.g.  the  late  arrival  of  a  support 
worker  or  a  cancellation  by  a  supporting  family  member) 
may  result  in  an  avalanche  of  defaults,  like  Mrs  Kunze 
pointed out: “a delay of the day care bus will provoke panic 
in the whole family.” She described a scene from the week 
before, when the bus that should have picked her husband 
up from day care was late by over an hour. Her daughter 
was waiting for Mr Kunze (the patient) at home, but had to 
leave  due  to  other  obligations.  (field  notes,  November 
2013).  
Most  caregivers  we  observed  emphasized  the  need  for 
circumstances  to  be  as  controllable,  or  organized  as 
possible.  Some  of  them  also  pointed  out  that  they  would 
like  to  improve  the  coordination  between  their  own 
schedule and that of the professional care staff organization, 
for  instance  with  automatic  notifications  about  delays  etc. 
Daily routines are essential for coping successfully with the 
demands  of  the  care  situation;  plans  are,  in  most  cases, 
precise to the minute, especially when professional external 
care is involved. All of our caregivers communicated their 
lack  of  “time  for  themselves”,  the  lack  of  freedom  and 
spontaneity  in  their  lives.  Mrs  Wolff  summarized  her 
situation  with  the  characteristic  comment  that  “even 
spontaneity  has  to  be  organized”  (interview  after  the 
collection of the cultural probes, February 2014).  
DISCUSSION & CONCLUSION 
As stated at the beginning, we refer to Glaser and Strauss’ 
early works about the “The Awareness of Dying” and their 
interest  in  the  rationales  of  caregivers,  but  we  go  beyond 
that by addressing a specific group of unskilled (informal) 
caregivers  and  their  way  of  coping  with  their  situation, 
learning  a  new  role  as  a  caregiver  and  cooperating  with 
professional  caregivers.  As  we  have  pointed  out,  existing 
literature  has  tended  to  focus  on  quantitative  measures  of 
quality of life or on limited “one shot” interviews ([7, 9, 32, 
50,  70].  Here,  long-term  ethnography  provides  us  with 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

extensive  insights  into  the  highly  complex  and  evolving 
situations  of  domestic  care  and  in  so  doing  addresses 
precisely the “missing what” that Van Ruyn et al. [65] point 
to.  
The experiences described above are not stable or fixed, but 
dynamic in multiple ways. This is important, for there can 
be  no  generic  application  that  fits  the  needs  of  all 
caregivers.  Progress  over  time  and  the  learning  curve 
typical  of  their  experience,  we  believe,  is  the  most 
important  dimension  to  consider.  Learning,  as  we  have 
seen, is a major feature of the moral career of the caregiver 
and  all  of  our  participants  express  reservations  about  the 
kind of help – social and symbolic as well as material – that 
is  available  to  them  (see  for  instance  the  aspect  “self-
perception  as  a  care-expert”).  The  learning  process  of  the 
new,  additional  social  role  of  an  informal  caregiver  is 
mainly  realized  and  accepted  over  time.  Along  with  this 
goes the observation that people who have been caregivers 
for a short period and who still struggle with this new role, 
situation and routine, also partly show what Goffman calls 
“role  distance”  [30],  meaning  a  more  critical  view  of  the 
caregiver role (such as Mrs Kunze). That might also be an 
important  perspective  to  design  for  such  situations  in  the 
sense  of  supporting 
the  establishment  of  a  “virtual 
community of practice”.  
Again, learning might be mistakenly thought of as simply a 
cognitive matter- that there are certain things one needs to 
know  about  a  medical  condition  in  order  to  provide  care 
and  so  on.  We  have  tried  to  show  that  this  significantly 
underplays other important aspects of the learning process. 
Not least, support needs to be provided to enable caregivers 
to  manage  their  own  identities  over  time.  This  includes 
support, 
feelings  of  shame  and 
stigmatization, and the sharing of experiences of this kind. 
Isolation and the moral commitment to “managing on one’s 
own”, and managing one’s own psychological and physical 
health  turns  out  to  be  a  major  feature  of  the  caregivers’ 
burden.  We  interpreted  these  changes  as  a  “moral  career” 
for  caregivers,  one  in  which  their  identities  and  social  as 
well  as  their  more  detailed  practices  and  their  cooperative 
work  undergo  change.  Informal  caregivers  have  to  face 
these  changes  and  have  to  adapt  themselves  to  new  and 
evolving  conditions.  Consequently,  the  technical  support 
we envisage will have to reflect this variety of conditions.  
The most significant challenge we as designers face, is how 
to  make  the  envisioned  product  capable  of  covering  the 
entire  process  that  caregivers  undergo.  This  not  only 
requires the platform to be easily accessible for users with 
various levels of technical experience, but also requires the 
features  and  contents  of  the  platform  to  cover  caregivers’ 
needs during the various phases of their moral career.   
In respect to experience with technology, most of our users 
have zero to little experience with smart devices and online 
social networks. Prior to our device rollout, only one of our 
users had a smart device (Tablet) and only one (other) user 

instance, 

for 

for 

further  complicates 

was  registered  on  Facebook.  This  of  course  creates  great 
challenges  for  the  user  group  to  accept  and  appropriate 
technological interventions. Additionally, the likelihood of 
being subjected to age-related impairments such as reduced 
eyesight 
the  situation.  Carefully 
designed interfaces and elderly-oriented design are just the 
first steps. The platform needs to have a site-wide guidance 
system  to  walk  users  through  early  sessions  and  support 
them  at  various  points.  We  argue  rather,  that  we  need  to 
understand  the  complex  and  evolving  assumptions  that 
inform  their  practices  as  they  move  from  “novice”  to 
“expert”. And, of course, we need to learn how, when and 
what kind of help might be needed, both on a technological 
and  care  level.  From  the  methodological  perspective,  we 
need to take a concerted approach to bring the technology 
to  our  users,  breaking  what  can  look  like  monolithic 
complexity  into  little  milestones.  For  example,  rolling  out 
smart  devices  earlier  than  the  prototype  is  ready,  we  will 
give  the  users  enough  time  to  first  get  acquainted  with  a 
device  and  consequently  reduce  hindrance  when 
the 
software is later rolled out separately. In addition, long-term 
personal training is essential for elderly users. Overall, we 
need  to  think  of  our  platform  as  a  service  rather  than  a 
software product. This means education in how to use the 
platform,  individual  adaption  of  the  service,  and  the  work 
of  a  reliable  support  team  will  all  be  as  important  as  the 
platform itself. 
The  definition  of  the  content  and  features  the  platform 
should  provide  is,  of  course,  another  major  challenge. 
Considering  the  diversity  of  experience,  and  the  evolving 
progress of each individual, the platform will need to have 
both great flexibility and extensibility to be able to cover a 
large range of needs/interests. A modular design philosophy 
would  seem  to  best  fit  these  varied  scenarios,  providing 
easy extensibility by add-ons. In respect to content, it will 
provide  an  editor-friendly  interface  to  allow  easy  content 
maintenance;  so  content  providers  will  not  have  to  bother 
with source code and can focus on delivering great content 
to  the  platform  continuously.  We  see  several  potential 
contributions our platform will bring to informal caregivers 
and  we  would  like  to  illustrate  and  provide  further 
considerations in relation to:  
Information Support: The confidence informal caregivers 
develop of “owning” the best care practice is based on the 
fact that they have gone through a long (normally painful) 
learning  process,  sometimes  receiving  relatively 
little 
external  help  from  professionals  along  the  way.  The 
envisioned platform should provide information to support 
this  learning  process  and  make  channels  for  information 
exchange  available.  Our  results  underline  that  informal 
caregivers  need  not  only  credible 
information  from 
professionals  (e.g.  information  about  a  disease),  but  also 
information  from  other  peers  (caregivers  facing  similar 
challenges) to provide orientation in their moral career. The 
platform  will  contribute  information  channels  from  both 
professionals and the “unprofessional” users. Of course, the 

795

intertwined,  compactly  crowded  plans 

validity of user-generated content here could be a concern; 
a  certain  need  for  moderation  by  professionals  on  these 
channels may be necessary. How this might meet the needs 
of  our  users  will  be  examined  in  the  next  phases  of  the 
project.  Last  but  not  the  least,  the  platform  needs  to 
structure information in such a way that different levels of 
knowledge and expertise are catered for. 
Social Support: Our results illustrate that, so far, our users 
do not use online social networks, and even their real-world 
social  connections  are  decreasing  due  to  limited  time, 
energy  and  options.  Building  a  dedicated  community  for 
informal  caregivers  has  been  our  ambition  since  the 
foundation of the project. Yet, with more understanding of 
the  field,  we  are  ever  more  aware  of  the  need  for  social 
support  for  this  population  (e.g.  experience  on  fighting 
stigmatization and shame, psychological counseling, social 
inclusion,  online/offline  events,  and  care  for  one’s  own 
situation).  Considering  the  lower-than-average  physical 
mobility of this user group, especially in rural areas where 
offers  are  even  more  limited,  the  platform  might  also 
provide  mobility  support  (e.g.  public  connection,  taxi,  car 
sharing [45]).  
Coordination  Support:  In  our  users’  paper  calendars,  we 
observed 
that 
involve multiple stakeholders such as family members and 
care professionals. The communication channels with these 
stakeholders,  for  now,  are  maintained  solely  “by  hand”. 
“Spontaneity  has  to  be  organized”,  but  as  the  current 
coordination  lacks  efficiency  and  responsiveness,  and 
stakeholders  are  not  able  to  react  to  contingency  in  many 
cases. Coordination support on our platform, we think, goes 
well  beyond  merely  providing  a  digital  calendar.  The 
challenge  lies  in  creating  and  integrating  coordination 
channels 
communication 
“backstage”. It is, we argue, essential that all stakeholders 
are  integrated  into  the  coordination  process,  and  that  the 
platform  should,  proactively  where  possible,  inform  all 
stakeholders  about  contingency  and  support 
the  re-
negotiation process when stakeholders react to unexpected 
changes. To achieve this goal, technical development is just 
one part of the objective. It would also require a lot of effort 
in the integration process on the part of “big players” in the 
healthcare system, e.g. care service and health insurance.  
Informal  elderly  caregivers  might  have  been  relatively 
overlooked as an ever growing user group up till now, but 
we believe that long-term micro studies contribute towards 
an understanding of the evolving complexity of this kind of 
cooperative and coordinative care work.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The  authors  thank  all  the  caregivers  and  the  professional 
care organizations for their great support. We are especially 
grateful  to  the  families  who  opened  their  home  for 
extensive  participant  observations.  This  research  has  been 
funded by the European Union (AAL-2012-TOPIC) and the 
Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Germany. 

automation 

of 

and 

the 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

REFERENCES 
1.  Gregory Abowd, Gillian R. Hayes, Julie A. Kientz, Lena 
Mamykina, and Elizabeth D. Mynatt. 2006. Challenges 
and Opportunities for Collaboration Technologies for 
Chronic Care Management. The Human Computer 
Interaction Consortium HCIC 2006. 

2.  Stinne A. Ballegaard, Thomas R. Hansen, and Moten 

Kyng. 2008. Healthcare in everyday life: designing 
healthcare services for daily life. In Proceedings 
CHI 2008, ACM Press, 1807-1816.  

3.  Susanne Bødker, Erik Grönvall. 2013. Calendars: time 
coordination and overview in families and beyond. In 
ECSCW 2013: Proceedings of the 13th European 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 
Springer, London, UK, 63-81.  

4.  Claus Bossen, Lars Rune Christensen, Erik Grönvall, 
and Lasse Vestergaard. 2013. CareCoor: Augmenting 
the coordination of cooperative home care work. 
International journal of medical informatics, 82, 5: 
e189-e199.  

5.  Tone Bratteteig and Ina Wagner. 2013. Moving 

healthcare to the home: the work to make homecare 
work. ECSCW 2013: Proceedings of the 13th European 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work. 
Springer, London, UK, 143-162.  

6.  Lynda C. Burton, Bozena Zdaniuk, Richard Schulz, 

Sharon Jackson, and Calvin Hirsch. 2003. Transitions in 
Spousal Caregiving. The Gerontologist 43, 2: 230-241. 
7.  Yunan Chen, Victor Ngo, and Sun Young Park. 2013. 

Caring for caregivers: designing for integrality. 
Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Computer 
supported cooperative work - CSCW ’13, ACM Press, 
91-102.  

8.  Lars Rune Christensen and Erik Groenvall. 2011. 

Challenges and Opportunities for Collaborative 
Technologies for Home Care Work. In ECSCW 2011: 
Proceedings of the 12th European Conference on 
CSCW, Springer, London, UK, 61-80. 

9.  Elizabeth C. Clipp and Linda K. George. 1990. 

Caregiver Needs and Patterns of Social Support. Journal 
of Gerontology 45, 3: S102-S111.  

10. Juliet C. Corbin and Anselm L. Strauss. 2015. Basics of 

Qualitative Research. Techniques and Procedures for 
Developing Grounded Theory (4th ed.). Sage.  

11. Andy Crabtree, Terry Hemmings, Tom Rodden, Keith 
Cheverst, Karen Clarke, Guy Dewsbury, John Hughes, 
and Mark Rouncefield. 2003. Designing with Care: 
Adapting cultural probes to inform design in sensitive 
settings. Proceedings of the Australian Computer-
Human Interaction Special Interest Group [OzCHI 
2003], 4-13. 

12. CMS.gov. National Health Expenditure Projections 
2012-2022. http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-

796

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-
Reports/NationalHealthExpendData/downloads/proj201
2.pdf. Accessed September 2014.  

13. Sunny Consolvo, Peter Roessler, Brett E. Shelton, 
Anthony LaMarca, Bill Schilit, and Sara Bly. 2004. 
Technology for care networks of elders. IEEE Pervasive 
Computing 3, 2: 22-29. 

14. John F. Deeken, Kathryn L. Taylor, Patricia Mangan, K. 
Robin Yabroff, and Jane M. Ingham. 2003. Care for the 
caregivers: a review of self-report instruments 
developed to measure the burden, needs, and quality of 
life of informal caregivers. Journal of Pain and 
Symptom Management 26, 4: 922-953. 

15. George Demiris. 2009. Independence and shared 

decision making: The role of smart home technology in 
empowering older adults. Conference Proceedings of 
the International Conference of IEEE Engineering in 
Medicine and Biology Society 2009, 6432-6436. 

16. Andrea Docherty, Alastair Owens, Mohsen Asadi-Lari, 
Roland Petchey, Jacky Williams, and Yvonne H. Carter. 
2008. Knowledge and information needs of informal 
caregivers in palliative care: a qualitative systematic 
review. Palliative Medicine 22, 2: 153-171. 

17. Jordan Eschler, Logan Kendall, Kathleen O’Leary, Lisa 

M. Vizer, Paula Lozano, Jennifer B. McClure, Wanda 
Pratt, and James D. Ralston. 2015. Shared Calendars for 
Home Health Management. In Proceedings of the 18th 
ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work & Social Computing, 1277-1288.  

18. Federal Ministry for Family, Elderly, Women and 

Youth. 2010. Ageing is changing. Central Results of the 
German Survey on Ageing. 2010. Download at 
http://www.bmfsfj.de/RedaktionBMFSFJ/Broschuerenst
elle/Pdf-Anlagen/Altern-im-
Wandel,property=pdf,bereich=bmfsfj,sprache=de,rwb=t
rue.pdf. (as in May 2013).  

19. Federal Statistical Office for Germany. Care Statistics. 
Care in the Context of Care Insurance. 2013. Download 
at http://www.statistik-portal.de/Statistik-
Portal/pflegestatistik_kreisvergleich.pdf (as in August 
2014).  

20. Geraldine Fitzpatrick and Gunnar Ellingsen. 2012.  

Review of 25 Years of CSCW Research in Healthcare: 
Contributions, Challenges and Future Agendas. 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) 22,  
4-6: 609-665. 

21. Uwe Flick. 2009. An Introduction to Qualitative 

Research. (4th ed.), Sage.  

22. Jonathan Gabe, Michael Bury, and Mary Ann Elston. 

2004. Key Concepts in Medical Sociology. Sage.  

23. William Gaver, Peter Wright, Andrew Boucher, John 
Bowers, Mark Blythe, Nadine Jarvis, David Cameron, 
Tobie Kerridge, Alex Wilkie, Robert Phillips, and Peter 

Wright. 2011. The photostroller: supporting diverse care 
home residents in engaging with the world. In 
Proceedings CHI 2011, ACM Press, 1757-1766.  

24. William Gaver, Andrew Boucher, Sarah Pennington, 
and Brendan Walker. 2004. Cultural Probes and the 
Value of Uncertainty. Interactions 11, 5: 53-56. 

25. Linda K. George, Lisa P. Gwyther. 1986. Caregiver 

well-being: a multidimensional examination of family 
caregivers of demented adults. The Gerontologist 26, 
253-259. 

26. Barney G. Glaser and Anselm L. Strauss. 1965. 

Awareness of Dying. Aldine de Gruyter. 

27. Barnes G. Glaser and Anselm L. Strauss. 1967. The 

discovery of grounded theory. Strategies for qualitative 
research. Aldine de Gruyter.  

28. Erving Goffman. 1959. The Presentation of Self in 

Everyday Life. Doubleday.  

29. Erving Goffman. 1961a. Asylums. Essays on the Social 

Situation of Mental Patients and Other Inmates. Anchor  
Books.  

30. Erving Goffman. 1961b. Encounters: Two Studies in the 

Sociology of Interaction, Bobbs-Merrill. 

31. Erving Goffman. 1963. Stigma. Notes on the 

Management of Spoiled Identity. Englewood Cliffs, N. 
J.: Prentice Hall, 1963.   

32. Rachael Gooberman-Hill and Shah Ebrahim. 2006. 
Informal Care At Times Of Change In Health And 
Mobility: A Qualitative Study. Age And Ageing 35, 3:  
261-266. 

33. Trisha Greenhalgh, Henry W. W. Potts, Geoff Wong, 

Pippa Bark, Deborah Swinglehurst. 2009. Tensions and 
paradoxes in electronic patient record research: A 
systematic literature review using the meta-narrative 
method. Milbank Quarterly 87, 4: 729-788. 

34. Karen Hooker, Deborah J. Monahan, Sally R. Bowman, 

Leslie D. Frazier, and Kim Shifren. 1998. Personality 
Counts for a Lot: Predictors of Mental and Physical 
Health of Spouse Caregivers in Two Disease Groups. 
Journal of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences 53B, 2: 
P73-P85. 

35. Tejinder K. Judge, Carman Neustaedter, and Andrew F. 

Kurtz. 2010. The family window: the design and 
evaluation of a domestic media space. In Proceedings 
CHI 2010, ACM Press, 2361-2370.  

36. Bonnie Kaplan and Kimberley D. Harris-Salamone. 

2009. Health IT success and failure: recommendations 
from literature and an AMIA workshop. Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association 16, 3: 291-
299. 
 

797

37. Tapio Kirsi, Antti Hervonen, and Marja Jylhä. 2000. A 

man’s gotta do what a man’s gotta do: Husbands as 
caregivers to their demented wives: a discourse analytic 
approach. Journal of Aging Studies 14, 2: 153-169.  
38. Tapio Kirsi, Antti Hervonen, and Marja Jylhä. 2004. 

Always One Step Behind: Husbands’ Narratives about 
Taking Care of their Demented Wives. Health 8, 2: 159-
181. 

39. Paula Klemm, Evelyn R. Hayes, Cynthia A. Diefenbeck, 
and Barry Milcarek. 2014. Online Support for Employed 
Informal Caregivers: Psychosocial Outcomes. 
Computers Informatics Nursing 32, 1: 10-20. 

40. Anna Kristenssen Eckwall, Bengt Sivberg, and Ingallil 

Rahm Hallberg. 2007. Older Caregivers’ Coping 
Strategies and Sense of Coherence in Relation to 
Quality of Life. Journal of Advanced Nursing 57: 6 NO. 

41. Thomas Lehnert, Dirk Heider, Hanna Leicht, Sven 

Heinrich, Sandro Corrieri, Melanie Luppa, Steffi Riedel-
Heller, and Hans-Helmut König. 2011. Review: health 
care utilization and costs of elderly persons with 
multiple chronic conditions. Medical Care Research and 
Review 68, 4: 387-420. 

42. Lena Mamykina, Elizabeth Mynatt, Patricia Davidson, 
and Daniel Greenblatt. 2008. MAHI: investigation of 
social scaffolding for reflective thinking in diabetes 
management. In Proceedings CHI 2008, ACM Press, 
477-486.  

43. John A. Mariani, Andy Crabtree, Terry Hemmings, and 

Tom Rodden. 2003. Informing the development of 
calendar systems for domestic use. In Proceedings of the 
Eighth European Conference on Computer-Supported 
Cooperative Work. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 119-
138.  

44. Robert K. Merton. 1957. The role-set. Problems in 

Social Theory. British Journal of Sociology 8, 2: 106-
120.  

45. Johanna Meurer, Martin Stein, David Randall, Markus 
Rhode, and Volker Wulf. 2014. Social dependency and 
mobile autonomy – Supporting older adults’ mobility 
with ridesharing ICT. In Proceedings CHI 2014, ACM 
Press, 1923-1932.  

46. Margaret Morris, Jay Lundell, Eric Dishman, and Brad 

Needham. 2003. New perspectives on ubiquitous 
computing from ethnographic study of elders with 
cognitive decline. In UbiComp 2003: Ubiquitous 
Computing. Springer, 227-242. 

47. Claudia Müller, Dominik Hornung, Theodor Hamm, and 

Volker Wulf. 2015. Practice-based Design of a 
Neighborhood Portal: Focusing on Elderly Tenants in a 
City Quarter Living Lab. In Proceedings CHI 2015, 
ACM Press, 2295-2304.  

798

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

48. Claudia Müller, Cornelius Neufeldt, David Randall, and 
Volker Wulf. 2012. ICT-development in residential care 
settings: Sensitizing design to the life circumstances of 
the residents of a care home. In Proceedings of CHI 
2012, ACM Press, 2639-2648.  

49. Elizabeth D. Mynatt, Jim Rowan, Sarah Craighill, and 

Annie Jacobs. 2001. Digital family portraits: supporting 
peace of mind for extended family members. In Proc. 
CHI 2001, ACM Press, 333-340.  

50. Maryam Navaie-Waliser, Penny H. Feldman, David A.  

Gould, Carol Levine, Alexis N. Kuerbis, and Karen 
Donelan. 2002. When the Caregiver Needs Care: the 
Plight of Vulnerable Caregivers. American Journal of 
Public Health 92, 409-413. 

51. Carman Neustaedter, A. J. Bernheim Brush, and Saul 

Greenberg. 2009. The calendar is crucial: Coordination 
and awareness through the family calendar. ACM 
Transactions on Computer- Human Interaction 
(TOCHI), 16, 1: 1-48.  

52. Leysia Palen, and Stinne Aaløkke. 2006. Of pill boxes 

and piano benches: “home-made” methods for 
managing medication. In Proceedings of the 2006 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 
ACM Press, 79-88.  

53. Carolyn E. Pang, Carman Neustaedter, Bernhard E. 

Riecke, Erick Oduor, and Serena Hillman. 2013. 
Technology preferences and routines for sharing health 
information during the treatment of a chronic illness. In 
Proc. CHI 2013, ACM Press, 1759-1768.  

54. Alexandra Petrakou. 2007. Exploring cooperation 

through a binder: a context for IT tools in elderly care at 
home. ECSCW 2007: Proceedings of the 7th European 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work. 
Springer, London, UK, 271-290.  

55. Susan Pickard, and Caroline Glendinning. 2002. 

Comparing and contrasting the role of family carers and 
nurses in the domestic health care of frail older people. 
Health & Social Care in the Community 10, 144-150. 

56. Wanda Pratt, Kenton Unruh, Andrea Civan, and 

Meredith M. Skeels. 2006. Personal health information 
management. Communications of the ACM 49, 1, 51-55. 

57. Dave Randall, Richard Harper, and Mark Rouncefield. 

2007. Fieldwork for Design. Theory and Practice. 
Springer. 

58. Dirk Sauerland, Ansgar Wübker, Sandra M. G. 

Zwakhalen, et al. 2014. Costs of Care for People with 
Dementia Just Before and After Nursing Home 
Placement. Primary Data From Eight European 
Countries. In Proc. of 10th World Congress on Health 
Economies in the Age of Longevity, Dublin, Ireland.  
 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

66. John Vines, Mark Blythe, Stephen Lindsay, Paul 

Dunphy, Andrew Monk, and Patrick Olivier. 2012. 
Questionable concepts: critique as resource for 
designing with eighty somethings. In Proc. CHI 2012, 
ACM Press, 1169-1178.  

67. Lin Wan, Claudia Mueller, Volker Wulf, and Dave 

Randall. 2014. Addressing the Subtleties in Dementia 
Care: Pre-study & Evaluation of a GPS Monitoring 
System. In Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM 
conference on Human factors in computing systems – 
CHI 2014, ACM Press, 3987-3996.  

68. Elaine Wittenberg-Lyles, Debra P. Oliver, George 

Demiris, and Paula Baldwin. 2010. The ACTive 
Intervention in Hospice Interdisciplinary Team 
Meetings: Exploring Family Caregiver and Hospice 
Team Communication. Journal of Computer-Mediated 
Communication 15, 3: 465-481. 

69. Volker Wulf, Claudia Müller, Volkmar Pipek, David 
Randall, Markus Rhode, and Gunnar Stevens. 2015. 
Practice-Based Computing. Empirical Ground 
Conceptionalization Derived from Design Case Studies. 
In Designing Socially Embedded Technologies in the 
Real World, Volker Wulf, Kjeld Schmidt, and David 
Randall (eds.), Springer, London, 111-150.  

70. Naomi Yamashita, Hideaki Kuzuoka, Keiji Hirata, and 

Takashi Kudo. 2013. Understanding the Conflicting 
Demands of Family Caregivers Caring for Depressed 
Family Members. In Proc. CHI 2013: Changing 
Perspectives, 2637-2646. 

59. Richard Schulz and Scott R. Beach. 1999. Caregiving as 

a Risk Factor for Mortality: The Caregiver Health 
Effects Study. JAMA. The Journal of the American 
Medical Association 282, 23: 2215-2219. 

60. Lucy Suchman. 1995. Making Work Visible. 

Communications of the ACM 38, 9: 56-64. 

61. Hilda Tellioğlu, Myriam Lewkowicz, Aparecido 

Fabiano Pinatti De Carvalho, Ivan Brešković, Marén 
Schorch. 2014. Collaboration and Coordination in the 
Context of Informal Care (CCCiC). In Proceedings of 
the Companion Publication of the 17th ACM 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
& Social Computing, ACM Press, 339-342.   
62. United Nations. Statement submitted by the 

international federation on ageing. 14 November 2013. 
http://documents-dds-
ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N13/564/41/pdf/N135644
1.pdf?OpenElement. Accessed September 2014. 

63. Stephen Uzor and Lynne Baillie. 2013. Exploring & 
designing tools to enhance falls rehabilitation in the 
home. In Proc. CHI 2013, ACM Press, 1233-1242.  
64. Job Van Exel, Gjalt De Graaf, and Werner Brouwer. 
2008. Give me a Break! Informal Caregiver Attitude 
towards Respite Care. Health Policy 88, 1: 73-87.  

65. Michelle Van Ruyn, Sarah Sanders, Katharine Kahn, 

Courtney van Houtven, Joan Griffin, Sean Phelan, 
Michelle Martin, Audie Atienza, Deborah Finstad, and 
Julie Rowland. 2011. Objective Burden, Resources and 
Other Stressors Among Informal Cancer Caregivers: a 
hidden quality issue. Psychooncology 20, 1: 44-52. 

 

799

