CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

The  Role  of  Digital  Technologies  During  Relationship  

Breakdowns  

Wendy Moncur 

Living Digital Group, 
University of Dundee 

Dundee, UK 

wmoncur@dundee.ac.uk 

Lorna Gibson 

University of Dundee, 

Dundee, UK 

lgibson@computing.dundee.ac.uk 

Daniel Herron 

Living Digital Group, 
University of Dundee 

Dundee, UK 

d.herron@dundee.ac.uk

ABSTRACT  
Relationship breakdowns are undoubtedly difficult. Access 
to and use of technology can exacerbate the situation. In our 
networked  society,  shared  lives  generate  vast  amounts  of 
shared digital data which can be difficult to untangle, whilst 
social media can provide an outlet to emotions that can take 
a public and often persistent form. In this paper, we report 
on a qualitative study that considered the role of technology 
in the process of a relationship breaking down. Four main 
themes emerged in our findings: communicating about the 
separation, change in social status, shared digital assets, and 
moving  on.  Opportunities  for  design  are  identified  in 
reducing  misunderstandings  via  CMCs,  enhancing  social 
media,  supporting  intimacy  in  distributed  families,  and 
refining service provision. 

Author  Keywords  
Divorce; Separation; HCI; life transitions; computer-
mediated communications; service design. 
ACM  Classification  Keywords  
H.1.1  [Models  and  Principles]:  User/Machine  Systems  – 
human factors. H4.3 [Information systems applications]: 
[Computing 
Communications 
Milieux]: Computers and Society 

applications;  K.4.2 

INTRODUCTION  
The breakdown of a relationship is undoubtedly a stressful 
life event.  It is also, on the whole, an unplanned one. While 
many  people  plan  for  inevitable  events  such  as  death  by 
considering  wills  and  funeral  preferences,  and  others  plan 
for  hoped-for  events  such  as  weddings  and  civil 
ceremonies, advance planning for a relationship breakdown 
verges on being taboo. This is despite the fact that 42% of 
marriages  in  the  UK  end  in  divorce  [29],  with  a  slightly 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-
party  components  of  this  work  must  be  honored.  For  all  other  uses, 
contact the Owner/Author. 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). 
CSCW ’16, February 27-02 March, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA ACM 
978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819925 

371

lower rate predicted breakdown for civil partnerships [30]. 
There  are  no  statistics  monitoring  the  breakdown  of  non-
formalized relationships in the UK.  
It  is  not  surprising  that  people  do  not  usually  plan  for 
relationship  breakdowns.  For  example,  the  traditional 
idealized  Western  model  for  heterosexual  marriage  is  to 
expect the relationship to be permanent and monogamous, 
affirmed through public vows of lifelong commitment.  To 
visibly plan for the ending of a relationship goes against the 
optimism  that  characteristically  accompanies  commitment 
to  that  relationship,  and  one  can  see  how  this  serves  as  a 
reason  for  avoiding  any  explicit  planning  of  this  kind.  A 
notable  exception  to  this  lack  of  planning  lies  in  the 
growing  trend  to  have  formal  marriage  contracts,  with 
prenuptial  agreements  that  specify  quite  tightly  against 
relationship breakdown. In the absence of advanced plans, 
relationship  breakdown  can  be  complicated  where  there  is 
shared  ownership  of  artifacts  (both  digital  and  physical). 
Dividing  these  artifacts  can  be  wrought  with  tensions 
around ownership, and imbued with emotion.  
Relationship  breakdown  of  co-habiting 
is 
relevant to the CSCW community. When a couple separate, 
the  disentangling  of  their  shared  life  now  incorporates 
digital  aspects,  including  changes  in  requirements  for 
device  and  account  ownership  and  use,  representations  of 
self through online channels, and access to digital materials 
such  as  photos  and  music.  Moving  on  may  also  involve 
digital  technologies  –  for  example,  with  communication 
around  parenting 
through 
computer-mediated communications (CMCs).  
In this paper, we report on qualitative research undertaken 
to  understand  the  intersection  between  technology  and 
relationship breakdowns. We first situate the research in the 
context  of  previous  work  that  considers  technology  use 
during relationship breakdown and other significant points 
in  the  human  lifespan.  We  then  describe  the  methodology 
and  context  of  the  research  that  we  carried  out,  and  the 
findings. These findings are used as input to a discussion on 
opportunities  for  design  that  take  relationship  breakdown 
into account.  
RELATED  WORK  
There is now a growing body of work looking at the design 
of technology that takes significant points across the digital 

responsibilities  conducted 

individuals 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

lifespan  into  account.  Work  so  far  on  expected  and 
unexpected transitions that occur across the human lifespan 
has 
included  moving  home  [33],  motherhood  [13], 
distributed  families  (through  work  separation  or  divorce) 
[28,37,38],  weddings  [20]  and  the  death  of  a  loved  one  
[18,23].  An  emerging  theme  in  this  body  of  work  is  the 
complex 
interweaving  of  social,  psychological  and 
technical  factors 
influence  users’  experience  of 
technology at these significant points in their lives. Online 
identity  is  –  understandably  –  profoundly  influenced  by 
offline  life  events.  Just  as  the  end  of  life  has  significant 
consequences for one’s Facebook profile [3,22], so too does 
separation. 

that 

that 

tied 

to 

it  has  on  an 

Relationship  breakdown  
A number of studies conducted in the social sciences have 
identified  the  stages  of  relationship  breakdown,  and  the 
impact 
individual’s  wellbeing 
[1,12,16,31,34]. Within this paper, we refer to relationship 
breakdown  specifically  in  the  context  of  the  end  of  a 
cohabiting  relationship,  as  this  was  the  experience  of  our 
participants. Relationship breakdown does not happen as a 
series of discrete events, but as a process that begins with 
feelings  of  estrangement  during  the  relationship.  For 
married  couples,  this  process  includes  a  landmark  civic 
event,  divorce  [1].  The  process  continues  until  after  the 
partners are (usually) no longer cohabiting – and if married, 
until after they are legally divorced. Markers of the end of 
the  process  include  the  ability  to  create  an  identity 
independently  of  the  former  relationship.  The  process 
brings with it stressors that former partners have to come to 
terms with (e.g. loss of emotional support), moderators that 
can positively or negatively impact on those stressors (e.g. 
individual, 
interpersonal  or  structural  resources),  and 
adjustments that they need to make (e.g. identity no longer 
being 
increase 
psychological  distress  and  decrease  life  satisfaction:  over 
43%  of  individuals  involved  in  a  relationship  breakdown 
reported  a  decline  in  wellbeing  (where  wellbeing  was  a 
combined  measure  of  psychological  distress  and  life 
satisfaction)  [31].  However,  opportunities  for  personal 
growth  and  reflection  can  emerge  out  of  relationship 
breakdown.  Tashiro  and  Frazier  found  that  individuals 
undergoing  a  breakup  could  identify  an  average  of  five 
positive  changes  that  they  could  make  to  improve  their 
romantic 
lives,  and  future  relationships,  following  a 
breakup [34]. 
Research  carried  out  by  Hall  and  Fincham  explored  the 
impact 
forgiveness  have  on 
reconciliation and relationship breakdown, following an act 
of  infidelity  [16].  They  found  that  in  order  to  promote 
forgiveness  and 
the 
attributions relating to the infidelity should be addressed in 
therapy sessions. The work draws an interesting conclusion, 
that  reconciliation  between  partners  is  not  the  optimal 
outcome for the individuals – it is forgiveness that couples 

reconciliation  between  couples, 

that  attributions  and 

relationship). 

It  can 

former 

should  strive  to  achieve,  as  it  brings  with  it  significant 
emotional and physical health benefits. 

Computer-­mediated  communications  and  relationship  
Increasingly, digital technologies play a role in supporting 
communication  both  during  relationships  and  during 
relationship  breakdown,  and  subsequently  in  moving  on. 
They even take the blame for a third of marital breakdowns 
[40]. Digital technologies can be used to promote intimacy 
during  relationships,  as  well  as  to  support  communication 
after  separation.  For  example,  Jiang  and  Hancock  found 
that  during  a  long  distance  relationship,  couples  reported 
equal  or  better  levels  of  relationship  stability,  satisfaction 
and  trust  than  their  geographically  close  counterparts  [6]. 
This was accomplished by utilizing a range of interpersonal 
media  to  communicate.  Frequently  used  CMCs  provided 
long distance couples with more opportunities for open self-
disclosure,  increasing  the  levels  of  intimacy  between 
partners.  After  a  breakup,  some  ex-partners  reported 
positive  uses  of  digital  technologies  –  e.g.  using  email  to 
share photographs of their children with one another [28], 
and  facilitating  productive  interactions  that  focused  their 
asynchronous  communications  on  a  common  connection  - 
their  child(ren).  However,  other  studies  have  found  that 
communication  between  divorced  parents  in  distributed 
family  structures 
that  digital 
technologies may hinder not help [38].  

limited,  and 

is  very 

role 

important 

they  played  an 

the  relationship  ended, 

Digital  artifacts  
Alongside  the  role  of  digital  technologies  in  supporting 
communication, 
in 
documenting  the  relationship,  through  materials  including 
photos, emails, text messages,  status updates and posts on 
social  network  sites  (SNS).  Sas  and  Whitaker  [32] 
considered  the  fate  of  these  digital  artifacts  when  a 
relationship  broke  down,  finding  that  artifacts  previously 
cherished  for  their  positive  effects  during  a  relationship 
(such  as  facilitating  intimacy  and  triggering  reminiscence) 
caused negative issues for the ex-partners by fulfilling those 
same  roles  after 
in  a  now 
unwelcome manner. They proposed that disposing of these 
digital  artifacts  could  be  a  solution  to  these  issues,  with 
design  implications  raised  around  the  ways  in  which  the 
disposal  could  be  carried  out;  arguing  that  disposing  of 
artifacts  from  the  relationship  in  the  right  way  could  be 
therapeutic for individuals as they move towards forming a 
new self-concept separate from being part of a couple.  
These 
issues  with  disposal  of  digital  artifacts  are 
highlighted  again  in  research  exploring  the  role  of  social 
media  in  personal  digital  archives.  The  facilities  on 
Facebook in particular are regarded as limited with respect 
to  curating  digital  media.  While  artifacts  can  be  hidden 
from  other  users  or  deleted  entirely,  there are  no  facilities 
for  hiding  artifacts  from  their  creator,  or  archiving  them 
[39].  In  situations  such  as  relationship  breakdown,  the 
option to selectively dispose of or discretely manage digital 

372

SESSION: RELATIONSHIPS AND ROMANCE

artifacts,  rather  than  simply  keeping  or  deleting  it,  could 
help individuals to move on. 
The  concept  of  reconstructing  one’s  identity  through 
disposal (or curation) of digital artifacts [29] is echoed in a 
more  literal  way  in  research  investigating  the  stresses  of 
gender  transition  (another  profound  life  transition)  on 
Facebook. During gender transition, individuals have been 
found  to  actively  manage  their  online  identity  as  they 
discover  and  reinvent  their  sense  of  self,  and  in  doing  so 
these  individuals  experience  substantial  levels  of  stress 
while updating and informing connections on social media 
about  their  experiences  [15].  Haimson  et  al.  found  that 
although Facebook provides the means to address different 
groups 
allowing 
individuals  to  tailor  news  of  their  transition  to  specific 
social groups, the task itself is complex and stressful. 

independently 

from  one 

another, 

Sharing  news  
Beyond  the  literature  on  relationship  breakdown  and 
managing online identity, recent work on use of technology 
during  other  disruptive  life  transitions  is  relevant.  For 
example,  when  parents  have  a  baby  in  Neonatal  Intensive 
Care, they are very selective in who they share updates with 
when they have bad news about the baby, preferring not to 
use  social  media  to  broadcast  to  their  entire  online  social 
network [24]. When there is a suggestion that parents are in 
some  way  ‘to  blame’  for  a  sick  baby’s  illness  –  for 
example, through passing on an inherited condition – they 
tell no-one, online or off. It is reasonable to expect parallels 
in 
for 
individuals to be reluctant to apportion blame to themselves 
via  social  media.  In  contrast,  online  social  media  may  be 
used  actively  in  a  range  of  practices  related  to  dying,  the 
funeral, grief and memorialization [25,36] - for example, to 
share the news efficiently with all social network members 
about 
funeral 
arrangements  [23],  and  to  express  individual  feelings  of 
loss  [4].  Again  there  are  likely  parallels  with  relationship 
breakdown.   

relationship  breakdown,  and 

the  context  of 

subsequent 

and 

the 

event 

(death) 

METHODOLOGY    
The  goal  of  this  work  was  to  consider  where  technology 
featured during the process of relationship breakdown, and 
how  it  was  used  to  facilitate  or  hinder  that  process.  We 
focus on the ecology of technology use across the transition 
period of separating (specifically moving from a cohabiting 
partnership back to individual living). 

Participants  
The work was based within a small geographical area of the 
UK. Due to the sensitivity of the subject, participants were 
recruited  through  convenience  sampling  and  snowballing.  
The diversity of the group recruited can be seen in Table 1. 
Participants  ranged  in  age  from  27  to  68,  had  been  in  a 
relationship  between  4  and  34  years,  and  had  been 
separated between 4 months and 7 years. Gender was mixed 

373

(3 male, 5 female). It should be noted that two participants 
(F  and  G)  were  an  amicable  divorced  couple,  and  the  ex-
husband  recruited  the  ex-wife  into  the  study.  They  were 
interviewed separately. We made no restrictions on the type 
of  relationship  that  participants  had  experienced  (for 
example,  marriage, 
co-habiting, 
heterosexual  or  homosexual),  and  indeed  did  not  ask 
participants  about  this.  Nor  did  we  ask  specifically  about 
the nature of the relationship breakdown. We acknowledge 
that there are very specific situations - such as the end of an 
abusive relationship [9] that will have a profound effect on 
the central actors. To our knowledge we do not cover those 
situations here.     

partnership, 

civil 

Approach  
Individual,  semi-structured,  ethnographic  interviews  were 
used to generate a phenomenological understanding of the 
experiences  of  the  participants,  and  the  meanings  they 
attached to those experiences. The researcher was respectful 
of  the  sensitivity  of  the  topic  throughout,  utilizing  skills 
from  previous  counseling  training.  Questions  took  two 
forms: open questions (e.g. How did you use social media 
during  that  time?)  and  probing/reflective  questions  (e.g. 
What,  in  particular,  made  you  feel  like  that?).  The 
researcher remained vigilant, looking for signs of distress in 
each  participant,  and  using  short  breaks  appropriately  to 
enable  participants  to  compose  themselves  when  needed. 
Interviews  took  place  over  the  course  of  4  months,  with 
each  interview  lasting  between  90  and  150  minutes. 
Participants  were  recompensed  with  a  £10  gift  voucher.  
We  stopped  recruiting  participants  once  we  had  reached 
information  saturation.  The  University  granted  ethical 
approval for the study. 

Participant  Gender 
and Age  
M (29) 
F (35) 
F (37) 
F (27) 
M (41) 
M (67) 
F (68) 
F (27) 

A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H 

Time since 
separation 

Years 
together 

2 yrs 
4 mths 
5 yrs 
8 mths 
18 mths 
7 yrs 
7 yrs 
2 yrs 

6 yrs 
10 yrs 
8 yrs 
4 yrs 
11 yrs 
34 yrs 
34 yrs 
4 yrs 

Table 1. Participant demographics 

During  the  interviews,  a  variety  of  audio  recordings  and 
researcher  notes  were  gathered.    Data  was  analyzed  using 
thematic  analysis 
[2].  This  method  allows  specific 
experiences  and  anecdotes  to  be  grouped  together  by 
similar attributes, and then evolve into overarching themes 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

through  a  process  of  analysis  by  the  researcher.  It  is 
particularly  useful  for  drawing  insights  from  rich  datasets 
provided  by  the  interviews.  With  each  pass  through  the 
interview data, the draft themes were refined until a set of 
distinct finalized themes emerged.   

FINDINGS  
Four  overarching  themes  were  identified:  communicating 
about the separation, change in social status, dividing up the 
assets  (digital  and  physical),  and  moving  on  and  looking 
towards the future. 

from 

face-to-face 

Communicating  about  the  separation  
Spreading  the  news  
Technology  acted  as  a  broadcast  service  for  news  of  the 
relationship  breakdown,  allowing  quick  dissemination  and 
detaching  participants 
emotional 
conversation.  It  was  used  both  for  wide  broadcast  to 
everyone  in  the  user’s  contacts  list  (which  could  be  their 
phone  address  book,  email  address  book  or  friends  on  a 
social networking site) and to send a personal message to a 
select few:   
"I couldn’t face the thought of having to tell people and I 
just wanted them to know quickly.  So I thought it would be 
easiest to text everyone in my phonebook and tell them.  It 
was like ripping off a plaster – I thought there was no point 
hanging around." – Participant A 
"I sent a text to my close friends saying ‘Don’t call me, I am 
fine, but we have split and I need some time to deal, I will 
be in touch soon’. I found that really helpful." – Participant 
C 
As illustrated by these participants’ comments, the innately 
asynchronous  nature  of  text  messages,  emails  and  social 
media  posts  was  valued  in  communicating  news  of  a 
breakup to members of participants’ social networks, either 
in  selected  groups  or  to  everyone  that  they  knew.  Such 
‘break-up notification’ messages did not require immediate 
responses  from  recipients  of  the  information,  and  also  - 
importantly - did not require the message sender to engage 
in discussion of the breakup unless they chose to.  
The  medium 
through  which  a  break-up  notification 
message was sent had a knock-on effect, shaping who could 
see the responses sent to the original notification. Sending a 
text  message  resulted  in  text  message  responses,  sent 
directly  to  the  sender:  while  a  message  may  be  sent  to  a 
group of people, their replies are (by default) only received 
by  the  original  message  sender.    However,  if  news  of  the 
breakup  was  sent  via  a  social  networking  site,  then  very 
public  responses  could  be  given  (if  people  responded), 
which exacerbated rather than reduced the emotions related 
to telling people:  
"I thought if I put something matter of fact up on Facebook, 
then folk would know why I haven’t been in touch, and then 
they would know when I saw them next.  I was actually a bit 

374

embarrassed  about  the  separation,  but  it  is  a  small 
community and he is with someone else, so I needed people 
to  know  I  knew.  None  of  those  awkward  situations  where 
people  felt  they  needed  to  avoid  me  because  they  know 
some  deep,  dark  secret.  I  was  slightly  staggered  by  the 
support.  But  the  more  responses  there  were,  the  more 
popular  the  update  was.  So  it  meant  it  kept  being  shown 
high  up  on  Facebook,  so  I  got  to  relive  it  over  and  over.  
Fab, eh!" – Participant D 
As  well  as  keeping  the  message  visible  for  longer  (if  the 
social  networking  metrics  deemed  it  to  be  most  popular), 
the message defaulted to a persistent state [10], remaining 
available permanently through the individual’s profile page 
(unless they chose to delete it at a later date).  Participants 
highlighted that they had not considered the persistence of 
postings  to  social  media  at  the  time,  only  later  when  they 
became uncomfortable with the contents of their posts and 
associated  responses.  Further,  some  participants  (n=2) 
expressed  surprise  at 
their 
relationship status in their profile, not realizing that it would 
be posted as an update. Participant B blamed herself for not 
being ‘tech smart’: 
"My  worst  move  was  changing  my  Facebook  relationship 
status. It was like putting up an advert for everyone to ask 
what  was  happening,  and  how  I  was.  I  never  felt  so 
harassed, and they were mostly my friends!”– Participant B 
In  contrast,  other  participants  (n=4)  were  clear  on  the 
effects of changing their relationship status online, and saw 
this  activity  as  part  of  the  experience  of  working  towards 
the ‘new normal’ [9] of their single state:  
"I  wouldn’t  want  to  be  one  of  those  people  who  changed 
status  to  ‘It’s  complicated’.    Nothing  spurs  intrigue  more 
than a vague statement like that.  A colleague did that last 
year, and I really found the whole thing annoying.  But I did 
have to change my relationship status to move forward" – 
Participant C 

impact  of  amending 

the 

in 

the 

role  of  CMCs 

Misunderstandings      
facilitating 
Optimism  over 
communication  between  the  partners  in  the  relationship 
breakdown proved unfounded.  The absence of visual and 
audio social cues associated with text-based CMCs resulted 
in misunderstandings:  
“When we separated, we thought using email would be the 
best way to sort things out and communicate generally.  We 
didn’t want the kids to hear shouting on the phone.  Trouble 
is, when you are emotional it is easier to misunderstand the 
tone of an email and for it all to spiral.  We actually made 
things much harder for ourselves”.  - Participant F 
Participants F and G (previously in a relationship together) 
had  both  expected  asynchronous  communication  to  be 
particularly  useful  in  facilitating  communication  as  it  did 
not require both of them to be in the right frame of mind at 
the  same  time.  However,  they  found  that  the  tensions  and 

SESSION: RELATIONSHIPS AND ROMANCE

emotions which were already associated with their breakup, 
coupled with the lack of social cues, meant they looked for 
a  negative  tone  that  was  not  necessarily  present  when  the 
email  was  composed.  This  contrasts  with  findings  from  a 
previous study where the asynchronous nature of text-based 
exchanges mitigated some of the problems associated with 
verbal interaction [28] in this context. The variation in these 
findings  could  simply  be  attributed  to  differences  in 
individuals’ communication styles. 

in 

the 

the  memories  of 

Catharsis,  Persistence  and  Regret  
New forms of mediated one-to-many communications such 
as  Twitter  and  other  social  networking  sites  made  it  very 
easy to react first and think later, particularly because these 
technologies facilitated a culture of sharing one’s thoughts 
without editing them first:  
“I used Twitter to vent about stupid things that annoyed me 
during the day, like the man having an offensive telephone 
conversation on the train in the morning.  When we split I 
would  vent  about  my  ex  on  there  too.  It  felt  right  at  first, 
and  then  I  felt  a  bit  exposed  because  it  is  so  public.”  - 
Participant E 
Failure  to  consider  the  very  public  nature  of  messages 
posted on social networking sites was a cause of subsequent 
regret.  The  misconception 
that  communications  were 
ephemeral  unless  physically  written  on  paper,  only  living 
on 
individuals  who  were 
communicating at the time, was also a source of regret as 
participants’ awareness of the persistent nature of CMCs [5] 
grew:  
“I was foolish really by thinking what I write was floating 
out  into  the  ether,  but  somehow  disappearing  amongst  all 
the  other  messages,  never  to  be  seen  again.  I  guess  I 
thought that people could see it for a few hours and then it 
was lost.  Sadly, they are a little more fixed in concrete than 
that.”  - Participant D 
Revenge and retribution were sought against ex-partners via 
social  networking  sites.  Participants  hoped  that  the  public 
nature of the medium might hurt their ex-partner, or shame 
them  into  changing  their  behavior.  While  posting  such 
content  initially  provided  catharsis,  there  was  subsequent 
regret  at  the  persistence  of  this  content  amongst  a  very 
public audience: 
“I shamed my ex on Facebook when he was behaving badly 
towards us. But when I say it out loud to you, I realized that 
it doesn’t sound very grown up. Maybe that was a mistake”  
- Participant H 
In contrast to this public venting behavior, the possibility of 
‘airing their dirty laundry in public’ was repugnant to some 
of our participants (n=2).  These users worked hard to pause 
and  consider  the  information  that  they  posted  online  at  a 
time  when  their  emotions  ran  high,  often  having  to 
completely disregard their visceral reaction:     

375

“I  watched  everything  I  posted  online  and  in  text  and 
emails.  I  knew  that  whatever  was  ‘written’  down  could 
come back to bite me on the bum one day.  I didn’t want an 
ill thought-through tweet being read out in court, if it ever 
came to that.” - Participant A 
Impression management [14] was identified as an important 
focus  for  some  participants,  who  felt  under  pressure  to 
present  themselves  ‘appropriately’  throughout  the  process 
of the split and afterwards.  They felt pressure both on how 
they  physically  presented  themselves,  and  also  how  they 
presented themselves online.  They felt that the relationship 
breakdown had made them vulnerable, and that even their 
closest  peers  would  be  watching  -  or  even  judging  their 
responses: 
“Every  post  I  made  after  we  split  up  was  labored  over.  I 
wanted to make sure I wasn’t being too happy, sad, bitter 
or  grumpy.    I  felt  under  the  spotlight,  and  thought  if  I 
posted that I had a really good night out, that people might 
think I was trying too hard or concerned that I wasn’t home 
crying into my cake. In the end it was easier to keep a low 
profile.”  - Participant C 

A  change  in  social  status  
The  pervasive  aspects  of  technology  –  and  indeed  of 
photos, videos and text-based communications more widely 
- meant that links still existed to hold individuals together in 
spite of a relationship breakdown:  
“I  understand  that  we  will  never  truly  be  disconnected.  
There  will  always  be  photos  from  parties  or  weddings  in 
friends’ albums that will show a connection. And I actually 
don’t  mind  that.  We  are  no  longer  together,  but  I  can’t 
honestly  say  that  those  years  didn’t  happen  or  weren’t 
worthwhile.” - Participant C 
Terms of service of Internet Service Providers (ISPs) have a 
direct  influence  on  whether  users  have  agency  (control) 
over  links  that  indicate  that  the  relationship  still  exists: 
some  of  those  links  are  semi-permanent,  some  are  under 
control of the individual participants. Where active removal 
or deletion of the links was possible, it was seen as an act of 
closure,  a  way  to  let  go  of  the  past  and  a  way  to  work 
towards a new normal [19]: 
“It was hard, but one night after a month or so of splitting, 
I  sat  down  and  removed  him  from  my  relationship  link, 
removed his sister who was down as my sister and untagged 
him from some of my group pictures.  The pictures of just us 
together got deleted as well.  I needed to do that to move on 
because as far as the Internet was concerned we were still 
very much connected and in a relationship.”- Participant C 
Participant  C’s  comments  here  also  highlight  a  dilemma 
experienced  by  those  who  had  been  part  of  a  long-term 
relationship:  where  to  ‘draw  the  line’  between  their  past 
social  identity  as  part  of  a  couple,  and  their  new,  post-
separation  self.  These  findings  reiterate  those  of  Sas  and 
Whitaker  [32],  highlighting  that  a  relationship  breakdown 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

changes  not  only  the  relationship  of  the  couple,  but  also 
their  relationships  with  their  wider  social  networks,  both 
online and offline. Concrete examples of dilemmas reported 
by participants include: 
•   Who  to  remain  friends  with  on  social  media?  Should 
they remove joint friends who had initially been friends 
with their ex-partner first? “Culling your friends list on 
Facebook is always political, but when it comes after a 
breakup,  it  almost  feels  like  you  are  each  picking  for 
your football team at school. And you will always have 
people upset that they haven’t been picked by you.”  - 
Participant E 

•   How to address the binary nature of friendship evident 
in  the  online  context  –  friends/  not  friends  –  when 
intending  to  maintain  a  close  friendship  with  an  ex-
partner’s  sister,  whilst  not  wanting  to  be  too  overt 
about  the  continuing  friendship  at  first  for  fear  of 
creating additional tensions with the ex-partner? 

to 

the  fraying  edges  of 

Technology also stopped people from letting go, and even 
facilitated  holding  on 
the 
relationship, using social networking sites to show their ex 
“what they were missing” or that “I am so over you – look 
what I am up to now”.      
“Don’t  laugh  but  I  was  obsessed  with  showing  him  I  had 
moved  on  which  -  if  I  am  honest  -  I  hadn’t,  otherwise  I 
wouldn’t  be  thinking  about  him  all  the  time.  I  had  never 
posted to Facebook or Instagram as much as then, as I was 
determined  to  make  my  life  look  all  the  better  for  being 
single.  I  went  out  loads,  and  made  sure  I  (or  my  friends) 
took  loads  of  pictures  having  fun  and  going  to  different 
places.  It was exhausting but it was what I needed to do”  - 
Participant B 
Hanging  on  could  evolve  into  “non-scary  stalking”  (n=2), 
with  participants  reporting  that  they  monitored  feeds  on 
social networking sites about their ex-partner: 
“I  did  do  a  bit  of  stalking  –  but  non-scary  stalking  –  I 
wasn’t sat outside the house watching through a window or 
anything!  I just checked what they were up to on Facebook 
and  Twitter,  to  see  what  they  were  getting  up  to  and  who 
they were spending time with. I don’t know why I was doing 
that,  but  I  guess  it  was  difficult  going  from  being  in 
someone’s life to nothing.”  - Participant H 

Shared  digital  assets  
Dissolution of a co-habiting relationship brings with it the 
need  to  divide  up  shared  assets.  Participants  reported  that 
the  division  of  shared  physical  (technology-based)  assets 
had been a source of tension and negotiation.  
While individuals had their own mobile phone, many of the 
participants  had  shared  a  laptop  or  desktop  computer  as  a 
communal  home  computer,  shared  MP3  players  for  music 
in the home, and even shared hard drives for home media 
servers. Their use prior to relationship breakdown matched 

376

the ‘Appliance Model’ [5], whereby those residing together 
share  use  of  available  technology,  having  first  deployed 
social  protocols  to  mediate  the  sharing  (for  instance, 
sharing account and password details). This contrasts with a 
‘profile model’ that orients towards each individual having 
his  or  her  own  profile  and  user  accounts  [5].  Shared 
ownership - while practical during the relationship - proved 
to  be  very  difficult  at  and  beyond  the  end  of  the 
relationship.  

them.  Financial  value 

The  value  of  assets  
Determining how to share and divide physical digital assets 
was  complicated,  largely  because  of  the  value  embedded 
within 
is  significant  during 
relationship breakdown, with adverse outcomes on financial 
wellbeing 
the  norm  -  particularly  for  women  [35]. 
However,  beyond  tensions  centering  on  financial  value  of 
assets,  the  personal  data  that  both  parties  stored  on  (or 
accessed from) devices – e.g. text, photos, music – could be 
the  subjects  of  dispute.  Beyond  any  possible  financial 
value,  this  personal  data  could  be  imbued  with  emotional, 
intellectual or practical/ informational value [22]. 
The  shared  laptop/desktop  was  likely  to  contain  data 
imbued with practical and informational value. The device 
often  contained  documents  or  accounts  relating  to  the 
home.    If  the  party  leaving  the  shared  home  took  the 
computer,  the  remaining  party  could  struggle  to  access 
online  billing  and  account  numbers.  In  addition,  loss  of 
access  to  the  computer  resulted  for  some  participants  in  a 
loss of access to online forms of communication that they 
found useful for social support - such as Skype and social 
networking  sites.  The  isolating  effect  of  loss  of  internet 
access during a relationship breakdown has previously been 
described  by  Dimond  et  al,  in  the  context  of  abusive 
relationships [9].   
The  emotional  value  of  shared  physical  (technological-
based)  assets  also  surfaced  in  interviews.  This  value  was 
not  necessarily  linked  to  an  asset’s  function,  and  could 
change in light of the relationship breakdown and the threat 
of loss. For Participant B, an object’s emotional value was 
generated  by  its  provenance  and  context,  unrelated  to  its 
digital capability:     
“I wanted the digital photo frame as it was a wedding gift 
from  my  aunt,  who  has  since  died.  My  ex  found  this 
ridiculous, because I didn’t even know how to put photos on 
it.  He was the one who played with it.”  - Participant B 
Beyond  the  types  of  value  identified  above,  participants 
were  sensitive  to  an  additional  quality  associated  with 
digital  assets: 
Intimate 
relationships  can  generate  intimate  materials  and  memory 
cues  [17].  At  the  end  of  a  relationship,  these  intimate 
materials have the potential to make their author or subject 
feel uncomfortable, embarrassed or humiliated. A desire to 
delete  these  materials  is  common  [32],  rather  than  to 
willingly share such materials with an ex-partner: 

to  discomfit. 

the  potential 

SESSION: RELATIONSHIPS AND ROMANCE

“My  other  half  wanted  copies  of  all  our  photos,  but  I 
wanted  to  be  selective  and  removed  the  ones  I  felt  a  bit 
more sensitive about, you know the beach photos etc.  After 
being together 10 years, there was lots to go through. So I 
kept just saying I couldn’t burn them to a CD at the moment 
as it was broken, to buy me the time to sort them out.”  - 
Participant B 

Dividing  digital  assets  
The  challenge  of  dividing  physical  assets  during  a 
relationship  breakdown  is  not  new.  Dividing  up  digital 
content is. This content could be based on a local physical 
device or in the cloud. Some of the data was very easy to 
deal with. For example, personal photographs were copied 
and  shared  with  the  ex-partner,  with  little  concern  over 
copyright  or  licensing  agreements.  While  the  curatorial 
process  of  choosing  which  photographs  to  share  poses  its 
own problems, the inherent ability to create multiple copies 
of  digital  artifacts  painlessly  resolves  tensions  over  who 
gets which precious keepsake photo.    
“We  both  got  all  the  photos  of  the  kids  growing  up.  I  am 
glad  we  had  digital  photos,  which  made  it  really  easy 
because  I  would  be  upset  not  to  have  them  all.”  - 
Participant H 
Difficulties  occurred  when  content  was  collated,  merged 
and  embedded  within  other  systems  such  as  online 
repositories.  As  Moncur  points  out,  “just  because  a  user 
has data does not mean that they own it – even if they have 
paid for it” [22]. Music collections that were stored online 
and streamed, rather than owned as CDs and records, may 
have  been  stored  in  a  joint/family  account  (a  shared 
ownership  account)  to  make  it  easier  to  produce  playlists 
and to make listening to music a collaborative activity. Or a 
couple  may  have  shared  a  password  to  a  single-user 
account, enacting the aforementioned Appliance Model [5]. 
Ownership  of  a  license  to  use  content  from  a  service 
provider,  rather  than  owning  it  outright,  posed  distinct 
challenges for the separating couple: 
•   How  do  you  divide  up  music  albums  between  two 
people  when  they  are  ‘stored’  under  a  single  online 
account in a repository such as iTunes? 
implications 

‘changing 
ownership’  of  music  or  films  downloaded  from  the 
Internet? 

•   What  are 

the 

legal 

to 

•   How  do  you  remember  what  you  had  under  a  shared 
account, when you can no longer access the inventory? 
“I lost my music collection because we always used his 
iTunes account. I know I can replace them, and it is not 
even the principle of paying twice that frustrates me. It 
is that I can’t remember everything I had off the top of 
my  head,  so  what  I  have  at  the  moment  feels  pretty 
rubbish.”  - Participant D 

377

Moving  on  
Managing  Practicalities  
Every  relationship  divides  responsibilities  differently, 
however  one  identified  problem  amongst  participants  was 
where  one  party  was  responsible  for  sorting  out  the 
household  bills  and  accounts.  With  service  suppliers 
moving  account  management  online,  it  became  very 
difficult when the party who left the shared accommodation 
was  the  one  who  ordinarily  managed  the  provision  of 
utilities to the home. Problems occurred in trying to transfer 
accounts (largely managed online) to a new owner, as the 
systems rarely provide that option:   
“We  had  a  very  amicable  and  methodical  split.  We  sat 
down  and  made  a  list  of  everything  which  needed  to  be 
sorted out before one of us moved out. My ex-husband dealt 
with  all  the  online  billing  for  the  telephone,  gas,  electric 
etc.  So we sat down to sort it out, and there was no way to 
do  this  online.  Not  even  in  the  help  files.  Eventually  we 
found the appropriate number, but then had to navigate the 
‘press 1 for’ list, and nothing seemed to fit. After about 30 
minutes  of  trying  different  options,  listening  to  irritating 
music  and  being  put  on  hold,  we  got  through  to  someone 
who could help. By that time we were a bit frustrated, and 
had only managed one (supplier) on the list.  So we left the 
next one until the next day.”  - Participant C 
Not all participants had the option for a mediated transfer of 
utilities  bills.  One  participant’s  partner  left  the  home  and 
was not contactable again, and one refused to help. Neither 
of these participants knew where their accounts were held, 
and there was no documentation or paper trail in the house 
to follow, largely because of paperless billing:    
“I tried to change the electricity supplier once I had found 
out  which  one  it  was.  Don’t  even  get  me  started  on  how 
difficult  it  is  to  find  out  who  the  supplier  is.  I  was  told  it 
should be easy enough, but it was like I wanted access to 
codes to launch a nuclear missile.  I had to keep explaining 
why I didn’t have that information. Anyway, when I phoned 
the electricity company, they told me it would be easier to 
change  account  details  if  my  other  half  had  died  than 
walked out on me!”  - Participant B 

Supporting  distributed  parents  
We  found  that  technology  could  have  a  positive  role  in 
facilitating  communication  between  distributed  families. 
Having  a  shared  online  calendar  space  that  acted  as  an 
intermediary  was  very  popular  with  participants  who  had 
children,  in  much  the  same  way  as  public  awareness 
calendars are [26], as it helped to provide talking points and 
facilitated a connection for separated parents:   
“We  have  a  Google  calendar  for  my  daughter  which  is 
shared between us (and the grandparents too).  We used it 
to  hold  all  her  appointments  and  clubs,  and  note  down 
when  she  is  staying  with  her  dad.  It  also  means  my  ex-
husband can phone at the right time, after dance class, and 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

ask  her  about  it  in  a  way  that  tells  her  he  knows  what  is 
going on, and cares about it. It is important to me that they 
have  a  good  relationship,  and  I  know  the  calendar  really 
helps  him.    So  I  can  help  by  keeping  it  up-to-date.”  - 
Participant B 
This  finding  echoes  that  of  Odom  et  al.  in  their  work 
investigating how interactive systems can support dynamic 
family  structures.  They  too  report  that  shared  calendars 
facilitated  connections  between  parents,  even  in  situations 
where  those  parents  were  not  on  speaking  terms.  As  both 
parties  could  see  how  the  other  contributed  to  managing 
their child’s time, it provided positive tangible evidence of 
their investment in the co-parenting relationship [28]. 
Tools that facilitated more interactive communication were 
also  popular,  particularly  when  children  were  young  and 
struggled  with  audio-only  communication  provided  by  the 
telephone. Often communication was set for pre-established 
windows of time:     
"I love Skype.  I was always going to speak to the kids every 
night, but with Skype I can see them and they can see me. It 
makes the situation easier to live with, and I hope it is good 
for them." – Participant A 
One  parent  reported  using  Google  Latitude,  a  (now-
discontinued)  service  that  allowed  users  to  be  tracked  by 
specific  people  via  their  mobile  phone  on  a  Google  map. 
This  allowed  the  parent  and  child  to  feel  a  connection 
without  communicating,  because  they  could  visualize 
where the other one was.  
"We  use  Latitude,  do  you  know  it?  It  is  like  our  own 
Marauder’s Map from Harry Potter.  I can check in on her 
and she can check in on me.  We feel connected, but without 
having to come up with an excuse for a text message.  Plus I 
can check she is home from her drama club before I call.  
We  are  quite  sad  that  they  don’t  do  Latitude  anymore."  – 
Participant E 

Summary  of  findings  
Our participants recalled strong, mainly negative, emotions 
in the context of their computer-mediated communications 
during  their  relationship  breakdowns.  Emotions  expressed 
through  online  fora  included  distress,  anger,  vengefulness, 
obsession  through  online  stalking  and  highly  crafted 
(disingenuous)  representations  of  a  very  social  self. 
Reflecting  on  their  use  of  technology  during  this  period, 
participants  expressed 
they  posted, 
vulnerability at how they could appear through the lens of 
social media, embarrassment, a sense of necessary pain in 
communicating news of the breakup, and a feeling of being 
harassed online by well-meaning social network members. 
One  participant’s  expression  of  a  positive  emotion, 
gratitude  for  the  unexpectedly  high  level  of  support  
expressed online by friends, was tempered by regret as this 
also meant that her breakup notification post achieved high 
visibility and persistence on social media as a popular post. 

regret  at  what 

378

through 

At a time when they were already facing real difficulties in 
the  analog  world 
relationship  breakdown, 
participants struggled with additional difficulties generated 
by  digital  services  that  were  designed  for  beginnings,  not 
endings. Our participants encountered a range of obstacles 
to  uncoupling  themselves  online.  The  simplistic  binary 
approach to friendship offered by SNS – friend/ not friend – 
created  difficulties  that  would  seem  ridiculous  offline, 
forcing  individuals  to  ‘unfriend’  people  that  mattered  to 
them  because  of  the  way  that  friendships  are  manifested 
publicly online. The division of digital assets also brought 
problems unique to the digital world, where ‘ownership’ is 
an  increasingly  problematic  concept  [27]  and  established 
domestic  practice  takes  precedence  over  copyright  and 
licensing  agreements  –  at  least  until  a  relationship  breaks 
down.  Service  suppliers’  (e.g.  provision  of  gas  and 
electricity)  online systems  often  failed  to  take  relationship 
breakdown into account, creating unwelcome headaches for 
those affected.  
On  a  positive  note,  one  of  the  issues  identified  by 
Participant  B  –  having  her  changed  relationship  status 
highlighted  by  Facebook  on  her  Timeline  –  is  now  moot. 
revised  how 
Facebook  has 
in 
it  handles  changes 
relationship  statuses;  couples 
taking  a  positive  and 
progressive  step  in  their  relationship,  for  example  moving 
from  ‘In  a  relationship’  to  ‘Engaged’  are  offered  the 
opportunity to post this as a public ‘Life Event’ by default. 
In  contrast,  couples  that  terminate  a  relationship,  for 
example, moving from ‘Engaged’ to ‘Single’ or ‘Separated’ 
are  notified  that  this  event  will  not  appear  on  their  News 
Feed by default. 

at 

in 

supporting  online 

OPPORTUNITIES  FOR  DESIGN  
We invite the designers of online services to take common 
adverse  life  events  into  account  just  as  much  as  they  do 
positive  ones.  Online  services  are  now  (generally)  very 
good 
instantiations  of  new 
relationships – whether platonic, romantic, professional, or 
service-related. They are also good at maintaining the status 
quo  –  for  example,  Facebook  reminders  to  wish  existing 
friends  ‘Happy  Birthday’,  LinkedIn’s  alerts  when  contacts 
have  a  work  anniversary,  routine  provision  of  online  bills 
for  utilities.  Online  services  are  not  so  good  at  endings. 
Poor  design 
the  face  of  an  extremely  common 
transitional  life  event,  relationship  breakdown,  caused  our 
participants to experience a range of negative emotions, and 
forced them to navigate additional hurdles in the process of 
separating. This seems unnecessary.  
Herein,  we  highlight  some  design  opportunities  emerging 
out  of  this  study  -  reducing  misunderstandings,  improving 
social  media,  supporting  intimacy  in  distributed  families, 
and  revising  service  provision  -  that  take  relationship 
breakdown into account. 

SESSION: RELATIONSHIPS AND ROMANCE

replicate 

the 

of 

they 

subtleties 

Reducing  misunderstandings  
CMCs  such  as  emails  and  social  media  have  a  way  to  go 
before 
offline 
communications.  As  Derks  and  Fischer  note,  “The  lack  of 
non-verbal  signals  in  CMC  would  imply  that  emotional 
states can be overestimated or underestimated… In the case 
of conflicts this may more easily lead to an escalation of the 
conflict” [8:11]. Use of email to communicate with their ex-
partner after breaking up certainly exacerbated tensions for 
some  of  our  participants.  We  see  opportunities  here  to 
examine  how  misunderstandings  in  text-based  CMCs  can 
be reduced through a range of non-verbal (visual) cues. In 
other  contexts,  emoticons  can  be  useful  in  reinforcing 
messages and expressing emotions [7], but previous studies 
on their use have been undertaken in contexts that are not as 
emotionally  charged  as 
is 
questionable  whether  they  could  help  to  communicate 
emotional  state  in  a  sufficiently  nuanced  and  mature 
manner in the context of relationship breakup. 

relationship  breakups. 

It 

text  messages 

Enhancing  social  media  
‘Netiquette’  
Our  participants  valued  the  asynchronous  nature  of  social 
media,  email  and 
in  sharing  news 
asynchronously, finding it a useful way of avoiding giving 
difficult news in person. This has previously been observed 
in  the  context  of  bereaved  individuals  sharing  news  of  a 
death  with  their  social  network  [23].  The  nature  of  the 
channel  used  for  the  breakup  notification  –  public  (a 
Facebook post) or targeted (a text message) – affected the 
response  given.  Participants  did  not  welcome  emotional 
responses that were aimed at a public audience.  
Sensitively  highlighting  that  a  piece  of  news  requires  a 
personal  response  from  recipients,  not  a  public  broadcast, 
could be a useful prompt for those who do not grasp tacit 
online  social  norms.  Such  prompting  could  also  be  useful 
for  dissuading  disgruntled  ex-partners 
from  making 
pronouncements online that they later regret. Of course, any 
such prompting would need to be designed very carefully to 
avoid becoming a new version of the irritating “Mr.Clippy” 
coach, once prevalent on Microsoft screens. 

Popular  social  media  posts  
When a number of friends responded publicly (rather than 
via  a  private  message)  to  a  breakup  notification  on 
Facebook, it could lead to the notification becoming a ‘top 
story’ – thus gaining far more attention than its originator 
may  have  intended.  It  is  likely  that  these  notifications 
would  also  appear  in  subsequent  ‘On  this  day’  messages1 
and  ‘Look  Back’  videos  issued  by  Facebook  to  support 
reminiscence  –  although  the  interviews  were  conducted 
before 
introduced,  and  so  our 
participants did not comment on these features. Automated 
                                                             
1 https://www.facebook.com/help/439014052921484/ 

these  features  were 

379

ranking  of  popular  posts,  and  reuse  in  nostalgic  reposts, 
could  be  improved  to  identify  context  and  to  avoid 
resurfacing  emotionally  painful  memories  in  a  manner 
which  is  beyond  users’  control  and  which  may  be  very 
unwelcome  [11]. More  broadly,  efforts  to  understand  how 
to  cue  welcome  memories  [17]  -  and  to  avoid  unwelcome 
ones - through mediated content would be valuable.   

Mediated  support  of  intimacy  in  distributed  families  
A significant part of being a member of a shared household 
is having available to you the resources to reason about one 
another's  activities  without  any  overt  effort.  Relationship 
breakdown means that, for people who are part of a family 
group  rather  than  just  (ex-)  cohabiting  partners,  these 
ordinary  resources  are  no  longer  going  to  be  available  for 
one of the people involved. An integral aspect to sustaining 
intimacy is the right to assume certain things about people, 
including  certain  kinds  of  knowledge:  removing  access  to 
ordinary knowings is something that can significantly erode 
how intimacy is made manifest.  
We see here an opportunity to support the ongoing intimacy 
that  family  life  calls  for,  whilst  recognizing  that  this 
intimacy  takes  on  a  new  shape  as  a  new  normal  is 
established  in  the  relationships  between  the  central  actors. 
Even  being  aware  of  a  parent’s  or  a  child’s  presence, 
without  necessarily  starting  a  conversation,  is  valuable  in 
sustaining  intimacy  for  distributed  families.  Looking  at 
systems to promote a sense of connectedness and presence 
in a non-verbalized way between a child and a parent who 
no  longer  share  a  home  every  day  presents  an  interesting 
next step. It is also one in which there is already significant 
engagement – albeit at the other end of life - in monitoring 
the  activities  of  elderly  relatives  in  more  or  less  intrusive 
ways.  

Refining  service  provision  
Disentangling    
The  transfer  of  billing  accounts,  from  the  ex-partner  who 
was moving out to the one who was remaining in the home, 
or from joint to single ownership, was surprisingly difficult. 
Participant B was told that it would have been easier if her 
partner had died. Indeed, the Tell Us Once service2 provides 
a  good  example  here  of  sensitive  service  provision  in  the 
context of bereavement, which is worth emulating for those 
experiencing 
service, 
provided  by  the  UK  Government,  allows  next  of  kin  to 
report  a  death  once, 
that 
automatically  amends  an  individual’s  status  to  ‘deceased’ 
across  government  services.  This  streamlines  a  once 
laborious  and  potentially  distressing  process  for 
the 
bereaved.  Facebook  provides  an  option  to  memorialize  or 
delete  an  account  in  the  event  of  a  user’s  death  [23]. 
Perhaps an extension to these services is needed? - a central 
                                                             
2http://bit.ly/1ll77Pf 

relationship  breakdown.  This 

triggering  a  process 

thus 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

digital breakup service, whereby all digital services can be 
adjusted to facilitate a ‘breakup’ of billing accounts, so that 
a couple’s online status can be disentangled, thus matching 
the offline one.  

Cloning  accounts  
Distinct to issues around who is named on billing accounts, 
participants  were  frustrated  by  the  inability  to  remember 
what  digital  assets  they  had  previously  had  access  to  via 
online  repositories  such  as  iTunes,  when  they  shared  an 
account  with  their  partner.  Remembering  goes  beyond  a 
mere list. Using Netflix (a popular provider of on-demand 
Internet streaming media) as an example, a shared account 
encompasses  not  only  a  list  of  films,  TV  series  and  other 
media  both  viewed  and  to  be  viewed,  but  also  user 
preferences 
A 
straightforward  service  design  opportunity  presents  itself 
here, in creating a facility to clone the online account – also 
presenting  commercial  benefit  to  service  providers  in  the 
form  of  new  customers.  The  concept  of  cloning  accounts 
generalises  to  other  situations  where  living  circumstances 
change  –  for  example,  to  young  adults  leaving  the  family 
home and beginning to live independently, who still want to 
watch the same kinds of media.  

recommendations. 

tailored 

and 

FUTURE  WORK  
This  study  focused  on  eight  adults  aged  from  29  to  68. 
Whilst the sample size was modest, reflecting the difficulty 
in  recruiting  participants  for  a  study  in  this  very  sensitive 
context, participants’ experiences and relationship durations 
were  varied.  In  future  work,  we  will  consider  the  role  of 
technology  in  relationship  breakdown  amongst  younger 
adults  and  teenagers,  in  comparison  to  the  experiences  of 
somewhat  older  people  reported  on  in  this  paper.  We 
anticipate  that  there  will  be  less  decoupling  of  assets,  yet 
there will still be a need to manage identity after break-up 
(perhaps even more so as digital engagement is commonly 
deeper and more extensive amongst young adults than older 
ones).  We  will  also  study  the  effects  of  relationship 
duration  and  socioeconomic  status.  How  much  identity 
management  is  done  to  erase  the  past,  depending  on  the 
duration  of  the  relationship?  How  does  a  division  of 
(digital) assets take place when there are scarce resources? - 
participants in our study were comparatively affluent.  
Our  participants  lived  within  the  UK.  The  data  presented 
here does need to be understood within the context it was 
gathered.  Each  breakdown  is  unique,  and  no  attempts  are 
made  to  determine  whether  the  results  will  generalize  to 
other  populations.  Opportunities  exist 
the 
to 
generalisability  of  our  overall 
themes 
to  alternative 
relationship breakdown settings and sociocultural contexts. 

test 

CONCLUSIONS  
This study has contributed to the small but growing body of 
research  into  the  role  of  digital  technologies  during 
relationship breakdown. It has examined where technology 

380

helps  and  complicates  the  breakdown,  and  highlighted 
opportunities  for  design.  Our  findings  share  common 
ground  with  work  on  other  common  yet  disruptive 
transitions  across  the  human  lifespan–  e.g.  [21,24,36].  As 
the  role  of 
we  develop  a  deeper  understanding  of 
technology  during 
rich 
opportunities  to  draw  insights  together  and  to  design 
technologies  that  can  support  individuals  during  the  more 
challenging periods in their lives. 

transitions, 

there  are 

these 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
This  research  was  supported  by  Research  Councils  UK 
(project  reference  EP/L00383X/1)  and  an  EPSRC  DTA 
studentship.  We  are  grateful  to  our  participants  for  their 
participation in this study. 

REFERENCES  
1.   Paul R. Amato. 2000. The Consequences of Divorce for 
Adults and Children. Journal of Marriage and Family 62, 
4: 1269–1287. http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1741-
3737.2000.01269.x 
2.   Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using 
thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in 
Psychology 3, 2: 77–101. 
http://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa 
3.   Jed R. Brubaker, Gillian R. Hayes, and Paul Dourish. 
2013. Beyond the Grave: Facebook as a Site for the 
Expansion of Death and Mourning. The Information Society 
29, 3: 152–163. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/01972243.2013.777300 
4.   Jed R Brubaker, Funda Kivran-Swaine, Lee Taber, and 
Gillian R Hayes. 2012. Grief-Stricken in a Crowd: The 
Language of Bereavement and Distress in Social Media. 
ICWSM. 
5.   AJB Brush and Kori Inkpen. 2007. Yours, Mine and 
Ours? Sharing and Use of Technology in Domestic 
Environments. In UbiComp 2007: Ubiquitous Computing. 
109–126. 
6.   L. Crystal Jiang and Jeffrey T. Hancock. 2013. Absence 
Makes the Communication Grow Fonder: Geographic 
Separation, Interpersonal Media, and Intimacy in Dating 
Relationships. Journal of Communication 63, 3: 556–577. 
http://doi.org/10.1111/jcom.12029 
7.   Daantje Derks, Arjan E. R. Bos, and Jasper von 
Grumbkow. 2008. Emoticons in Computer-Mediated 
Communication: Social Motives and Social Context. 
CyberPsychology & Behavior 11, 1: 99–101. 
http://doi.org/10.1089/cpb.2007.9926 
8.   Daantje Derks, Agneta H. Fischer, and Arjan E. R. Bos. 
2008. The role of emotion in computer-mediated 
communication: A review. Computers in Human Behavior 
24, 3: 766–785. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2007.04.004 

SESSION: RELATIONSHIPS AND ROMANCE

9.   Jill P. Dimond, Casey Fiesler, and Amy S. Bruckman. 
2011. Domestic violence and information communication 
technologies. Interacting with Computers 23, 5: 413–421. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.intcom.2011.04.006 
10.   J Donath. 2004. Sociable media. In (1st ed.), William 
S Bainbridge (ed.). Berkshire Publishing Group, 
Massachussetts, USA. 
11.   Josh Dzieza. 2015. Facebook’s new nostalgia feature 
is already bringing up painful memories. The Verge. 
Retrieved July 22, 2015 from 
http://www.theverge.com/2015/4/2/8315897/facebook-on-
this-day-nostalgia-app-bringing-back-painful-memories 
12.   Judith A. Feeney and Patricia Noller. 1992. 
Attachment style and romantic love: Relationship 
dissolution. Australian Journal of Psychology 44, 2: 69–74. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/00049539208260145 
13.   Lorna Gibson and Vicki L. Hanson. 2013. Digital 
Motherhood: How Does Technology Help New Mothers? 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems, ACM, 313–322. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2470700 
14.   Erving Goffman. 1959. The presentation of self in 
everyday life. Double Day, Garden City, NY, USA. 
15.   Oliver L. Haimson, Jed R. Brubaker, Lynn 
Dombrowski, and Gillian R. Hayes. 2015. Disclosure, 
Stress, and Support During Gender Transition on Facebook. 
Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing, ACM, 
1176–1190. http://doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675152 
16.   Julie H. Hall and Frank D. Fincham. 2006. 
Relationship Dissolution Following Infidelity: The Roles of 
Attributions and Forgiveness. Journal of Social and 
Clinical Psychology 25, 5: 508–522. 
http://doi.org/10.1521/jscp.2006.25.5.508 
17.   Elise van den Hoven and Berry Eggen. 2014. The Cue 
Is Key: Design for Real-Life Remembering. Zeitschrift für 
Psychologie 222, 2: 110–117. http://doi.org/10.1027/2151-
2604/a000172 
18.   Michael Massimi. 2013. Exploring Remembrance and 
Social Support Behavior in an Online Bereavement Support 
Group. Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work, ACM, 1169–1180. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2441776.2441908 
19.   Michael Massimi, Jill P. Dimond, and Christopher A. 
Le Dantec. 2012. Finding a New Normal: The Role of 
Technology in Life Disruptions. Proceedings of the ACM 
2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work, ACM, 719–728. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2145204.2145314 
20.   Michael Massimi, Richard Harper, and Abigail J. 
Sellen. 2014. “Real, but Glossy”: Technology and the 

381

Practical Pursuit of Magic in Modern Weddings. Proc. 
CSCW’14, ACM, 854–865. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2531602.2531682 
21.   Michael Massimi, Svetlana Yarosh, Madeline E. 
Smith, and Joseph Jofish Kaye. 2014. Designing 
Technology for Major Life Events. CHI ’14 Extended 
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, 
83–86. http://doi.org/10.1145/2559206.2559235 
22.   W Moncur. 2015. Digital ownership across lifespans. 
In Ageing and the Digital Life Course, C. Garratini and D 
Prendergast (eds.). Berghahn Books. 
23.   Wendy Moncur, Jan Bikker, Elaine Kasket, and John 
Troyer. 2012. From Death to Final Disposition: Roles of 
Technology in the Post-Mortem Interval. Proc. CHI’12, 
ACM, 531–540. http://doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2207750 
24.   Wendy Moncur, Judith Masthoff, Ehud Reiter, 
Yvonne Freer, and Hien Nguyen. 2014. Providing Adaptive 
Health Updates across the Personal Social Network. 
Human–Computer Interaction 29, 3: 256–309. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/07370024.2013.819218 
25.   Moncur, W. and D. Kirk. 2014. An Emergent 
Framework for Digital Memorials. Proc. DIS’14, ACM 
Press, 965–974. 
26.   Carman Neustaedter, A. J. Bernheim Brush, and Saul 
Greenberg. 2009. The Calendar is Crucial: Coordination 
and Awareness Through the Family Calendar. ACM Trans. 
Comput.-Hum. Interact. 16, 1: 6:1–6:48. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1502800.1502806 
27.   William Odom, Abi Sellen, Richard Harper, and Eno 
Thereska. 2012. Lost in translation: understanding the 
possession of digital things in the cloud. Proc. CHI ’12, 
ACM, 781. http://doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2207789 
28.   William Odom, John Zimmerman, and Jodi Forlizzi. 
2010. Designing for Dynamic Family Structures: Divorced 
Families and Interactive Systems. Proceedings of the 8th 
ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems, ACM, 
151–160. http://doi.org/10.1145/1858171.1858199 
29.   Office for National Statistics. 2014. What percentage 
of marriages end in divorce?. HM Government, UK. 
Retrieved May 19, 2015 from 
http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/vsob1/divorces-in-england-
and-wales/2011/sty-what-percentage-of-marriages-end-in-
divorce.html 
30.   Office for National Statistics. 2015. Civil Partnerships 
in the UK, 2013. HM Government, UK. Retrieved May 19, 
2015 from http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/vsob2/civil-
partnership-statistics--united-kingdom/2013/stb-civil-
partnerships-2013.html 
31.   Galena K. Rhoades, Claire M. Kamp Dush, David C. 
Atkins, Scott M. Stanley, and Howard J. Markman. 2011. 
Breaking Up is Hard to do: The Impact of Unmarried 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Relationship Dissolution on Mental Health and Life 
Satisfaction. Journal of family psychology 25, 3: 366–374. 
http://doi.org/10.1037/a0023627 
32.   Corina Sas and Steve Whittaker. 2013. Design for 
forgetting: disposing of digital possessions after a breakup. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems, ACM, 1823–1832. Retrieved 
January 6, 2015 from 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2466241 
33.   Irina Shklovski, Robert Kraut, and Jonathon 
Cummings. 2008. Keeping in Touch by Technology: 
Maintaining Friendships After a Residential Move. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems, ACM, 807–816. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1357054.1357182 
34.   Ty Tashiro and Patricia Frazier. 2003. “I’ll never be in 
a relationship like that again”: Personal growth following 
romantic relationship breakups. Personal Relationships 10, 
1: 113–128. http://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6811.00039 
35.   D de Vaus, M Gray, L Qu, and D Stanton. 2010. 
Relationship breakdown and social exclusion: A 
longitudinal analysis. Proc. 10th Australian Institute of 
Family Studies Conferences. 

36.   T Walter, R Hourizi, W Moncur, and S Pitsillides. 
2012. Does the internet change how we die and mourn? An 
overview. Omega: Journal of Death & Dying 64, 4: 275–
302. 
37.   Svetlana Yarosh and Gregory D. Abowd. 2011. 
Mediated Parent-child Contact in Work-separated Families. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems, ACM, 1185–1194. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979120 
38.   Svetlana Yarosh, Yee Chieh “Denise” Chew, and 
Gregory D. Abowd. 2009. Supporting Parent-child 
Communication in Divorced Families. Int. J. Hum.-
Comput. Stud. 67, 2: 192–203. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2008.09.005 
39.   Xuan Zhao and Siân E. Lindley. 2014. Curation 
Through Use: Understanding the Personal Value of Social 
Media. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, 2431–2440. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557291 
40.   2009. Facebook fuelling divorce, research claims. The 
Telegraph. Retrieved from 
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/facebook/6857918/
Facebook-fuelling-divorce-research-claims.html 

 

382

