CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Thousands of Positive Reviews:

Distributed Mentoring in Online Fan Communities
Julie Ann Campbell

Cecilia Aragon

Katie Davis

University of Washington

University of Washington

University of Washington

Seattle, USA

juliemu@uw.edu

Seattle, USA

aragon@uw.edu

Seattle, USA

kdavis78@uw.edu

Sarah Evans

University of Washington

Seattle, USA
sarahe@uw.edu

Abigail Evans

University of Washington

Seattle, USA

abievans@uw.edu

David P. Randall

University of Washington

Seattle, USA
dpr47@uw.edu

ABSTRACT
Young people worldwide are participating in ever-increasing 
numbers in online fan communities. Far from mere shallow 
repositories  of  pop  culture,  these  sites  are  accumulating 
significant evidence that sophisticated informal learning is 
taking place online in novel and unexpected ways. In order 
to understand and analyze in more detail how learning might 
be  occurring,  we  conducted  an 
in-depth  nine-month 
ethnographic investigation of online fanfiction communities, 
including  participant  observation  and  fanfiction author 
interviews.  Our  observations  led  to  the  development  of  a 
theory we term distributed mentoring, which we present in 
detail in this paper. Distributed mentoring exemplifies one 
instance  of  how  networked 
technology  affords  new 
extensions  of  behaviors  that  were  previously  bounded  by 
time  and  space.  Distributed  mentoring  holds  potential  for 
application beyond the spontaneous mentoring observed in 
this  investigation  and  may  help  students  receive  diverse, 
thoughtful feedback in formal learning environments as well.
Author Keywords
Mentoring; distributed  mentoring;
fanfiction; online communities; digital youth. 
ACM Classification Keywords
H.5.3. Group and organization interfaces: Theory and models.
INTRODUCTION
In a 45-minute period during the afternoon on Monday, May 
4, 2015, 100 new fanfiction stories were published on the 
online  repository  Fanfiction.net.  Fanfiction is  immensely 
popular  among  adolescents  and  young  adults,  and  this 

informal 

learning;

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  the  author(s)  must  be 
honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific 
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
Copyright  is  held  by  the  owner/author(s).  Publication  rights  licensed  to 
ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819934

691

popularity  is  evident  in  the  millions  of  stories  housed  in 
online  fanfiction repositories.  Fanfiction.net  is  the  440th 
most popular website in the United States, and its visitors are 
overwhelmingly  teens  and  emerging  adults [1].  Fanfiction
authors have written stories housed on Fanfiction.net that are 
several hundred thousand words in length, even longer than 
the original works on which the stories were based. 
This  abundance  of  literary  production  stands  in  sharp 
contrast to popular wisdom that today’s young people are not 
interested in or even capable of long-form writing and use 
technology  primarily  for  shallow  interactions  on  social 
media [11,23,59,62]. What is it about fanfiction experiences 
that foster such engaged participation among youth? We set 
out  to  investigate  why  members  of  a  generation  often 
maligned  for  placing  video  games  ahead  of  books  are  so 
engaged  in  this  form  of  writing.  During  this  analysis,  we 
communicated  directly  with  young  fanfiction authors  in 
addition  to  observing  interactions  between  authors  and 
readers over the course of nine months. In the process, we 
discovered evidence of a type of community-based learning 
and  mentoring 
the 
technological  affordances  of  the  Web.  Moving  beyond 
formal mentoring, people have developed a network-enabled 
form of giving and receiving feedback, actively correlating 
knowledge gleaned in small pieces from a large community 
to  inform  their  fanfiction  writing.  As  this  knowledge  is 
embodied  in  artifacts  of  interaction  between  community 
members, we draw on and extend Hutchins’ framework of 
distributed  cognition [30,31] and  Dawson’s  mentoring 
this  process  distributed 
framework 
mentoring.
While “distributed mentoring” has been used previously by 
other  scholars [16,40,50] to  describe  mentors  who  are 
geographically distributed or collectively based, our use of 
the  term  is  novel  because  of  its  grounding  in Hutchins’ 
concept of distributed cognition, and because it is not just the 
people but also the mentoring itself that is distributed. We
identify seven  key  attributes  of  distributed  mentoring  that 
distinguish  it  from  traditional,  offline  forms  of  mentoring 
and tie it both to Hutchins’ theory of distributed cognition 

facilitated  by 

is  uniquely 

in  naming 

that 

[18]

and to the particular affordances of networked publics. These 
attributes  are:  aggregation,  accretion,  acceleration, 
abundance, availability, asynchronicity, and affect.
Grounded in a sociocultural tradition of theory and research, 
our work  builds  upon  and  extends  previous  research
addressing  the  role  of  mentoring  in  affinity  spaces  and
communities of practice [16,24,25,40,42,50] by delving into 
the  specific  processes  by  which  knowledge  is  shared,  the 
distinct affordances  of  networked  platforms  that  facilitate 
this sharing, and how writers experience these processes of 
knowledge  sharing.  In  this  way,  we  extend  prior  work  by 
articulating a new  theoretical  understanding  of  networked 
mentoring processes and how they differ from a traditional 
model of mentoring. We believe that the theoretical construct 
of distributed mentoring may be of benefit in understanding 
learning  processes  in  other  formal  and  informal  learning 
environments.
PREVIOUS WORK AND BACKGROUND
Fanfiction
Scholars  have  explored  fanfiction from  a  number  of  angles, 
including  legality [47,55,57],  literacy [8,35],
instructional 
potential [12,44], sexuality [34,58], and identity [3,8]. Jenkins’
[34] seminal investigation of fanfiction occurred more than 20 
years ago as part of a larger study of fan culture. Challenging 
negative stereotypes of fans, Jenkins depicted them “as active 
producers and manipulators of meanings” [34]. He identified 
fanfiction as a prime example of how fans engage actively with 
original  creative  works  by  referencing,  manipulating,  and 
extending them in new and unexpected ways. 
Fanfiction has existed since the 1960s, developing within the 
fandoms for television shows like Star Trek [34]. However,
the distribution of fanfiction has substantially changed with 
the advent of internet-based fanfiction repositories. Removing 
the physical constraints of printing has lowered the barriers
to reader critique, with the result that there may be hundreds 
or  thousands  of  reviews  submitted  for  a  single  fanfiction
story.  Additionally,  the  public,  persistent,  and  immediate 
nature  of  online  reviews  allows  for  instant  and  highly 
interactive communication among reviewers as well as the 
fanfiction authors themselves. This dramatic decrease in the 
cost of providing feedback to authors has led to far greater 
volumes  of  information  being  exchanged  among  larger 
numbers  of  participants  in  online  fanfiction communities, 
enabling  a  complex  web  of  support,  commentary, 
communication,  and  mentoring that  could  not  have  been 
possible with older technologies: what we term distributed 
mentoring.
Following Jenkins’ investigation of fanfiction, Black [6–8]
investigated  language  acquisition  and  identity  formation 
among  English  language  learners  participating  in  online 
fanfiction communities.  Black  analyzed 
the  dialogue 
between authors and readers in the form of story reviews and 
authors’ notes. She found that these interactions helped the 
authors  shape  their  learning  space  and  identity.  Black’s 
focus,  however,  was  primarily  on  how  reviews  affected 

692

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

individual  authors’  identity  formation  over  time.  We  still 
lack  insight  into  the  complex  structure  of  the  network  of 
fanfiction reviews and the impact that an entire community 
of reviewers may  have  on authors’  creative  processes  and 
skill development. This topic is worth further exploration in 
light of fanfiction’s popularity and the encouragement that 
authors  profess 
to  feel  because  of  reader  reviews. 
Understanding this phenomenon in more depth may provide 
insights  into  how  young  people  could  be  encouraged  to 
develop their skills as writers as well as their enjoyment of 
the writing process in arenas outside the fanfiction world. In 
this way, our work contributes to existing work exploring the 
use  of  fanfiction  and  other  forms  of  fan  creation  to  support 
learning in formal and informal educational settings [43,49].
Affinity Spaces,  Participatory  Culture,  and  Connected 
Learning
The present study takes as its starting point the recognition 
that  fanfiction communities  function  as  affinity  spaces
[8,36]. Gee [24] described an affinity space as an “interest-
driven  passion-fuelled  site,”  where  personal  differences  in 
age,  gender,  or  class  are  less  important  than  the  shared 
interest being explored. Like communities of practice [42], 
affinity spaces are distinct contexts of learning and identity 
formation  where  novices  become  experts  through  guided 
participation  in  the  social  structure  of  the  community
[24,25]. However, Black [8] distinguishes between the two 
by  observing  that in  affinity  spaces  there  are  a  range  of 
different novice and expert roles that vary based on context, 
whereas  in  communities  of practice, apprentices  are being 
trained  toward  one  type of full  participation  using  a well-
defined  body  of  knowledge.  In  a  fanfiction community, 
authors  may  be  apprentices and  masters at  the  same  time, 
possessing  expertise  in  one  aspect  of  the  craft,  such  as 
characterization,  grammar,  or  canon  knowledge,  but 
requiring assistance in other aspects. In the present work, we 
expand on Gee’s concept of affinity spaces and related work 
around networked  practices  of  feedback [8,38,41,54] by 
exploring  how  the  distinct  affordances  of  networked 
technologies  shape  and  transform  mentoring  processes in 
affinity spaces. In so doing, we demonstrate how the concept of 
distributed  mentoring  offers  new  insights  into  collaborative 
mentoring processes in networked environments.
The present work is also informed by participatory culture 
and connected learning principles, which networked affinity 
spaces are well positioned to support. According to Jenkins
[36], a participatory culture is “a culture with relatively low 
barriers to artistic expression and civic engagement, strong 
support for creating and sharing creations, and some type of 
informal mentorship whereby experienced participants pass 
along knowledge to novices” [36]. Fanfiction communities 
promote participatory culture by virtue of their low barrier to 
entry—anyone of any age can write and publish a story—and 
their high level of peer support and mentoring. The concept 
of  distributed  mentoring  extends  Jenkins’  work  around 
participatory  culture  by  delving  more  deeply into  the 
relationship  between 
the  affordances  of  networked 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

technologies  and  the  mentoring  processes  we  observed  in 
fanfiction communities. In so doing, we draw on Ito et al.’s 
model of connected learning [33], which is defined by three 
core  properties:  learners  come  together  around  a  shared 
purpose,  a  focus  on  production,  and  openly  networked 
infrastructures.  Our  work  illustrates how  these  three 
properties  support  and  give  rise  to  new  forms  of  openly 
networked, collaborative mentoring.
Mentoring
Mentoring  relationships represent  a  common  thread  in 
descriptions  of  affinity  spaces,  communities  of  practice, 
participatory  culture,  and  connected  learning.  Mentors 
provide community participants with support in developing 
the skills and competencies necessary for full and productive 
participation  in  the  community.  In  fanfiction communities 
specifically,  informal  peer  mentors  help  authors  improve 
their  writing  skills  by  providing  feedback  and  answering 
questions [8].
The term “mentoring” has been used in so many different 
ways and contexts that experiences referred to as mentoring 
may be quite distinct from each other. As a result, Dawson
[18] argued for the specification of mentoring models and 
provided  a  common  framework  for  researchers  to  use  in 
crafting their definitions. Mentoring is not limited to formal 
relationships  between  an  older,  more  experienced  mentor 
and  a  younger,  less  experienced  mentee,  which  Dawson 
refers to as “traditional,” but instead may take place between 
participants of all ages, with different levels of engagement 
and formality. Based on a survey of mentoring literature and 
feedback 
from  mentoring  professionals,  Dawson’s
framework  contains  sixteen  dimensions  along  which  to 
classify  mentoring 
roles, 
cardinality,  tie  strength,  relative  seniority,  time,  selection, 
matching, activities, resources and tools, role of technology, 
training,  rewards,  policy,  monitoring,  and  termination.
Drawing on Dawson’s [18] mentoring framework, we classify 
fanfiction sites as informal, weakly tied, peer-based, many-to-
one or many-to-many, CMC-only [21] mentoring intended to 
improve certain skills—in the present analysis, writing skills. 
The  mentoring  is  informal  and  weakly  tied  because  the 
engagement  between  authors  may  be  spontaneous  and 
limited  to  a  single  incident,  or  it  may  build  into  a  longer 
relationship  if  the  authors  are  interested.  The  community 
participants taking part in this mentoring are all peers in the 
same affinity space in which there is no prescribed formal 
hierarchy. The large number of participants involved in the 
mentoring 
indicates  a  many-to-one  or  many-to-many 
experience  that  is  distinct  from  simply  having  multiple 
mentors.
The advent of networked technologies has opened up new 
possibilities  for 
learning  and  mentoring that  stretch 
Dawson’s [18] framework and reveal its limitations. Stahl, 
Koschmann,  and  Suthers [53] referred  to  “fundamentally 
social technologies” to describe technologies with specific 
affordances  that  support  social  interactions  and  group 

relationships; 

objectives, 

693

as 

such 

asynchronous 

learning [53].  With  respect  to  mentoring  in  particular, 
affordances 
communication, 
anonymity,  and  persistent,  searchable  content  introduce 
advantages  of  computer-mediated  mentoring  versus 
traditional  mentoring,  including  a  record  of  interactions, 
equalization  of  status,  and  reduced  interaction  costs [21]. 
Communication within online fanfiction communities is by 
its very nature computer-mediated and, therefore, generates 
a persistent record of the interactions between authors and 
readers for both to learn from at their leisure. There is no 
overt  distinction  among  authors  on  their  profile  pages;  all 
authors may choose whether or not to include demographic 
information.  In  such  a  context,  the  age-based  distinctions 
typical of offline settings are not as overt in online fanfiction
communities,  providing  teens  and  emerging  adults  with 
unique opportunities to assume mentoring roles [32]. In addition 
to the decreased cost of reader interactions mentioned earlier, 
these qualities distinguish the mentoring occurring in fanfiction
communities  from  more  traditional,  non-computer-mediated 
mentoring.
Distributed Cognition and Mentoring
Hutchins’ [30] theory of distributed cognition is useful for 
understanding the dynamics involved in coordinated group 
processes, such as those that are found in affinity spaces like 
online  fanfiction communities.  Instead  of  considering  the 
individual mind as the unit of cognitive analysis, distributed 
cognition  takes  into  account  a  system  consisting  of  the 
individuals  as  well  as  their  “information  environment,” 
which  includes  the  tools  and  artifacts  used  as  part  of 
cognition [31].
Since Hutchins’ initial exploration in offline environments, 
distributed cognition has been applied to computer-mediated 
interactions [15] and promoted as a theoretical foundation for 
human-computer  interaction [28].  In  addition, Aragon  and 
Williams [4] drew upon distributed cognition in their study 
of distributed affect in collaborative creativity, expanding the 
focus of  communication  to include  not  only  cognition but 
emotion.
The  durable  and  distributed  nature  of  online  text-based 
communication allows for easy discussion, coordination, and 
error  checking  between  participants  dispersed  across  the 
globe [19,53]. Distributed cognition aids the understanding 
of a specific type of interaction in fanfiction communities: 
mentoring among participants. A fanfiction author residing 
in a small town in the United States can receive reviews and 
advice  from  individuals  in  any  location,  at  any  time,  and 
much  like  in  a  cognitive  system,  each  individual  in  this 
mentoring  system  can  build  on  the  other  participants’ 
insights.  Interactions  among  geographically  dispersed 
participants are facilitated by their shared knowledge of and 
interest in a particular fandom, including its characters, plot 
points,  and  universe.  Although  this  mentoring  system 
features key attributes of distributed cognition, such as the 
embodied  representation  of  information  in  artifacts  of  the 
system  (e.g.  reviews)  and  the  existence  of  a  cognitive 
ecosystem,  distributed  mentoring  also 
includes  many 

additional features enabled by the affordances of networked 
publics,  such  as  the  ability  to  easily  set  up  asynchronous 
communication, or the aggregation of pieces of information 
that  ordinarily  might  be  too  small  to  provide  meaningful 
mentoring, but that taken as a whole enable learning and skill 
development.
The current study builds on previous work by investigating 
the distinct mentoring processes involved in online fanfiction
communities.  We focused  our  research  on  three  popular 
fandoms:  Harry  Potter,  Doctor  Who,  and  My  Little  Pony: 
Friendship  is  Magic.  Previous  research  related  to  these 
fandoms  has  focused  on  fan  identities [39], gender  and 
sexuality [26,58],  civic  engagement  and  fan  activism
[27,37],  copyright  issues [14,51], and  fan  community 
engagement [60], rather than on mentoring processes related 
to fanfiction writing in these fandoms.
METHODS
Drawing  on  a rich  set  of  data  sources,  we  describe  the 
learning  and  mentoring  that  take  place  in  fanfiction
communities from the perspective of the authors, and present 
the results of our analyses of fanfiction user groups and story 
reviews.  We  define  learning  as  a  process  of  deepening 
participation in a social practice, and mentoring as positive 
support for this process [33,36,42]. We detail the theory of 
distributed  mentoring  that  grew  out  of  our  ethnographic 
investigation  of  fanfiction communities  and  suggest  its 
potential impact for computer-mediated learning.
The following research questions guided this study:

1. How and what do young people learn through their 

involvement in fanfiction communities?

2. What  role  does  mentoring  play  in  participants’ 

learning, and what does this mentoring look like? 

Our investigation centered on interviews with a sample of 28 
young  fanfiction authors  and  a  nine-month  period  of 
participant observations in fanfiction communities.
We selected our three fandoms based upon the diversity of 
each  fandom’s  genre  (e.g.  science  fiction,  fantasy,  and 
animation), medium (e.g. TV, book) and length of time in 
existence.  Our selection  was also guided  by  the  research 
team’s personal familiarity with the fandoms, as significant 
fandom  knowledge  was  necessary  for  understanding  the 
discussions and stories in these communities. We selected 
three fandoms instead of focusing on one to make sure that 
what  we  witnessed  was  not  an  aberration  within  a  single 
fandom. Additionally, we chose widely popular fandoms to 
ensure the size of the community and amount of material was 
sufficient  for  our  study. We  purposely  opted  for  fandoms 
based on  original  story  material  (versus  music  group  or 
hobby-based fandoms) because they inspire the majority of 
fanfiction writing  as  readers  seek  to  extend  the  story  and 
utilize the original text as mentor text [20,35]. 
Study Sites
Fanfiction.net  is  the  largest  fanfiction repository  on  the 
internet with over six million registered users; it hosts more 

694

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

to 

dedicated 

favorite  minor 

than five million fanfictions across thousands of fandoms. As 
of July 2015, the largest fandom on Fanfiction.net was Harry 
Potter,  with  719,000  fanfictions,  followed  by  Naruto,  with 
386,000. In addition to hosting fanfiction, Fanfiction.net has 
social  features,  such  as  communities,  forums,  beta-reader 
listings,  and  a  private  messaging  system.  Users  on 
Fanfiction.net have profile pages that list the stories they have 
authored,  the  stories  and  authors  they  have  marked  as 
favorites, and introductory profile messages.
FIMFiction.net  is  a  single-fandom  fanfiction repository 
dedicated to the television show My Little Pony: Friendship 
is Magic. As of July 2015, FIMFiction.net had 185,014 users 
and  86,009 published  stories [22]. Once  users  create  an
account  on  FIMFiction.net,  they  can  access  user  groups, 
which  include  a  common  fanfiction repository  and  a 
discussion forum. Any member can create a group and there 
are more than 7,000 groups in existence. Group topics range 
from support groups for writers with learning disorders to 
groups 
characters. 
FIMFiction.net  user  pages  are  more  customizable  than 
profile pages on Fanfiction.net, and users have the option to 
write blog entries, leave public comments on other users’ pages,
and create custom content modules and image galleries. Like 
Fanfiction.net,  FIMFiction.net  also  has  a  private  messaging 
system where users can communicate directly.
We  also  interacted  with  and  observed  the  Doctor  Who 
fanfiction repository  A  Teaspoon  and  an  Open  Mind
(Whofic.com),  the  My  Little  Pony:  Friendship  is  Magic 
discussion board Ponychan.net, Livejournal.com fanfiction
communities, and Reddit.com fanfiction subreddits.
Interviews
We conducted in-depth interviews with 28 fanfiction authors 
via  the  private  messaging  systems  on  Fanfiction.net  and 
FIMFiction.net.  Sixteen  of  the  authors  were  members  of 
Fanfiction.net  and  12  were  members  of  FIMFiction.net. 
Twelve authors wrote My Little Pony fanfiction, nine authors 
wrote  Doctor  Who  fiction,  and  seven  authors  wrote  Harry 
Potter fiction. 
Following  previous  research  involving  online  communities
[17,45], we selected authors through a process of purposive
sampling, whereby members of the research team identified 
individuals who were active authors and reviewers in one of 
the  chosen  fandoms.  We  did  this  by  looking  at  published 
stories on Fanfiction.com and FIMfiction.com with at least a 
small number of reviews and then viewing the author’s user 
profile to ascertain if they were currently active on the site, had 
regularly  received  reviews  on  their  writing  and  were  likely 
within the age and language demographic of the study.
We chose to target authors between the ages of 18-25 so that 
we  might  better  identify  individuals  who  had  recently 
encountered—or  were  currently  engaged  in—a  mentoring 
experience  in  their  formative years;  however,  some  authors 
did  fall  out  of  this  range,  with  an average  age  of  22.8,  the 
youngest  13  and  the  eldest  30.  We  also  chose  to  interview 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

interviews 

authors who were native English speakers and who had been 
writing fanfiction for more than one year.
In order to protect the privacy of our subjects, and given the 
complex  issue  of  gender  binaries  and  fluidity—which  is 
often  the  subject  of  fanfiction stories—we  did  not  require 
them  to  identify  their  gender.  We  instead  chose  to  seek  a 
gender balance through the selection of our primary research 
sites: Fanfiction.net and FIMFiction.net. Fanfiction.net has a 
primarily  female  audience [1] while  FIMFiction.net’s 
audience is predominantly male [2]. Of those subjects who 
did openly offer a gender identity, 9 identified as female (all 
were from Fanfiction.net) and 3 identified as male (with 2 
from FIMFiction.net and one from Fanfiction.net).
included  questions  about  community 
The 
identity. 
participation,  mentoring,  writing  skills,  and 
Adopting  Charmaz’s  constructivist  grounded 
theory 
approach that  builds  upon  Glaser,  Strauss,  and  Corbin’s 
methods [13], and guided by our research questions [48,56],
members  of  our  research  team  created a  list  of  dominant 
themes  that  emerged  directly  from  a  close  reading  of  the 
interview  transcripts [56]. Through  weekly  research  team 
meetings in  which  we  reviewed  the  transcripts, discussed 
relationships among the themes, and wrote memos reflecting 
upon our process and observations, we collectively distilled 
the themes into the following four categories: 1) learning from 
writing fanfiction; 2) fanfiction’s impact on life; 3) mentoring; 
and 4) the importance of fanfiction reviews. We used these 
themes to guide the focus of our participant observations.
Participant Observation
We used participant observations to explore in situ the themes 
that surfaced in the interviews and to further refine our theory. 
Following Boellstorff et al. [9], we were transparent about our 
position as researchers throughout the process.
To  start  our  participant  observation  and  help  integrate 
ourselves into the community [6,9], each team member wrote 
a  short  fanfiction on  a  fandom  of  his  or  her  choice  and 
published it on a relevant fanfiction repository. This exercise 
provided  us  with  an  understanding  of 
the  author’s 
perspective and lent us credibility as fans when contacting 
other authors.
The member-created groups on FIMFiction.net served as a 
primary  site  for  our  participant  observations.  The  five 
FIMFiction.net groups observed each had between 1,000 and 
5,000 members and focused on writing help and discussion. 
Three  groups  were  spaces  for  struggling  authors  to  ask 
questions,  one  group  was  a  “school”  to  help  writers  learn 
their craft, and the largest, most active group was a general 
writing community that allowed questions and discussion. 
We observed these groups over a period of nine months, taking 
notes and screen captures of what we saw. Each team member 
spent 5-10 hours per week  observing the  communities.  This 
time was spent reading stories and reviews of recently published 
works and older stories, viewing Reddit and community posts, 
and participating in writing events within the communities such 

695

contacted 

through

informally 

as National Novel Writing Month (NaNoWriMo). Additionally, 
we  communicated  informally  via  private  message  with 
members of the FIMFiction.net groups to ask them questions 
about  their  participation;  these  members  were  chosen  when 
interesting  behavior  or  topics  were  observed.  None  of  the
individuals
participant 
observation were also part of the interview phase of the study. 
Our observations  also 
included author  and  reviewer 
communications  on  Fanfiction.net.  Because  Fanfiction.net 
lacks  the  group  activity  of  FIMFiction.net,  reader  reviews 
and  author’s  notes  are  potentially  the  richest  source  of 
publicly viewable mentoring data on the site. Any reader can 
leave  a  review  of  a  fanfiction on Fanfiction.net,  either 
anonymously  without  creating  an  account  or  through  a 
registered account. It is common practice for authors to leave 
notes either at the beginning or end of their work, and these 
notes will sometimes reference comments they have received 
in previous reviews or ask for reviewers’ input on specific 
aspects of the work. We spent 10-20 collective hours each 
week reading stories, reviews, profiles, and author’s notes on 
Fanfiction.net.
Our  analyses  of  the  participant  observations  served  two 
primary purposes: 1) to corroborate themes surfaced in the 
interviews  and  2)  to  examine  processes  of  interpersonal 
communication  among  members  of  the  fan  communities. 
During the nine-month period of data collection, our team 
conducted  a  cumulative  total  of  over  a  thousand  hours  of 
participant observation, generating several hundred pages of 
field  notes,  memos,  and  digests.  This  documentation  was
shared  amongst  the  team  and  discussed  in  weekly  team 
meetings.
During  these  discussions,  we  identified  and  highlighted 
evidence  related  to  the  dominant  themes  surfaced  in  the 
interviews.  We  paid  particular  attention  to  processes  of 
mentoring among community participants. During the course 
of these weekly discussions and follow up analytic memos, 
we noted that mentoring appeared to be “distributed” across 
participants.  Authors  received  guidance  from  multiple 
reviewers,  and  these  reviewers  sometimes  referenced  and 
built  on  comments  left  by  earlier  reviewers.  Through  this 
analytic  process [13,48], we  distilled  seven  attributes  that 
together account for the full range of mentoring processes 
that we observed.
In the following sections, we report the dominant themes that 
emerged from our analysis of the author interviews, followed 
by  a  description  of  the  seven  attributes  that  we  identified 
through discussions  and  analytic  memos  following  our 
participant  observations.  All  quotations 
included  are 
unmodified,  unless  obfuscation  was  necessary 
for 
anonymity, and as a result may contain typographical errors 
that were present in their original form. In addition, portions 
of the data have been anonymized to protect the identity of 
the authors.

they  received 

informal  mentoring 

interviewed believed 

FINDINGS
that 
The  fanfiction  authors  we 
participating in fanfiction communities was both a source of 
emotional support and an avenue to improve the quality of 
their  writing.  They  attributed  these  benefits  to  the  varied 
forms  of 
the 
communities  to  which  they  belonged.  Our  participant 
observations  led  us  to  identify  seven  distinct  attributes 
associated  with  the  mentoring  processes  that  participants 
described.
Learning to Write, Learning about Life
Our findings provide evidence of the learning and mentoring 
occurring in fanfiction communities. It was striking, given 
how many online communities are not supportive [23], that 
every author we interviewed emphasized that support from 
the community contributed to their development as writers.

in 

Writing fanfiction and getting instant feedback over 
the  past  couple  of  years  has  improved  my  writing 
significantly. I still have a long way to go, but I mostly 
avoid the standard pitfalls that young writers fall into 
such  as  poor  flow  and  sentence  construction,  flat 
dialogue, and trivial descriptions.
- Author 19 (My Little Pony)

For most of the authors we interviewed, fanfiction was their 
first  foray  into  creative  writing,  and  it  was  fanfiction that 
taught them that they liked writing and gave them the desire 
to pursue original fiction. Author 11 has already produced an 
original fiction and attributed its existence to the confidence 
gained from writing fanfiction:

My original novel is due for publication next month. 
It's a fantasy fiction, part one of a planned four series. 
If it wasn't for the confidence I got from writing my 
fanfictions, I would never have even dreamed of self-
publishing my own work.
- Author 11 (Harry Potter)

Authors  also  learned  life  lessons  beyond  writing  from 
participating  in  fanfiction communities.  Author  26  (My 
Little Pony) felt that the creative thinking involved in writing 
fanfiction helped  him  become  more  open-minded  about 
other things, stating, “If anything, thinking of premises for 
stories that can fit inside of canon has taught me to think 
outside of the box and expand things.” Author 27 (My Little 
Pony) noted that in addition to learning about grammar, he 
has also learned to be more tolerant and willing to help others 
because of his community participation.
Some  authors  found  emotional  support  or  release  from 
fanfiction. Author 16 felt that the response she received from 
the fanfiction community helped her get through a difficult 
period in her life:

I've received literally thousands of positive reviews 
and some truly wonderful letters and messages from 
people  who  have  been  genuinely  touched  by  my 
writing, and it's been a massive confidence boost that 

696

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

instances. 

Individually, 

forms.  For 

to  distinct  mentoring 

helped me get through university without quitting and 
still helps me today if I'm feeling down.
- Author 16 (Harry Potter)
Diverse Forms of Mentoring
In  seeking  to  determine  how  the  learning  in  fanfiction
communities  takes  place,  we  uncovered  diverse  forms  of 
mentoring.  Authors  we  interviewed  revealed  that  they 
experienced  mentoring  in  contexts  beyond  a  traditional 
dyadic mentor/mentee relationship. Fanfiction communities 
connect  thousands  of  authors  together  and  provide  the 
opportunity  for  immediate  and  diverse  feedback. Authors 
described a rich network of resources that they could draw 
on which included fanfiction reviews, FIMFiction.net user 
groups,  beta  readers,  co-writers,  Skype  groups,  podcasts, 
Internet  Relay  Chat  (IRC),  and  other  message  boards  and 
communities.  Authors  received  and  provided  assistance 
through  these  channels  in  one-to-one,  one-to-many, and 
many-to-one  mentoring 
these 
interactions with readers via story reviews or other authors 
via  message  boards  may  be  too  small  to  be  considered 
mentoring,  but  in  the  aggregate  they  form  a  richer,  more 
complete form of mentoring that is distributed across many 
participants and communication channels.
Differences in the affordances of fanfiction platforms give 
rise 
instance, 
FIMFiction.net  includes  a  number  of  user  groups,  which 
several of the authors we interviewed said they relied on as a 
writing resource. Each user group has an associated forum, 
and  in  the  writing help  groups  we observed,  the  members 
used these forums as a place to elicit advice on problematic 
aspects of their fanfiction stories (e.g. characterization and 
writing style) and to discuss general writing tips. The forums 
are publicly accessible, so any group member can respond to 
any post. In some cases, respondents would provide advice 
to the original poster independently without referencing what 
other  respondents  stated,  but  in  other  cases  respondents 
would debate, correct, or agree with the advice provided by 
other respondents, often adding to it. For example, one poster 
described a rubric for creating an antagonist, and 21 group 
members  posted  completed  rubrics  while  four  members 
contributed  additional 
topic  and 
commented on others’ rubrics. One respondent added a ‘map 
of evil’ with different categories and characteristics of evil 
traits and left a caveat stating that “not all antagonists have 
to be evil. In fact, making your reader sympathize with an 
antagonist  is  an  advanced  narrative  technique.” Another 
respondent who  had  previously  posted  a  completed  rubric 
replied “Funny you should mention this. I plan to try this out 
with my next antagonist.” These lively forum posts provide 
the original posters with a rich set of differing perspectives, 
something they would not have had access to if they had asked 
questions  through  more  private,  one-to-one  channels  to 
individual mentors (we term this aggregation, detailed below).
Many  authors  experienced  mentoring 
fanfiction
communities as a reciprocal process. Author 6 described how 

information  on 

the 

in 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

the mentoring she received early on inspired her to provide 
the same support in a one-on-one mentoring context for a 
new writer:

I'll just add to the mentoring point - it's sort of come full 
cycle for me. When the girl PM'd [private messaged] me 
asking for advice, I did realise that I used to be her. Back 
in  the  day  I  wrote  so  badly  that  people  flaming  and 
trolling me would've been perfectly viable. Luckily I had 
people to push me up and advise me to turn me into the 
author I am today, so I found it really important to do 
exactly the same for her.
- Author 6 (Doctor Who)

The advice that Author 6 received in lieu of inflammatory 
comments  also  illustrates  the  supportive  nature  of  the 
fanfiction community, where groups of authors are willing to 
provide  feedback  in  order  to  help  new  writers  grow (the 
influence of affect is described below).
Author 19 (My Little Pony) went so far as to express that one 
of  the  key  reasons  for  participating  in  fanfiction was  the 
review structure, stating “I write fanfiction because you can 
get immediate feedback from an active fandom. I have to play 
my part as well, and give back to the community.”
The Importance of Reviews
Fanfiction reviews present a particularly fertile ground for 
mentoring, where authors can learn from the tens, hundreds, 
or  even 
their  work. 
Fanfiction.net’s user base is much larger and more diverse 
than FIMFiction.net’s, which may explain why it lacks the 
user 
feeling  of 
FIMFiction.net.  However,  stories  posted  on  Fanfiction.net 
tend to receive a large number of reader reviews; therefore, 
we  investigated  the  mentoring  present  in  these  reviews  as 
another space for a distributed form of mentoring.
We  observed  that  many reviewers  provide thoughtful, 
detailed recommendations. These reviews let authors know 
specifically what they are doing well and what they need to 
work on. Author 23 recalled his experience as a beginning 
author as motivation to provide feedback:

thousands  of  reviews 

left  on 

group 

activity 

and 

community 

I usually search for beginning authors and leave tips 
on how to improve. Such as better pacing, less telling, 
and most of all, trying to tone down a Mary Sue [self-
insertion] type character or red and black alicorn OC 
[original  characters].  What  prompts  me  to  leave
feedback  is  that  I  used  to  be  as  inexperienced  or 
beginning as a newbie on the site just like them not 
too long ago, so if I can help in any way, I'm going to 
try my hardest.
- Author 23 (My Little Pony)

Often, authors of substantive reviews identified themselves 
as part of the larger fandom community by demonstrating 
deep  knowledge  of  the  canon  or  fanon  material  and  by 
providing  corrective  feedback  for  authors  who  made 
mistakes with regard to the canon:

697

Okay, I have one slight issue. Hermione doesn’t learn 
the Patronus charm until her fifth year, so did being 
inside of Harry’s head give her the ability to do it? If 
so, how would she know it was an otter if she wasn’t 
supposed to have learned it yet.  

While  these types of  detailed  reviews may  be  the  most
relevant  for  helping  writers  improve  their  craft,  the 
cumulative encouragement contained in a collection of many 
shallow positive reviews (e.g. “Great story!”) must not be 
discounted.  We  learned  from  participant  observation  and 
interviews that reviews are a crucial source of motivation for 
authors,  and  receiving  a  large  number  of  any type  of 
encouraging reviews reportedly helps authors persevere in an 
activity  that  requires  substantial  effort  but  provides  few 
rewards  aside  from  personal  satisfaction.  The  cumulative 
encouragement present in large numbers of reviews (what we 
term abundance, described in more detail below) may also 
help authors understand if they are on the right track in terms 
of story aspects like plot, pacing, and writing style. Author 4 
indicated she has written hundreds of reviews because she 
knows how important they are: 

According  to  my  General  User  Stats  page,  I've 
submitted 796 reviews on FFN dot net. I usually leave 
reviews for stories I really enjoy, or for stories I find 
don't have many reviews. I make it an effort to review 
everything  I  read.  I  know  how  much  reviews  are 
appreciated on this site.
- Author 4 (Doctor Who)

Overall, we found that reviewers were primarily providing 
supportive  comments  on  the  text  rather  than  negative 
responses.  Our  interviews  and  observations  suggest  that 
shared interest in the fandom generates a sense of kinship and 
contributes to the positive atmosphere of the community. In 
the relatively infrequent instances when negative comments 
were  posted,  we observed  far  more  community  members 
come  to  the  defense  of the  author  of  the  story  being 
criticized.  One  controversial  fanfiction story  contained 
several flame reviews but even more reviews like this one 
defending the author:
Just ignore the stupid tart-lover [reference to a Doctor Who 
character] who is leaving those horrid reviews. She can take 
all her stuffy little remarks and shove them where the light 
don’t shine. This is a fantastic story, I just had a shitty day 
and this story has really helped me smile.
This  quote  also  illustrates  the  fact that  many  fanfiction
reviewers are engaged in dialogue with other reviewers and 
authors and are considering other feedback and notes as they 
construct  their  reviews.  In  other  words,  the  mentoring 
activity  is  not  focused  exclusively  on  a  single  author,  but 
demonstrates  high  levels  of  interaction  among  reviewers, 
what we term accretion and acceleration (described below). 
This  emergent,  complex  structure  within  the  mentoring 
activity is a key attribute of distributed mentoring.

The Seven Attributes of Distributed Mentoring
The themes emerging from the author interviews guided our 
participant  observations  and  led  us  to  identify  seven 
attributes that describe the mentoring processes we observed. 
These  attributes  are:  aggregation,  accretion,  acceleration, 
abundance, availability, asynchronicity, and affect. Despite 
some  differences  in  mentoring  style  across platforms  (e.g. 
user  groups  on  FIMFiction.net),  we  found  evidence  of  all 
seven  attributes  across  the  fandoms  and  platforms  we 
studied.
Aggregation: Authors experienced mentoring from a number 
of  different  sources.  Powered  by  the  openly  networked 
nature of computer-mediated communication, the authors in 
our study received numerous small pieces of advice in the 
form of story reviews or discussion forum responses that, as 
in distributed cognition [30], created a whole far greater than 
the sum of its parts. The feedback provided independently by 
each  participant  may  not  be  sufficient  in  either  depth  or 
longevity  to  be  considered  mentoring  on  its  own.  Instead, 
authors are being mentored in the aggregate by the fanfiction
community at large.

I can't think of any one person [in particular who has 
influenced me], I take inspiration from a number of 
people. 
- (Author 19, My Little Pony)

Based on our observation of reviews, an author who receives 
even ten reviews on his or her work is likely to receive five 
targeted  pieces  of  feedback  in  addition  to  several  other 
encouraging  remarks.  Together,  this  aggregated  feedback 
may let authors know what they have done well and what is 
lacking  in  their  fanfiction stories.  Even  numerous  shallow 
positive reviews can show authors collectively that they are 
on the right track.
Accretion: Reviewers themselves interacted with each other 
in a persistent, cumulative fashion, enabling an accretion of 
knowledge  to  facilitate  the  author’s  learning  process.  The 
mentoring activity pertaining to the creation of an antagonist 
is an example of this (described on p. 6), where the process 
of  developing  a  compelling  antagonist  in  one’s  story  was 
carefully  deconstructed  by  a  group  whose  members  built 
upon and extended previously posted commentary. Through 
these  distributed  postings  and  exchanges,  the  information 
accreted over time, enabled by the persistent nature of the 
forum. The advice that authors received from this mentoring 
experience included targeted, cumulatively sophisticated and 
detailed  feedback  on  their  fanfiction stories  and  thorough 
answers to their questions posted on forums or in authors’ 
notes. 
Acceleration: It is sometimes the case that authors receive 
conflicting feedback in the variety of reviews of their work. 
While  this  may  at  first  seem  confusing,  we  found  that 
discussions and conflicts between reviewers typically yield a 
more complex and nuanced body of feedback as reviewers 
point out holes in each other's arguments or reinforce each 
other’s  statements  through  agreement,  cite  deep  fandom 

698

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

knowledge,  and  accelerate  the  process  of  learning  through 
active  discussion.  We  observed  an  interwoven  network  of 
reviewer responses delving into highly specialized knowledge 
and buttressing subtle points of argument.
Abundance:  The  sheer  volume  of  review  responses 
contributes to the nature of distributed mentoring. By itself, 
a shallow positive comment is relatively meaningless. But if 
an author receives dozens or hundreds of such comments, the 
mere  presence  of  positive  feedback  in  such  quantities 
provides important guidance to the writer. Additionally, the 
existence of multiple channels of feedback and mentoring, 
such  as  private  messaging, author’s  notes,  reviews,  Skype 
chats,  etc.  contribute  to  the  multiplicity  and  abundance  of 
distributed mentoring.

If I’ve got an idea, but need to spin it out a bit more, 
I’ll just pop into one of my 30+ member Skype chats 
and  toss  it  out  there.  I  can  always  expect  good 
feedback there.
- (Author 22, My Little Pony)

Availability:  On  Fanfiction.net  and  FIMFiction.net,  the 
interactions of individual participants are visible to the larger 
community. The persistent and public nature of online text-
based communication ensures that reviews are available not 
just  immediately  after  a  story  is  written,  but  indefinitely, 
months  or  years  into  the  future.  This  availability  in  turn 
facilitates  long-term  exchanges  and  relationships  between 
reviewers and authors, as authors can post their stories and 
learn  from  their  reviewers  (and  reviewers  can  learn  from 
each other) years into the future, thus further broadening the 
effect of distributed mentoring.
Asynchronicity: The public, durable text interactions allow 
for asynchronous contributions by any person, at any time, 
no  matter  the  location,  enabling  reviewers  from  multiple 
time zones around the globe to easily and continuously view 
and reply to other reviews. Authors might post a story, go to 
sleep, and in the morning wake up to multiple thoughtful and 
lengthy critiques of their work, which they or other reviewers 
can then respond to as they wake up in their own time zones. 
This asynchronicity adds depth, immediacy, and continuity 
to  a  mentoring  conversation.  The  power of  asynchronous 
communication,  especially  in  international  communities 
operating in different time zones and outside work or school 
hours,  has  been  noted  in  previous  research  on  online 
community [5]. It is a crucial enabling factor for distributed 
mentoring.
Affect: In interviews, on forums, and in their author’s notes, 
fanfiction writers  repeatedly  mentioned  positive  affect  or 
emotion  generated  by  the  encouragement  and  inspiration 
they  received  from  reviews  and  feedback (see  “The 
Importance of Reviews” above). Negative reviews or flames 
were  moderated  by  other  reviewers  creating  a  supportive 
community  response.  It  is  important  not  to  ignore  the 
emotional  and  supportive  aspects  of  mentoring,  especially 
with respect to adolescents who are forming their identities 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

and building self-efficacy. The act of writing, even nonfiction 
writing, can be an emotionally charged event where otherwise 
highly skilled individuals find themselves unable to produce the 
written  communication  that  is  crucial  for  success  in  almost
every field of endeavor. Authors in these communities cited the
emotional  support  they  received  as  key  to  their  growth  as 
writers.
These attributes and tendencies themselves are interwoven, 
as each contributes to and facilitates other attributes, further 
contributing  to  the  interdependent  and  complex  nature  of 
distributed  mentoring.  For  example,  participants  must  be 
able to view the responses of others (availability) so they can 
take  these  diverse  perspectives  into  consideration  when 
creating  their  own  responses  or  reviews  (accretion),  and 
respondents  can  directly  contradict  or  support  other 
respondents  (acceleration).  As  the  fanfiction stories  we 
sampled increased in their number of reviews (aggregation),
we saw an increase in the amount of discussion present in these 
reviews, indicating that interactions in distributed mentoring 
become more complex and richer with increasing numbers of 
participants and responses.
Any  phenomenon  that  draws  millions  of  young  people  to 
participate  and  generate  literary  content,  especially  in  a 
generation  criticized for  their  inability  to write  coherently 
[11,23,59,62], is deserving of closer attention. In particular, 
understanding in more depth how networked publics facilitate 
this new type of learning and mentoring is vital for the future 
of formal  and informal education as  more and  more young 
people  spend  a  significant  fraction  of  their  waking  hours 
online  [23].  The  seven  attributes  we  identified  form  the 
beginning of an understanding of the underlying structure of 
this new kind of mentoring. 
DISCUSSION
We set out to understand what adolescents and young adults 
were  learning  from  their  participation  in  online  fanfiction
communities,  how  this  learning  took  place,  and  what  part 
mentoring  played.  We  initially  anticipated  that  we  would 
uncover  traditional  mentoring  relationships  where  less 
experienced writers learned from more experienced writers; 
instead, during our investigation, we encountered a rich and 
interwoven tapestry of interactive, cumulatively sophisticated 
advice and informal instruction that added up to a networked 
experience we have termed distributed mentoring.
Grounded in Hutchins’ [30] theory of distributed cognition, 
distributed  mentoring  takes  as  its  base  the  fact  that 
knowledge is distributed across people and artifacts and the 
aggregation  of  this  knowledge  is  greater  and  qualitatively 
different from the knowledge residing in any one individual 
or artifact. As a result, distributed mentoring is most likely to 
be  found  in  online  affinity  spaces [24,25].  Consistent  with 
Gee’s  description  of  an  affinity  space  but  with  a  particular 
focus  on  mentoring  processes,  we  found  that  mentoring 
resources  were  shared  socially  to  extend  and  broaden  the 
influence and knowledge from the domain of the individual to 
the group, so that a greater effect was achieved than through 

699

the 

intrinsic,  and 

the  monitoring 

traditional mentoring. This was made possible and facilitated 
specifically by networked publics and thus did not occur in fan 
communities  before 
the  advent  of  widespread  online 
communication.  As  in  distributed  cognition,  mentoring 
processes are distributed among humans and artifacts in the 
environment,  and  mentoring  systems  are  formed  where 
complex structure emerges in ways that enhance the reach of 
any single individual. However, distributed mentoring extends 
Hutchins’  concept  of  distributed  cognition  by  focusing 
specifically on mentoring processes as well as the influence of 
networked technologies’ distinct affordances.
Distributed  mentoring  also  pushes at  the  framework  for 
traditional  mentoring  models  established  by  Dawson [18]. 
Most of these design elements become irrelevant or extremely 
varied within the informal structure of the online fanfiction
community.  Selection 
and  matching  of  mentoring
relationships, crucial components of most traditional models, 
are  entirely  self-driven in  fanfiction communities.  Roles, 
cardinality (number of relationships), ties, relative seniority, 
and  time vary  both  by  individuals  and  by  task  (e.g.
proofreading versus plotting). There is no mentorship training, 
the  rewards  are  all 
is 
crowdsourced. Yet, powerful and effective mentorship occurs 
daily within these sites for thousands of authors. Therefore, a 
new mentoring model is happening that is uniquely supported 
by the affordances of networked technologies and for which 
we  must  account. The  seven attributes we  identified—
aggregation, accretion, acceleration, abundance, availability, 
asynchronicity, and affect—illustrate how the affordances of 
networked technologies give rise to distributed mentoring and 
set it apart from traditional mentoring.
Previous  work  has  detailed  the  distinct  affordances  of 
networked technologies [10,61] as well as how they support 
new  social  forms,  such  as  participatory  culture [35,36] and 
connected 
learning [33].  The  attributes  of  distributed 
mentoring  we  have  identified  are  consistent  with  the 
characteristics  of  participatory  culture  (e.g.  low  barriers  to 
entry,  informal  mentorship)  and  supported  by  the  core 
properties of connected learning (shared purpose, production-
centered,  openly  networked).  However, 
theory  of 
distributed  mentoring  extends  prior  work  by  focusing 
explicitly on the interplay between mentoring and networked 
technologies,  showing  how  the  affordances  of  networked 
technologies shape mentoring processes in new ways. 
For  instance,  the  persistent  quality of  computer-mediated 
communication  (CMC) makes it  possible  for  authors  to 
consider multiple voices together, both in the moment and at 
a  later  date,  supporting  the  attributes  of  aggregation, 
accretion,  acceleration,  and  asynchronicity [19,53]. This 
may  be  challenging  in  non-CMC  contexts,  where  human 
memory  limits  the  number  of  previous  responses  a 
participant  can  consider.  In  addition,  the  public  nature  of 
communicating  in  networked  environments  like  fanfiction
sites allows for a high level of interaction among reviewers, 
who  can  react  to  and  build  on  each  other’s  comments 

the  same 

to  engage  each  other  on 

asynchronously  and  over  the  long  term.  This  quality  of 
networked  communication  supports 
the  attributes  of 
abundance,  availability,  and  affect.  In  contrast,  traditional 
ideas  of  mentoring  are  grounded  primarily  in  one-to-one 
relationships,  which  are  easier  to  maintain  in  the  physical 
world. Mentoring facilitated by the internet can move past 
the  limitations  of  the  physical  world  to  allow  numerous 
mentors 
topic 
asynchronously when providing advice to mentees.
Benefits of Distributed Mentoring
The fanfiction authors  emphasized  how  much  they  valued 
the mentoring that they received from the larger community, 
which they viewed as an important part of their growth as 
writers as well as a morale boost to keep writing (affect). The 
unique style of distributed mentoring available in fanfiction
communities is one reason why young authors often choose 
to practice writing by creating fanfiction before attempting 
to write original fiction. Authors mentioned that the feedback 
that they received from the fanfiction community was a key 
reason for their participation and that they viewed fanfiction
as an excellent training ground for aspiring writers who hope 
to  produce  original  fiction  one  day.  One  published  writer 
who had started out writing fanfiction commented in a blog 
post  that  she  received  more  feedback  in  a  week  on  her 
fanfiction than  she  had  in  several  years  on  her  original 
fiction. In the communities that we investigated, participants 
were  very  supportive  of  each  other  and  eager  to  provide 
informal  mentoring.  The  communities  also  provided  a 
knowledge base and instant connection based on the fandom 
for anyone wishing to participate. 
The benefits derived from distributed mentoring are similar 
to  the  benefits  associated  with  distributed  cognition [30].
Distributed mentoring provides artifacts that are embodied 
outside the author, such as forum responses, reviews, private 
messages,  and  author’s  notes.  These  artifacts,  as  in 
distributed  cognition,  allow  for  the  coordination and 
aggregation of mentoring efforts. As well, the distribution of 
access to information among these artifacts in the contexts 
we  studied  allowed  for  error  checking  in  the  form  of 
agreement, 
among 
respondents, just like in a cognitive system.
The  whole  of  the  mentoring  experience  provided  by 
distributed  mentoring  is  greater  than  the  sum  of  its  parts. 
Distributed mentoring creates richer mentoring experiences 
than individual mentors alone could provide, much like how 
distributed cognition allows cognitive systems to accomplish 
tasks that would be otherwise impossible for individuals to 
complete. A single mentor can provide only one perspective, 
and if a writer asks multiple mentors independently, it will 
be  up  to  the  author  to  decide  which  pieces  of  advice  are 
sound.  In  FIMFiction.net  group  discussions,  authors  can 
learn  from  the  different  pieces  of  advice  individually  and 
also learn from the discussion between the respondents. In 
these  discussions,  bad  advice  is  corrected,  good  advice  is 
validated, and more nuanced answers to questions form as a 

disagreement, 

discussion 

and 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

and 

because 

situations 

accretion, 

reviews  are  moderated  by 

result  of  the  respondents  building  off  of  each  other
(aggregation, 
acceleration).  On 
Fanfiction.net,  authors  are  able  to  learn  from  reviews  that 
focus on different aspects of the story and from reviewers 
who  may  be  more  critical  or  more  positive.  In  addition, 
inflammatory 
reviewers’ 
responses, and responses to author’s notes provide targeted 
assistance for authors.
As in other affinity spaces, participants in online fanfiction
communities can be any age, from any location, and of any 
experience level. There are no defined roles of “master” and 
“apprentice” in these communities because one author might 
possess  deep  knowledge  on  a  certain 
topic,  e.g. 
characterization, and yet be lacking in another aspect, e.g.
grammar. This diversity of expertise and the lack of defined 
roles  in  online  fanfiction communities  are of  benefit  in 
distributed  mentoring 
different 
participants  can  bring  up  different  perspectives  in  their 
feedback. Also, because distributed mentoring is peer-based, 
or horizontal, rather than hierarchical, an author who asks for 
assistance can turn around and provide feedback for another 
author  on  a  different  topic.  The  authors  we  interviewed 
revealed  the  important  role  that  reciprocity  played  in  the 
fanfiction community, indicating that the help they received 
inspired them to help others (acceleration).
Participation in affinity spaces and participatory cultures is 
predicated on participants’ intersubjective understanding of 
the context in which they are taking part, just like the ship 
navigators  and  pilots  described  by  Hutchins [30] and 
Hutchins  and  Klausen  [31].  In  our  observations,  the 
substantial  number  of  reviews  involving  some  form  of 
fandom  discussion  provided  evidence  that  authors  and 
reviewers share a common base of language and knowledge. 
Indeed,  their  shared  knowledge  goes  beyond  what  is 
represented in the canonical literature to include fan canon 
notions of untold character backstories, favored relationship 
pairings, and  popular  plot  conspiracies.  Our  analysis 
suggests that the communitarian ethos present in the civil, 
reciprocal  exchanges  in  online  fanfiction communities  is 
likely  encouraged  by  the  membership  that  authors  feel  as 
participants in the community.
Implications
Previous research investigating fanfiction has looked at how 
the mentoring that authors receive via interactions with other 
community  members  impacts  their  identity [6–8] and 
improves  their  writing  ability [35].  However,  there was  a 
lack  of  research  into  the  relationship  between  these 
individual-level  effects  and  the  group-level  qualities  of 
fanfiction communities,  such  as  the  massive  scale  of 
mentoring; its distributed nature across individuals, time, and 
platforms; and the distinct characteristics of author-mentor 
and  mentor-mentor  interactions.  In  particular,  our  work 
extends Black’s  research [6–8] by  broadening  the  focus 
beyond  a  small  number  of  fanfiction authors,  a  single 
fanfiction repository (Fanfiction.net), and a single fanfiction

700

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

technologies  and  how 

genre  (anime).  This  broader  view  allowed  us  to  detect 
common  patterns  of  mentoring  across  different  fanfiction
communities,  indicating  that  distributed  mentoring  is  not 
limited to one specific context or group of participants. In 
addition, by focusing on mentoring at the group- rather than 
the individual-level, we were able to document the patterns 
and effects of multiple sources of feedback in the aggregate. 
Central  to  this  analysis  was  an  enumeration  of  the  distinct 
affordances  of  networked 
they 
distinguish  distributed  mentoring  from  traditional  models  of 
mentoring. By extending Black’s research [6–8] in this way, our 
work provides new insight into leveraging the affordances of 
networked  publics  to  support  and promote  collaborative 
learning.
For instance, the insights from the present study suggest that 
distributed  mentoring  could  be  successfully  applied  to 
formal  educational  contexts as  a  useful  peer  mentoring 
mechanism, building on previous related work exploring the 
incorporation of fanfiction in classroom settings [43,49]. An 
internet-based  peer  review  system  joining  a  number  of 
classrooms 
together  would  help  facilitate  distributed 
mentoring. Students in one classroom could be tasked with 
contributing  comments  to  the  work  of  students  in  other 
classrooms.  By  interacting  with  students  from  another 
classroom, located in a different school or perhaps even a 
different  city  or  country,  the  pseudonymous  nature  of 
distributed mentoring would be maintained. This geographic 
and  emotional  distance  could  help  to  prevent  feelings  of 
inhibition that students might feel if asked to give and receive 
feedback from the classmates they see and interact with on a 
daily basis. Moreover, students would be able to benefit from 
encountering,  considering,  and  responding  to  perspectives 
different from their own [29,52]. Gee states that “[networked 
publics] are allowing people with no official credentials from 
formal institutions to become experts,” and this development 
of expertise can be encouraged in classroom settings [25].
Our findings suggest that students should be encouraged to 
leave a small amount of feedback for each piece of writing 
they  are  to  review,  making  sure  to  read  and  build  upon 
previous comments. In this way, students could learn from 
the interactions of their reviewers in addition to the different 
perspectives presented in each review, which is what makes 
distributed mentoring such a rich learning experience. The 
attributes  observed  in  spontaneous  forms  of  distributed 
mentoring could be used to evaluate and refine these planned 
mentoring systems. Black [8] saw adolescents motivated to 
participate  in  fanfiction spaces  by  the  experience  of 
procedural  knowledge  (as  contrasted 
to  propositional 
knowledge) and opportunities to contribute to the function of 
the space. Therefore, a distributing mentoring model in the 
classroom would need to maintain such features to sustain 
student engagement.
In addition, distributed mentoring holds implications for the 
design of online affinity spaces. As the differences between
Fanfiction.net and FIMFiction.net illustrate, website design 
facilitates or discourages different types of interactions. The 

common features across these sites, such as comment threads 
and  discussion  groups,  suggest  that  these  interest-driven 
communities already afford rich distributed mentoring. The 
power  of  distributed  mentoring  comes  in  part  from  the 
numerous responses or reviews that authors receive. As an 
author  receives  more  replies,  the  mentoring  experience 
becomes  richer.  More  could  be  done,  however,  to  help 
authors who are not receiving a lot of feedback to benefit 
from distributed mentoring. Although it is currently possible 
to browse fanfiction sites by number of reviews, readers have 
to intentionally seek out stories with few reviews. A simple 
recommender  that  directs  community  members  who  have 
just  left  a  review  to  similar  stories  that  have  few  or  no 
reviews may help to channel feedback to stories that need it 
most. Such a system could also steer readers and writers to 
similar  stories,  thus  affording  more  community formation 
and  participation.  Affective  features  such  as  easy  ways  to 
“like”  or  categorize  stories  could  enhance  positive 
experiences. Developers could also enhance the mentoring 
experience  for  contributors  who  receive  large  numbers  of 
reviews by adding tools that use text mining techniques to 
automatically  synthesize  common  themes  or  contrasting 
viewpoints.
LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
As is inherent in most qualitative research, our site for this 
study was limited. We investigated only three fandoms and 
two fanfiction repositories in detail; therefore, our findings 
may not generalize to mentoring in online affinity groups at 
large.  There  may  be  unique  aspects  specific  to  these  two 
fanfiction communities  that  encourage  members  to  leave 
more  feedback.  The  communities  we  observed  were  very 
civil, as shown by the low amount of trolling present in story 
reviews.  This  civility  was  surprising  because  readers  can 
leave anonymous reviews on Fanfiction.net, and anonymous 
forms of online communication have a reputation for being 
susceptible to trolling [46]. This civility could in part be a 
legacy  of  the  benign  atmosphere  found  in  early  fanfiction
zines’ Letters  of  Comment;  it  may  be  that  other  affinity 
spaces that lack this legacy may not be supportive enough to 
sustain distributed mentoring [34].
We  are  not  able  to  claim  for  certain  that  distributed 
mentoring  directly  affects  writing  ability.  We  set  out  to 
understand  and  describe  the  type  of  mentoring  present  in 
online fanfiction communities, leaving the verification of its 
effect to later research. Many of the authors we interviewed 
believed that the feedback they received from the fanfiction
community  helped  improve  their  writing, but our  research 
was observational in nature, not experimental. There are a 
number of other potential learning resources in these young 
authors’  lives  that  have  certainly  impacted  their  writing, 
although we think on the basis of our findings that distributed 
mentoring is one of them.
As distributed mentoring is a nascent concept, there are many 
opportunities  to  explore  regarding  its  effectiveness  and 
application, as well as its limitations. More work is needed to 

701

determine how distributed mentoring impacts writing quality, 
especially  in  comparison  with  other  types  of  mentoring  or 
formal  education.  Does  the  computer-mediated  nature  of 
distributed mentoring allow for a more diverse and therefore 
richer  mentoring  experience  compared  to  in-person  peer 
mentoring?  Does  writing  ability  improve  more  when  writers 
experience distributed mentoring compared to communicating 
independently with multiple mentors via the internet?
Additionally, we did not investigate how website structure and 
design aids or impedes distributed mentoring, although we did 
observe  different  styles  of  distributed  mentoring  on  different 
websites. Writers on FIMFiction.net frequently received help on 
user  group  forums,  while  writers  on  Fanfiction.net  often 
received  help  from  reviews  in  reply  to  authors’  notes.  We 
wonder  if  a  particular  style  of  feedback  mechanism  (e.g., 
forums) yields superior mentoring experiences. Also, do more 
opportunities for users to leave feedback actually yield more 
feedback, and what is the quality of this feedback?
CONCLUSION
Online  fanfiction communities  represent  affinity  spaces  in 
which authors, brought together by a passion for the fandom, 
provide support for each other in their creative endeavors. 
Through  in-depth  interviews and participant  observations, 
we identified and documented a unique style of mentoring 
occurring in these communities that we named distributed 
mentoring, inspired by Hutchins’ [30] theory of distributed 
cognition. In our investigation, we observed and described 
seven key attributes of distributed mentoring that distinguish 
it from traditional, offline forms of mentoring and tie it to the 
particular  affordances  of  networked  publics:  aggregation, 
accretion, 
availability, 
asynchronicity, and  affect.  Distributed  mentoring  involves 
numerous  participants  answering  questions, 
leaving 
feedback,  and  engaging  each  other 
in  asynchronous 
conversations that in the aggregate yield a positive mentoring 
experience. The authors we interviewed valued the feedback 
they  received  from  the  community  and  viewed  it  as  an 
important part of their growth as writers. Aside from its role 
in  online communities,  distributed  mentoring  may  also 
present  opportunities,  as  described  in  the  implications 
section, for collaborative learning in other learning contexts, 
including formal educational contexts.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We  thank  the  reviewers  who provided  thoughtful  and 
detailed comments on previous iterations of this document. 
The final paper has been greatly improved by their feedback. 
We also extend gratitude to our participants in this study and 
our colleague, Jeff Giorgi.
REFERENCES
1. Alexa. 2015. Site Overview – Fanfiction.net. Retrieved 

acceleration, 

abundance, 

May 4, 2015 from 
http://www.alexa.com/siteinfo/fanfiction.net

2. Alexa. 2015. Site Overview – Fimfiction.net. Retrieved 

May 4, 2015 from 
http://www.alexa.com/siteinfo/fimfiction.net

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

3. (cid:36)(cid:92)(cid:86)(cid:2149) (cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:129)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:46)(cid:88)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:36)(cid:79)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:2149) (cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:36)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:43)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)-
creations of the female Harry Potter protagonist in fan 
fiction. Z Anglist Am 61, 2: 155–173.

4. Cecilia R. Aragon and Alison Williams. 2011. 

Collaborative creativity: a complex systems model 
with distributed affect. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’11), ACM, 1875–1884. 

5. Cecilia R Aragon, Sarah Poon, Andres Monroy-

Hernandez, and Diana Aragon. 2009. A tale of two 
online communities: Fostering collaboration and 
creativity in scientists and children. Creativity & 
Children (C&C ’09), ACM, 9–18.

6. Rebecca W. Black. 2006. Language, culture, and 
identity in online fanfiction. E-Learning 3, 2: 15.

7. Rebecca Black. 2007. Digital design: English language 
learners and reader reviews in online fiction. In A New 
Literacies Sampler, Michele Knobel and Colin 
Lankshear (eds.). Peter Lang, New York, NY, 115-136.

8. Rebecca W Black. 2008. Adolescents and Online 

Fanfiction. Peter Lang, New York, NY.

9. Tom Boellstorff, Bonnie Nardi, Celia Pearce, and T.L. 

Taylor. 2012. Ethnography and Virtual Worlds: A
Handbook of Method(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3031)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:56)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)
Press, Princeton.

10. Danah Boyd. 2007. The role of networked publics in 

teenage social life. In Youth, Identity, and Digital 
Media. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 119–142.

11. Tom Bradshaw. 2004. Reading at (cid:53)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:78)(cid:2271)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:36) Survey of 

Literary Reading in America(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:58)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:17)(cid:3031)(cid:29)(cid:3)
National Endowment for the Arts, Washington, D.C.

12. Kelly Chandler-Olcott and Donna Mahar. 2003. 

Adolescents’ anime-inspired “fanfictions”: An
exploration of multiliteracies. J of Adoles & Adult Lit
46, 7: 556–566.

13. Kathy Charmaz. 2006. Constructing Grounded Theory: 
A Practical Guide Through Qualitative Analysis. Sage, 
London.

14. Michelle Chatelain. 2012. Harry Potter and the prisoner 
of copyright law: Fan fiction, derivative works, and the 
fair use doctrine. Tulane J of Tech & Intellect Pro 15: 
199–319.

15. Mark Chen. 2012. Leet Noobs: The Life and Death of 

an Expert Player Group in World of Warcraft. New 
(cid:60)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:3031)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:51)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:47)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:49)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:60)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:17)

16. Computing Research Association. 2005. CRA-W

Canadian Distributed Mentor Project. Retrieved July 
27, 2015 from 
http://archive2.cra.org/Activities/craw_archive/cdmp/in
dex.php

17. Katie Davis. 2010. Coming of age online: The 

developmental underpinnings of girls’ blogs. J of 
Adolesc Res 25, 1: 145–171. 

18. Phillip Dawson. 2014. Beyond a definition: Toward a 

framework for designing and specifying mentoring 
models. Ed Res 43, 3: 137–145. 

702

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

19. Pierre Dillenbourg. 2005. Designing biases that 

augment socio-cognitive interactions. In Barriers and 
Biases in Computer-Mediated Knowledge 
Communication: And How They May Be Overcome, 
Rainer Bromme, Friedrich W Hesse and Hans Spada 
(eds.). Kluwer Academic Publisher, Dordrecht, 
Netherlands, 243–264.

20. Elizabeth Dutro and Monette C. McIver. 2011. 

Imagining a writer’s life: Extending the connection 
between readers and books. In Handbook of Research 
on Children’s and Young Adult Literature, Shelby 
Anne Wolf, Karen Coats, Patricia Enciso and Christine
A. Jenkins (eds.). Routledge, New York, 92–107.

21. Ellen A Ensher, Christian Heun, and Anita Blanchard. 

2003. Online mentoring and computer-mediated 
communication: New directions in research. J of Voc 
Behav 63, 2: 264–288.

22. FIMFiction.net. 2015. FIMFiction.net Statistics. 

Retrieved July 19, 2015 from 
http://www.fimfiction.net/statistics

23. Howard Gardner and Katie Davis. 2013. The App 

Generation: How Today’s Youth Navigate Identity, 
Intimacy, and Imagination in a Digital World. Yale 
University Press, New Haven

24. James Paul Gee. 2004. Situated Language and 

Learning: a Critique of Traditional Schooling. New 
(cid:60)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:3031)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:49)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:60)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:17)

25. James Paul Gee. 2013. The Anti-Education Era: 

Creating Smarter Students Through Digital Learning.
(cid:49)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:60)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3031)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:51)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)

26. Darlene Rose Hampton. 2015. Bound princes and 

monogamy warnings: Harry Potter, slash, and queer 
performance in LiveJournal communities. Transform 
Works & Cult 18.

27. Ashley Hinck. 2012. Theorizing a public engagement 
keystone: Seeing fandom’s integral connection to civic 
engagement through the case of the Harry Potter 
Alliance. Transform Works & Cult 10.

28. James Hollan, Edwin Hutchins, and David Kirsh. 2000. 

Distributed cognition: Toward a new foundation for 
human-computer interaction research. ACM TOCHI 7, 
2: 174–196. http://doi.org/10.1145/353485.353487

29. Sylvia Hurtado, Mark Engberg, Luis Ponjuan, and Lisa 
Landreman. 2002. Students’ precollege preparation for 
participation in a diverse democracy. Res in Higher Ed
43, 2: 163–186. 

30. Edwin Hutchins. 1995. Cognition in the Wild. MIT 

Press, Cambridge, Mass.

31. Edwin Hutchins and Tove Klausen. 1996. Distributed 

cognition in an airline cockpit. In Cognition and 
Communication at Work(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:60)(cid:85)(cid:77)(cid:124)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:2119) (cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:3)
Middleton (eds.). Cambridge University Press, 15–34.
32. (cid:48)(cid:76)(cid:93)(cid:88)(cid:78)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:44)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:2115) (cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:3)Hanging Out, Messing Around, and 

Geeking Out: Kids Living and Learning with New 
Media. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.

33. (cid:48)(cid:76)(cid:93)(cid:88)(cid:78)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:44)(cid:87)(cid:448)(cid:15)(cid:3)Kris Gutiérrez, Sonia Livingstone, Bill 

Penuel, Jean Rhodes, Katie Salen, Juliet Schor, Julian 

Sefton-Green, and S. Craig Watkins. 2012. Connected 
Learning: An Agenda for Research and Design. Digital 
Media and Learning Research Hub.

34. Henry Jenkins. 1992. Textual Poachers: Television 

Fans & Participatory Culture. Routledge, New York.

35. Henry Jenkins. 2006. Convergence Culture: Where Old 

and New Media Collide. New York University Press, 
NY.

36. Henry Jenkins. 2009. Confronting the Challenges of 
Participatory Culture: Media Education for the 21st 
Century. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

37. Henry Jenkins. 2012. “Cultural acupuncture”: Fan 
activism and the Harry Potter Alliance. Transform 
Works & Cult 10.

38. Henry Jenkins and Kurt Squire. 2011. Video Games 

and Learning: Teaching and Participatory Culture in 
the Digital Age(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:49)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:60)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:3031)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:55)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)
NY.

39. Jessica Elizabeth Johnston. 2015. Doctor Who–themed 
weddings and the performance of fandom. Transform 
Works & Cult 18.

40. Debi Khasnabis, Catherine H. Reischl, Melissa Stull, 

and Timothy Boerst. 2013. Distributed mentoring: 
Designing contexts for collective support of teacher 
learning. Eng J 102, 3: 71–77.

41. Colin Lankshear and Michele Knobel. 2007. 

Researching new literacies: Web 2.0 practices and 
insider perspectives. E-Learning 4, 3: 224–240. 
42. Jean Lave and Etienne Wenger. 1991. Situated 
Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

43. Margaret Mackey and Jill Kedersha Mcclay. 2008. 

Pirates and poachers: Fan fiction and the conventions 
of reading and writing. Eng in Ed 42, 2: 131–147.

44. Kerri Mathew and Devon Adams. 2009. I love your 
book, but I love my version more: Fanfiction in the 
English language arts classroom. ALAN Review 36, 3: 
35-41.

45. Sharan B. Merriam. 2014. Qualitative Research: A

Guide to Design and Implementation. Wiley, Hoboken.
46. Michael J. Moore, Tadashi Nakano, Akihiro Enomoto, 

and Tatsuya Suda. 2012. Anonymity and roles 
associated with aggressive posts in an online forum. 
Comp in Hum Behav 28, 3: 861–867.

47. Mollie E. Nolan. 2006. Search for original expression: 
Fan fiction and the fair use defense. SIU Law J 30, 3: 
533-571.

48. Nick Pidgeon and Karen Henwood. 1996. Grounded

theory: Practical implementation. In Handbook of
Qualitative Research and Methods for Psychology and 
the Social Sciences, J. T. E. Richardson (ed.). Wiley, 
Oxford.

49. Kevin Roozen. 2009. “Fan Fic-(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:180)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3031)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:36)(cid:3)

case study exploring the interplay of vernacular 
literacies and disciplinary engagement. Res in Teach of 
Eng 44, 2: 136–169.

703

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

56. Anselm L. Strauss and Barney G. Glaser. 1967. The 

Discovery of Grounded (cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:2271)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)
Qualitative Research. Aldine Pub. Co., Chicago.

57. Rachel L. Stroude. 2010. Complimentary creation: 

Protecting fan fiction as fair use. Marquette Intellect 
Prop Law Rev 14, 1: 191.

58. Catherine Tosenberger. 2008. Homosexuality at the 
online hogwarts: Harry Potter slash fanfiction. Child
Lit 36, 1: 185–207.

59. Sherry Turkle. 2011. (cid:36)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:55)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:2271)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:58)(cid:75)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:58)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:91)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:3)

More from Technology and Less from Each Other. 
(cid:49)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:60)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:3031)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:37)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:37)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:78)(cid:86)(cid:17)

60. Kevin Veale. 2013. Capital, dialogue, and community 

engagement—My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic 
understood as an alternate reality game. Transform 
Works & Cult 14.

61. Joseph B. Walther. 1996. Computer-mediated 
communication: Impersonal, interpersonal, and 
hyperpersonal interaction. Comm Res 23, 1: 3–43.

62. Emily Weinstein, Zachary Clark, Dona Dibartolomeo, 

and Katie Davis. 2014. A decline in creativity? It 
depends on the domain. Creativ Res J 26, 2: 174–184.

50. Jim Sandherr, Asia Roberson, Caitlin K. Martin, 

Ugochi Acholonu, and Denise Nacu. 2014. Distributed 
mentorship: Increasing and diversifying youth access 
to learning networks. Panel at the 6th annual Digital 
Media and Learning Conference (DML ’14). 

51. Aaron Schwabach. 2009. The Harry Potter lexicon and 
the world of fandom: Fan fiction, outsider works, and 
copyright. U of Pitt Law Rev 70, 3: 387–434.

52. Robert L. Selman. 1975. Level of social perspective 
taking and the development of empathy in children: 
Speculations from a social-cognitive viewpoint. J of 
Moral Ed.

53. Gerry Stahl, Timothy Koschmann, and Daniel D. 
Suthers. 2006. Computer-supported collaborative 
learning. In The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning 
Sciences, R. Keith Sawyer (ed.). Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge.

54. Constance A. Steinkuehler. 2004. Learning in 

massively multiplayer online games. In Proceedings of 
the 6th International Conference on Learning Sciences 
(ICLS ’04), 521–528.

55. Leanne Stendell. 2005. Fanfic and fan fact: How 

current copyright law ignores the reality of copyright 
owner and consumer interests in fan fiction. SMU Law 
Rev 58: 1551.

704

