CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

How Blind People Interact with Visual Content on 

Social Networking Services  
Shaomei Wu 

Shiri Azenkot 

Jacobs Technion-Cornell Institute 

Cornell Tech 

shiri.azenkot@cornell.edu 

Violeta Voykinska 
Cornell University 
vv238@cornell.edu 

Facebook 

shaomei@fb.com 

Gilly Leshed 

Information Science 
Cornell University 
gl87@cornell.edu 

ABSTRACT 
In  this  paper,  we  explore  blind  people’s  motivations, 
challenges, 
interactions,  and  experiences  with  visual 
content on Social Networking Services (SNSs). We present 
findings  from  an  interview  study  of  11  individuals  and  a 
survey  study  of  60  individuals,  all  with  little  to  no 
functional vision. Compared to sighted SNS users, our blind 
participants 
faced  profound  accessibility  challenges, 
including  the  prevalence  of  photos  without  sufficient  text 
descriptions.  To  overcome  the  challenges,  they  developed 
creative strategies, including using a variety of methods to 
access  SNS  features  (e.g.,  opening  the  mobile  site  on  a 
desktop browser), and inferring photo content from textual 
cues  and  social 
interactions.  When  strategies  failed, 
participants  reached  out  for  help  from  trusted  friends,  or 
avoided  certain  features.  We  discuss  our  findings  in  the 
context  of  CSCW  research  and  SNS  accessibility  as  a 
design value. We highlight the social significance of photo 
interactions for blind people and suggest design practices.  
Author Keywords 
Blind  users;  social  networking  services;  accessibility; 
assistive technologies; qualitative study. 
ACM Classification Keywords 
K.4.2  [Social  Issues]:  Assistive  technologies  for  persons 
with disabilities. 
INTRODUCTION 
With  1.44  billion  Facebook  users1,  300  million  Twitter 
users2, and 360 million LinkedIn users3, enabling people of 
diverse  backgrounds  and  abilities  to  participate  in  Social 
Networking Services (SNSs) has become a pressing issue. 
With  Facebook  users  uploading  350  million  photos  a  day 
[18], sharing visual content has become a bigger part of the 
experience,  with  which  raises  questions  about  how  people 
with vision disabilities experience SNSs. 
Recent statistics show that 2.3% of the U.S. population has 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work owned by  others  than ACM must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit  is  permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA  
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02...$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820013 

1584

a  visual  disability  [13].  People  with  little  to  no  functional 
vision (from here referred to as “blind”) usually access the 
web,  and  SNSs  in  particular  [7,45],  using  screen  readers 
and  screen  magnifiers  on  mobile  and  desktop  platforms. 
However, despite attempts to make the web more accessible 
through  design  guidelines  [42],  designer  awareness  [24], 
and  evaluation  techniques  [27],  barriers  to  access  certain 
content remain [7,23].   
Recent  large-scale  empirical  research  by  Wu  and  Adamic 
found that visually impaired Facebook users engaged with 
major  Facebook  functions  as  actively  as  other  users  did, 
with the exception of a few minor differences: they posted 
and shared photos, but to a smaller extent than the average 
user, and they also connected more with other screen reader 
users  and  used  words  related  to  visual  impairment  more 
frequently [45].  
As a large-scale, quantitative study, Wu and Adamic’s work 
surfaced interesting high-level patterns of how blind people 
use  Facebook,  but  did  not  explain 
the  practices, 
experiences,  and  challenges  behind  those  patterns.  Our 
work  aims  to  gain  deeper  insights  into  these  findings  by 
answering  questions  that  have  remained  unexplored:  How 
do blind people engage with photos and other visual content 
on SNSs? What strategies do they employ to overcome the 
challenges?  How  do  challenges  related  to  visual  content 
relate 
their  everyday 
interactions on SNSs?  
To  answer  these  questions,  we  conducted  an  interview 
study  of  11  people  and  a  survey  study  of  60  people  with 
little to no functional vision. We asked about their everyday 
experiences  on  SNSs,  especially  about  their  interactions 
with  visual  content.  Our  participants  used  SNSs  daily  or 
several  times  per  week.  Many  of  them  had  accounts  on 
more than one SNS, and many also had experience sharing 
and interacting with visual content in SNSs. 
Our work leads to a better understanding of blind SNS users 
as  a  unique  user  group,  and  uncovers  both  patterns  of 
successful  SNS  use  and  persistent  challenges.  We 

to  other  challenges 

faced 

in 

1 newsroom.fb.com/company-info/ 
2 about.twitter.com/company 
3 press.linkedin.com/about-linkedin 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

contribute to the discussion of web accessibility as a design 
value,  and  offer  design  recommendations  to  enable  blind 
people to better engage with the increasingly visual-centric 
web  and  social  media.  We  also  discuss  implications  for 
future CSCW research.  
RELATED WORK 
Web Accessibility Today 
Blind  users  typically  interact  with  computers  using  screen 
readers, software that interprets what is being displayed on 
the screen and reads it to the user. Screen readers exist for 
both  desktop  computers  (e.g.,  JAWS  –  Job  Access  With 
Speech  by  Freedom  Scientific),  and  mobile  devices  (e.g., 
VoiceOver for iOS, TalkBack for Android, and Nuance for 
Nokia  phones)  [43].  However,  a  2-dimensional  web  page 
converted into a 1-dimensional speech stream is not easy to 
interpret.  It  can  be  even  more  frustrating,  given  the 
prevalence  of  websites  with  insufficient  text  labeling  of 
graphic  content,  concurrent  events,  dynamic  elements,  or 
infinitely scrolling pages (e.g., a stream of feeds) [1,2,23].  
Although  web  accessibility  can  be  seen  as  a  universal 
usability value [36], web designers do not always have the 
resources to devote to accessibility, or do not see the value 
in making their sites accessible [24]. Even if they do, they 
might not know the best way to test for accessibility [27]. 
Further,  even  applying  web  accessibility  guidelines  does 
not  necessarily  improve  accessibility  [30].  As  a  result, 
many  websites  continue  to  be  inaccessible  through  screen 
readers, even those that are intended for broad access such 
as library websites [26], universities websites [21,31], and, 
SNSs [7].  
Blind Users and Social Networks 
Online  SNSs  are  places  for  people  to  connect  with  others 
through  weak 
to  maintain  strong  personal 
relationships [12]. The same may be true for blind people, 
but their offline social networks seem to be structured and 
to function differently than those of sighted people. In terms 
of  weak  ties,  for  example,  blind  unemployed  college 
graduates  were  found  to  have  less  extensive  networks  to 
help  them  find  jobs  compared  to  sighted  people  [32].  To 
achieve 
they  need  more  support  with 
socialization  and  career  development  in  the  form  of 
structured  group  activities  [33],  as  opposed  to  one-on-one 
conversations [32]. Furthermore, blind people rely more on 
their  physical  communities  for  help,  including  family 
members and – in the case of older blind people – in-home 
help [38]. In terms of strong connections, blind people who 
receive strong support from their friends have higher self-
esteem,  similar  to  sighted  people  [17].  Unlike  sighted 
people,  blind  people  rely  more  on  family  [9]  and  less  on 
friends [17] as a source of social support. 
Despite  these  differences  in  offline  social  networks,  blind 
people  have  significant  presence  on  SNSs  [6,45].  While 
their networks on these sites used to be smaller, denser, and 
more  homogenous  than  the  networks  of  sighted  users, 

life  success, 

ties  and 

these 

technologies  have  yet 

recent  data  shows  that  these  differences  have  diminished 
over  time  [45].  However,  there  are  still  some  unique 
characteristics  of  how  blind  users  interact  with  SNSs.  For 
instance,  they  upload  fewer  photos,  but  in  general  receive 
more feedback on their posts [45]. They also prefer to ask 
crowd workers instead of their networks for help, especially 
with  questions  about  visual  content  [5].  These  findings 
leave  some  unanswered  questions  around  the  everyday 
motivations, experiences, and practices of blind SNS users.  
Interacting with Visual Content 
With  the  increasing  popularity  of  visual  content  on  SNSs 
(more than 350 million photos uploaded daily to Facebook 
[18])  and  visual-centric  SNSs  such  as  Instagram  and 
Snapchat,  it  is  important  to  understand  the  ways  in  which 
blind people interact with such content on SNSs. Advanced 
technologies  offer  blind  people  tools  to  identify  and 
understand  visual  content.  These  include,  for  example, 
image  recognition  [15],  tactile  graphics  [22],  and  crowd-
powered  systems  [3,6].  Further  interaction  with  visual 
objects  is  supported,  for  example,  through  tools  that  help 
blind people take better photos [8,19,40], and by improving 
the  experience  of  photo  sharing  with  audio  augmentations 
[16].  However, 
to  be 
incorporated into the designs of popular SNSs.  
Our study, reported next, aims to gain a rich understanding 
of  not  only  what  blind  users  do  to  interact  with  visual 
content on SNSs, but also why and how they do it. Through 
first-hand 
interview  accounts  and  open-ended  survey 
responses  of  blind  people  active  on  SNSs,  we  uncover 
strategies  of  how  they  fully  engage  with  others  on  SNSs, 
challenges that remain, and opportunities to better support 
this user group.   
METHODS 
Pilot Study 
We conducted an initial interview study with 12 individuals 
(7  female,  5  male)  in  early  2014  to  understand  their 
experience with SNSs. Participants included eight blind and 
four  low  vision  people,  ages  22  to  63  years  (Mean=47.8, 
SD=14.6,  Median=53),  with  a  variety  of  occupations. 
Through  30-40  minute  phone 
interviews,  we  asked 
participants about the accessibility technologies they used, 
and  general  questions  about  their  usage  of  SNSs  and  the 
Internet.  Participants  were  compensated  with  Amazon  gift 
cards.  
Participants  reported  varying  levels  of  familiarity  and 
willingness  to  engage  with  computers,  the  Internet,  and 
SNSs. They had the same motivations for using SNSs and 
derived  the  same  benefits  as  sighted  people:  staying  in 
touch  with  friends,  maintaining  existing  relationships,  and 
accessing  and  sharing  information.  However,  the  findings 
also revealed a clear distinction between the experiences of 
participants  who  were  blind  and  those  that  had  low,  but 
functional vision. Low vision participants who used screen 
magnifiers  were  generally  more  satisfied  with  SNSs,  and 

1585

faced  fewer  challenges  than  participants  with  little  to  no 
functional  vision  who  only  used  screen  readers  to  access 
SNSs.  
Most  blind  participants  reported  that  SNS  sites  were  not 
fully compatible with accessibility technologies due to their 
use of JavaScript and dynamic elements. Most had trouble 
signing  up  for  SNSs  on  their  own  due  to  the  additional 
burden  of  poorly  labeled  input  boxes  and  a  complicated 
multi-step validation process, confirming previous findings 
about  Facebook  account  setup  difficulties  [7].  When  new 
features  were  launched  without  full  accessibility  support, 
participants  needed  to  invest  more  time  and  effort  to 
understand how these features worked with screen readers. 
They also had to rely on sighted individuals they trusted—a 
close friend, a spouse, etc.—to engage with other aspects of 
SNS use, such as uploading photos.  
One limitation to the pilot was that we included people who 
were not able to successfully setup and use SNS accounts at 
all.  To  gain  a  deeper  understanding  of  blind  people’s 
experiences  on  SNSs,  we  recruited  frequent  SNS  users  in 
our  main  study.  We  also  decided  to  specifically  engage 
people  with  little  to  no  functional  vision,  since  the  pilot 
study  showed  that  this  group  of  users  faced  more  severe 
accessibility  challenges,  particularly  when  engaging  with 
visual  content.  Finally,  while  the  pilot  study  explored 
general  accessibility  challenges,  interactions  with  visual 
content emerged anecdotally through our analysis. Based on 
these  insights  from  our  pilot  study  and  recent  findings  by 
Wu and Adamic [45], we constructed the following survey 
and interview study. 
Survey Study 
We  conducted  an  online  survey  to  gather  data  and  recruit 
diverse  SNS  users  with  little  to  no  functional  vision. 
Constructed on Qualtrics, an accessible survey platform, the 
survey  was  open  for  one  month  during  February-March 
2015.  We  recruited  survey  participants  through  email  lists 
of various organizations including the National Federation 
of the Blind, asking “blind” SNS users to participate.   

SESSION: ACCESSIBILITY AND UNIVERSAL DESIGN

Sixty people completed the survey: 41 women, 18 men and 
1  undisclosed.  Their  ages  ranged  between  16  and  67 
(Mean=40.2,  SD=14.1,  Median=39).  All  had  little  to  no 
functional  vision.  The  majority  of  the  participants  were 
from  24  different  US  states.  The  remaining  participants 
were from Canada, Germany, and India.  
The  survey  took  about  10  minutes  to  complete  and  asked 
questions about everyday use of SNSs, and interaction with 
visual  content.  Respondents  reported  using  the  following 
SNSs at least once a week (multiple choice was available): 
•  Facebook: 100% 
•  LinkedIn: 60% 
•  Twitter: 60% 
• 
We  anticipated  Facebook  would  be  the  most  used  service 
by  blind  users,  based  on  its  overall  popularity  [11],  and 
therefore included the following open-ended questions:  
•  If you have recently posted a photo on Facebook, please 
tell  us  about  this  photo:  what  it  was  of,  who  took  it,  if 
anyone helped you post it, what comments you received 
about this photo, and any other details about it.  

•  Snapchat: 7% 
•  Tumblr: 7% 
•  Vine: 3% 
•  Other: 22% 

Instagram: 22% 

•  When a Facebook friend posts a photo, how do you know 
what  is  in  the  photo?  Do  you  respond  to  the  photo  by 
liking/commenting on it? Why or why not? 

•  If  you  recently  posted  a  news  story  or  article  on 
Facebook,  please  tell  us  about  it:  what  was  it  about, 
where  did  you  find  it,  why  did  you  post  it,  what 
comments  you  received  about  the  post,  and  any  other 
details about it. 

Participants had the option to provide further comments and 
to enter their email address if they wished to take part in the 
interview study. We donated $1 to the National Federation 
of the Blind for every completed survey. 
Interview Study 
We recruited participants for the interview study among the 
survey respondents. We contacted respondents who (1) had 

 

Pseudonym  Gender  Age 
Tom 
Sophie 
Victor 
Naomi 
Lisa 
Marcus 
Selena 
James 
Katie 
Calvin 
Darcy 

21 
25 
26 
28 
28 
32 
35 
40 
49 
60 
65 

M 
F 
M 
F 
F 
M 
F 
M 
F 
M 
F 

k
o
o
b
e
c
a
F
X 
Undergrad student 
X 
Grad student 
Unemployed 
X 
Vision rehab therapist  X 
Law student 
X 
Assistive tech specialist  X 
X 
Unemployed 
X 
Musician 
X 
X 
X 

Age of 
Vision 
Loss  Occupation 
9 
5 
Birth 
Birth 
Birth 
Birth 
20 
32 
Birth  Grad student 
Birth 
3 

Paralegal consultant 
Writer 

 
r
e
t
t
i

w
T
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 

 

i

I

n
d
e
k
n
L
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 

 

l

+
e
g
o
o
G
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
X  Wordpress, Goodreads, Instagram 

Other SNSs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Table 1. Interview participants and the SNSs they reported using. 

1586

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

little  to  no  functional  vision,  (2)  posted  on  one  or  more 
SNSs  regularly  (several  times  a  week  to  several  times  a 
day), and (3) provided their email address. Due to a lack of 
standard  measures  to  assess  overall  technology  skill,  we 
relied  on  the  frequency  of  SNS  use  to  recruit  uniformly 
skilled  users.  We  continued 
to  contact  potential 
interviewees  and  conduct  interviews  until  we  started 
identifying clear repetitions in the responses.  
Eleven  individuals  participated  in  the  interview  study  (6 
female,  5  male)  (see  Table  1).  Their  ages  ranged  between 
21 and 65 years. Six participants were blind since birth, and 
the others lost their vision either as children or as adults. All 
used  Facebook  regularly  and  most  reported  using  other 
SNSs as well. Participants reported using multiple devices 
and  screen  reading  technologies,  including  Apple  mobile 
devices  with  VoiceOver  (8  participants),  PCs  with  JAWS 
(8), Macs with VoiceOver (2) and PCs with NVDA (1).  
We  conducted  semi-structured  interviews  with  questions 
about the following topics: 
•  General  Facebook  use  and  challenges  experienced,  e.g., 
do  you  post  and  respond  to  others  on  Facebook? 
Describe your latest post.  

•  Other SNSs used and challenges experienced, e.g., which 
sites do you use and what for? What challenges do you 
face in using these sites? 

•  Engaging with photos and visual content, e.g., do you like 
or comment on the photos of others? Do you post photos? 
Describe the last photo you posted.  

All  interviews  were  conducted  remotely  over  the  phone, 
Skype,  or  Facetime.  We  asked  participants  to  share  their 
screen with us or to send us screenshots of interactions we 
discussed.  Interviews  lasted  45-60  minutes.  Interviewees 
were compensated with a Visa gift card.  
Data Analysis 
We  addressed  the  limitation  of  a  small  interview  sample 
size by analyzing both the in-depth interview data and the 
qualitative survey. All interviews were audio recorded and 
then  transcribed  using  professional  transcription  services. 
We used an open-coding technique [34], iteratively reading 
the transcripts and survey responses, highlighting excerpts, 
and  identifying  key  insights,  themes,  and  patterns  that 
reoccurred in the data. In the findings, we included quotes 
from  both  the  interviews  and  the  open-ended  survey  data. 
Survey  respondents  are 
identified  with  assigned  ID 
numbers preceded by the letter P for “participant,” e.g., P1, 
P2; interviewees are identified with pseudonyms (see Table 
1).  
Our findings, reported next, are in two parts. The first part 
establishes the context for blind people’s interactions with 
visual content on SNS by reporting on general motivations, 
accessibility  challenges,  and  the  strategies  our  participants 
applied to overcome them. The second part reports on the 

1587

unique  practices  we  identified  in  interacting  with  visual 
content on SNSs. 
CONTEXT: SNS USE PATTERNS 
Motivations for Using SNSs 
We  found  that  blind  users  have  the  same  motivations  for 
using SNSs and for engaging with visual content as sighted 
people. Like sighted users, all of our participants used SNSs 
to  maintain  relationships  with  friends  and  family.  In 
addition, seven interviewees indicated that they used SNSs 
for  career-related  purposes.  For  example,  Naomi  used 
Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn to promote her cosmetics 
sales business. Eight interviewees reported using SNSs as a 
platform  to  discuss  their  experiences  as  blind  persons,  to 
share  useful  news  on  the  topic,  or  to  advocate  for  visual 
impairment awareness. However, similar to anyone with a 
mixed  set  of  interests,  they  also  blended  their  interests 
related  to  blindness  with  their  other  interests  (i.e.,  sports, 
technology,  politics),  and  engaged  with  a  wide  range  of 
topics and communities on SNSs. 
Existing Accessibility Challenges  
Prior  research  has  discussed  accessibility  challenges  of 
SNSs [7], and our study focused on questions beyond web 
accessibility.  However,  nine  of  the  interviewees  reported 
facing  accessibility  challenges  in  SNSs,  making  this  an 
issue  we  could  not  ignore.  We  describe  them  to  set  the 
context for how blind users interact with visual content. 
While a sighted user can quickly scan a webpage and click 
links anywhere on the page to complete their goal, a screen 
reader  user  needs  to  listen  through  each  page  element  in 
fixed order, and cannot easily skip through items irrelevant 
to his or her task. Visual page elements (e.g., buttons) may 
have a mismatch between what they visually look like and 
their  alt-text  read  by  the  screen  reader,  making  it  difficult 
for a blind user to understand their meaning and function. 
SNS pages with unstructured visual elements and numerous 
links, or horizontally and vertically organized content such 
as  photo  galleries  or  infinitely  scrolling  feeds,  make  the 
process of listening to the screen reader even lengthier and 
more confusing.  
Our  participants  reported 
the 
aforementioned  challenges,  but  their  perceptions  of  the 
accessibility  of  SNSs  varied.  For  example, 
some 
participants  tolerated  structural  complexity  to  varying 
degrees  and  found  some  SNSs  easier  to  use  than  others. 
Their  experiences  improved  over  time  as  they  got  used  to 
different  features  and  developed  strategies  to  overcome 
challenges.  However,  the  same  features  could  become 
difficult  again  over  time  due  to  frequent  or  unexpected 
interface changes:  
Just  when  I  figure  out  how  to  maneuver  around,  they  go 
and change things. Changing status, making things public 
or  private  is  more  difficult  to  discern  than  it  used  to  be. 
(P58)  

they  experienced 

that 

in 

Some  participants  were 
intimidated  by  accessibility 
challenges to such a degree that they did not even try to use 
SNSs  features  that  they  expected  to  be  inaccessible.  For 
example,  Selena  assumed  Facebook  games  were  not 
accessible:  “I think there is a lot of Facebook games that 
I’m not even aware of and I don’t think I could probably do 
those.  I  just  assume  they’re  not  accessible,  I  don’t  even 
know what they are though.” 
Overall, accessibility challenges frustrated our participants, 
and left them feeling excluded or incapable of participating 
in what they considered cultural mainstream:  
It  is  frustrating  for  me  to  use  these  websites  that  take  up 
longer (much longer) to carry out simple tasks. I feel that I 
am  missing  some  of  the  fun  stuff  on  social  media,  but  I 
don’t want to waste too much time. (P50)  
Strategies for Overcoming Accessibility Challenges 
In an attempt to overcome some challenges, the majority of 
interviewees  first  reported  accessing  SNSs  through  a 
combination  of  interfaces  (i.e.,  the  mobile  site,  the  main 
site,  the  mobile  app)  and  platforms  (i.e.,  mobile  and 
desktop).  Each  of  these  interface-platform  combinations 
had  different  strengths  and  weaknesses 
terms  of 
accessibility. 
Most  participants  reported  that  the  Facebook  mobile  site 
(m.facebook.com)  was  particularly  accessible,  and  many 
used  it  exclusively  on  a  desktop  browser  to  avoid  the 
structural complexity of the main site. The mobile site did 
not support all the functions of the main site, but people still 
used it even if this meant that they forwent functionality, or 
resulted  in  having  to  switch  between  the  desktop  and 
mobile  versions.  Katie  explained  an  intricate  system  she 
used  to  access  different  functionalities  through  different 
interfaces:  
If  I  want  to  tag  a  specific  friend  or  a  specific  page  in  a 
particular status update, I’ll use the … full Facebook site. 
Then if I’m just reading and scrolling through, I’ll use the 
mobile  version  on  the  PC.  If  I’m  posting  a  picture  or  a 
video, I will use the iOS app… It’s much easier to upload 
pictures  and  videos  from  the  iOS  app…  Then  if  I’m  just 
scrolling  or  browsing,  I’ll  use  the  mobile  site  on  the  PC. 
(Katie) 
To reduce structure complexity, some participants reported 
accessing  SNSs  through  other  applications.  For  example, 
Naomi used an accessible client application for Twitter, but 
wished  that  other  SNSs  such  as  Facebook  also  had  a 
dedicated  desktop  client  to  “de-clutter  the  interface.” 
Another potential access point was email. Instead of going 
to Facebook and scrolling through updates, Calvin reported 
entering Facebook when he got a notification of interest via 
email. Several survey respondents also reported interacting 
with  Facebook  friends  via  email  rather  than  through  the 
site:  

1588

SESSION: ACCESSIBILITY AND UNIVERSAL DESIGN

I try to interact by replying to email as much as possible, 
rather than going through the site, as I find FB complicated 
and hard to navigate, even the supposedly less visual and 
less complex mobile site. (P40) 
A  second  strategy  for  overcoming  accessibility  challenges 
was getting help from sighted individuals. The majority of 
participants reached out to close friends, spouses, or other 
family  members  to  get  help  with  challenging  tasks.  Their 
closest friends and family knew them well and understood 
their ways of using screen readers to assist when needed: 
The thing that I find frustrating about LinkedIn is I cannot 
figure out how to efficiently manage my connections. […] I 
can’t figure out how to delete them without having sighted 
assistance. […] I may ask a neighbor. If we’re on Skype, I 
can share my screen and then he can see what I’m doing. 
He’s  very  into  how  I  use  a  computer  and  how  I  use  my 
devices versus how somebody who is sighted lives life and 
that sort of thing. He or a couple of friends that I’m very 
close with I’d probably ask them for help with that sort of 
thing. (Katie) 
Finally, when workarounds were not possible and help was 
not  available,  participants  avoided  SNS  features  that  they 
found inaccessible: “I do not poke, as I think it is too hard 
to  figure  it  out.”  (P58).  Lisa  managed  to  figure  out 
Google+, but was limited in how she used it to interact with 
her  friends:  “I’ve  never  posted  anything.  I  only  use  it  to 
look  at  what  my  friends,  who  I’ve  managed  to  figure  out 
how to add, have posted. It’s completely one-sided.” Three 
interviewees  said  that  they  did  not  use  Google+  at  all, 
explaining  that  they  could  not  figure  out  how  to  perform 
elementary  tasks  such  as  adding  connections.  Avoiding 
features  and/or  entire  SNSs  prevented  them  from  having 
more  connections  and  interactions  with  their  friends,  and 
contributed to making them feel neglected by the designers 
and developers of these services.  
INTERACTING WITH VISUAL CONTENT 
SNSs enable users to communicate through various types of 
visual content including photos, videos, and graphics (e.g., 
image memes, emojis). Although our participants were not 
able to perceive the visual content in the way that sighted 
users  did,  they  were  fully  aware  that  visual  content  is  an 
important part of SNS experiences. As Marcus mentioned, 
“when  it  comes  down  to  doing  things  people  do  on 
Facebook, it’s more about the photos.”  
Consistent  with  findings  from  previous  research  [45],  we 
found that blind people engaged with photos on SNSs. Most 
of  the  blind  people  we  interviewed  and  surveyed  posted 
photos and responded to visual content that was shared by 
their friends. However, to fully engage with visual content, 
blind  people  needed 
to  first  overcome  accessibility 
challenges  associated  with  the  visual  content  through 
workarounds  or  with  help  from  family  and  friends.  They 
needed help to determine the content of the photos, and to 
take  and  post  photos  of  their  own.  Due  to  these  hurdles, 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

some  chose  to  forgo  engaging  with  photos,  or  chose  to 
selectively  do  so  when  convenient.  In  this  section,  we 
describe  our  participants’  approach  to  visual  content,  the 
challenges they experienced with it, and the strategies they 
employed to overcome these challenges. 
Taking and Posting Photos and Videos 
Seven 
interviewees  and  23%  of  survey  respondents 
reported  that  they  posted  photos.  Three  interviewees 
reported that they also posted videos. The process involved 
composing  and  capturing  the  image,  confirming  that  they 
had  the  right  file  selected  to  upload,  and  then  posting  it 
online.  Each  of  these  steps  had  unique  challenges  and  all 
participants reported seeking help from sighted individuals 
in some parts of the process. When help was not available, 
some either delayed the task or gave up on it altogether.  
Taking Photos 
To  take  a  photo,  participants  first  faced  the  challenge  of 
composing  the  photo  and  correctly  capturing  their  target. 
Naomi explained: “There’s just no way for me to know that 
whatever I’m photographing has been properly centered or 
the lens is in [focus] to take a good photo.”  Since  content 
shared on SNSs is seen by a large audience, not just close 
friends,  our  participants  worried  about  the  emotional  and 
social  consequences  of  sharing  an  imperfect  photo  or  a 
different photo than the one intended:   
I  have  practiced  taking  selfies  and  now  I  am  quite  good 
about  it,  but  I  am  afraid  to  share  except  [with]  my  close 
friends, as even though I can take good selfie, it might not 
be  perfect  as  others  would  take,  and  if  I  do  something 
wrong I don’t want to be a joke. I do remember recently I 
shared my selfie on WhatsApp. And I forgot to switch on the 
front camera, and I just took the photos and shared it. My 
close friends told me that they can see the wall and not me. 
As  they  are  my  close  friends  and  family  members  no  one 
laughed at me. It may not be the case with FB. (P9) 
As a result, only a small number of participants took photos 
by  themselves.  Most  reported  asking  friends  or  family 
members to take photos or videos of or for them. Parents, 
significant  others,  and  close  friends  were  particularly 
trusted. Just like sighted people, participants cared not only 
about  the  content  of  their  photos,  but  also  about  the 
aesthetic elements and the quality of photography:  
Some people don’t always understand completely that when 
a  blind  person  asks  you  to  take  a  picture  for  them  you 
should do it with the same the way that you would take it 
for  yourself.  Some  people  aim  it  at  the  thing  and  take  a 
picture  and  be  like  ‘okay  it’s  done.’  Certain  ones  of  my 
friends  understand  that  I  care  about  the  way  things  look 
and that sort of thing and so they’ll take it the way that they 
would take it if they wanted to post it or if they wanted to 
share it. (Lisa) 
Katie  highlighted  the  crux  of  the  challenge:  “I  do  wish 
there was a way to, for a person who is totally blind, to be 
able to take good pictures or good videos. There’s sort of a 

disconnect there.” Participants did not seem to be aware of 
tools  developed  to  help  blind  people  take  better  photos 
[19,40].  Further,  our  participants  cared  about  “looking 
good”  in  the  photos,  a  judgment  that  tools  could  not 
provide.  
Selecting and Editing Photos 
Once  acceptable  photos  were  taken,  participants  had  to 
identify  the  correct  photo  from  the  photo  storage  on  their 
phone  or  computer  to  post  and  share  online.  Accidentally 
posting  a  different  photo  from  the  one  they  intended  had 
negative  consequences:  “I  accidentally  posted  the  wrong 
pic from my photo album on my phone and didn’t realize it 
until I read the comments.” (P3) 
In  some  situations,  participants  were  able  to  select  their 
photo independently, for example, when the desired photo 
was the most recent one: “I just knew it was the picture just 
because it was the last photo that was on the camera roll.” 
(P4) In other cases, participants reported that someone else 
took the photo and sent it to them via email, and they were 
able  to  identify  the  photo  because  it  was  attached  to  the 
message. In all these cases, participants relied on non-visual 
cues in selecting the correct photo. 
In most cases, participants reached out to a trusted sighted 
person to help identify the correct photo or photos to share. 
Some waited until they had a batch of photos for posting, 
and then sat down with a sighted friend or family member 
to go over them. Unfortunately, this was perceived as time 
consuming, and therefore sometimes delayed or deterred a 
blind person from posting. Sophie described the reason for 
not posting a set of photos: “[I need someone to] help me 
understand which picture is that. Then I will rename it, and 
then if there is some editing, then I have to keep on asking 
“could you cut the picture? Could you edit it? Could you do 
this?” … That becomes kind of difficult.”  
As Sophie recounts, the process of selecting photos to post 
involved  more  than  just  identifying  what  is  in  the  photo: 
participants  wanted  their  friend  to  judge  in  which  photo 
they  looked  best,  they  wanted  to  avoid  blurriness  or 
incorrect  composition,  and  they  sometimes  wanted  to  edit 
the  photo:  to  crop,  rotate,  or  to  use  other  editing  features. 
This was only possible with the help of sighted individuals 
they trusted, who would spend the time to help them out.  
Posting Photos 
Most of the participants reported sharing photos or videos 
on Facebook more than on other SNSs, and some of them 
were  able  to  post  photos  or  videos  without  help.  P2 
describes  his  process  of  posting  a  photo  to  Facebook  that 
was taken by someone else on his phone: 
I ask a family member or friend to take the picture using my 
iPhone’s  camera.  Once  the  photo  has  been  taken,  I  turn 
VoiceOver  back  on  and  post  the  picture  using  the  built-in 
sharing features in the native iOS camera app. (P2) 

1589

Facebook’s mobile app was considered by most participants 
to be easier than the main site for posting photos, especially 
because the photos were already on their phone. However, 
additional interactions with the photo upload process, such 
as  tagging  people,  were  considered  difficult:  “I  couldn’t 
access  the  area  where  you  tag  friends”  (P20).  Further,  if 
photos  needed  to  be  edited  before  being  uploaded,  for 
example, to meet the size requirement, this was a particular 
challenge that required help from others: 
When I’m promoting an event, a performance of my band, I 
can’t  generally  do  the  photographs  to  add  a  photo  to  the 
event.  It’s  the  whole,  the-photo-has-to-be-a-certain-size 
issue. I can’t find a way to edit it myself to make it fit into 
the Facebook requirements. (James) 
Following  up  on  previous  work  [45],  our  findings 
demonstrated  that  sharing  photos  is  part  of  the  SNS 
experience  for  blind  users,  but  that  they  did  so  through 
unique  practices  that  almost  always  involved  getting  help 
from trusted sighted contacts. When help was not available, 
participants  often  delayed  or  avoided  sharing  photos, 
resulting  in  fewer  opportunities  to  interact  with  friends 
through photos.  
Interpreting and Responding to Visual Content 
Seven  interviewees—those  who  posted  photos—and  more 
than  half  (52%)  of  survey  respondents  reported  that  they 
tried to interpret the photos posted by their friends, and that 
they  liked  and  commented  on  the  photos  as  a  means  of 
interacting  with  their  friends.  However,  participants  faced 
various  challenges 
In 
particular, 
lack  of  useful  contextual 
information  such  as  photo  descriptions  often  prevented 
participants from engaging with most visual content.  
Interpreting Visual Content  
To understand the content of a photo, participants read the 
names of individuals tagged in it, the description posted by 
the author, comments posted by others, and the geo-tag of 
the  photo.  Author-generated  descriptions  were  considered 
by far the most informative:  
When  people  include  descriptions,  it  makes  it  so  much 
easier for somebody who’s blind to know what’s going on 
and more fully participate in the posting of that picture or 
responding to that picture or video. (Katie) 
However,  participants  mentioned  that  most  photos  posted 
on Facebook did not have clear descriptions or a description 
at all, and included only some of the contextual information 
described above. As a result, participants used partial clues 
to connect the dots and make sense of the photo based on 
the information available. For example, when faced with a 
photo without a description, Marcus deduced that “it must 
be from [his friends’] trip because they went to Mexico and 
that’s  tagged  in  Mazatlán.”  Our  participants  reported 
relying  on  very  few  clues  to  interpret  photos  in  order  to 
participate in the interactions around them: 

in  understanding 

the  photos. 

the 

frequent 

1590

SESSION: ACCESSIBILITY AND UNIVERSAL DESIGN

If  a  person  leaves  a  comment  with  their  picture,  then 
there’s something in it that gives me a [clue]… I remember 
a friend of mine, I don’t know what it was, she said, “I hope 
you enjoy this picture of Bill and I.” I wrote back something 
like,  “as  long  as  you’re  together,  I  don’t  care  where  you 
are.” I had no idea what the picture was of, but as long as 
they were together, that’s good enough for me. (Darcy) 
In many cases, the information provided was not sufficient 
to  allow  the  blind  person  to  make  successful  guesses.  In 
these cases, some sought more information, especially if the 
photo  seemed  interesting  or  was  posted  by  a  close  friend. 
Some reached out to a nearby friend or family member to 
ask  them  to  describe  the  photo.  Others  reached  out  to  the 
photo’s author, but only when the relationship was intimate 
enough. They did so either directly, or by commenting on 
the photo: 
Normally I’ll do it in a teasing way because we talk about 
accessibility  all  the  time,  my  sighted  friends  and  I. 
Normally, if I ask them, I’ll make it into sort of a joke about 
how I don’t know what they’re talking about. (Lisa) 
When  no  information  was  provided  and  help  was  not 
available, many participants ignored photos and other visual 
content. This was common with content that was not easy 
to  describe  with  words,  such  as  images  that  featured  text 
(e.g.,  screenshots  or  memes),  graphics-based  emojis  that 
were not captured by screen readers, and humorous videos:  
Sometimes people post videos that they think are funny but 
they’re very visual, and I don’t really understand what’s so 
funny about it, so I don’t bother. (Naomi) 
While many participants accepted this situation, others were 
frustrated when their friends did not describe the photos and 
other visual content they posted: “I have found it useless to 
ask  family  and  friends  to  make  sure  their  photos  include 
description,  because  they  usually  ignore  this  request.” 
(P34)  
Again,  they  felt  left  out  of  the  SNS  experience: “I cannot 
see  the  photo,  and  people  rarely  ever  describe  it.  They 
assume everyone on planet Earth has working eyes. If your 
eyes happen not to work, too darned bad.” (P40) 
While some emotional and humorous content in photos and 
videos may be difficult to convey with screen readers, some 
of 
it  could  be  made  more  accessible  with  existing 
technologies as we will describe in the design implications.  
Responding to Visual Content 
Participants’ decisions on whether to respond to a photo by 
“liking” it or commenting on it were based on a number of 
factors.  First,  they  generally  responded  to  photos  if  they 
were able to interpret the photo content or context in some 
way.  As  described  above,  participants  reported  relying  on 
various  cues  such  as  descriptions,  comments,  or  people 
tagged in the photo, to interpret the photo and decide if they 
wanted  to  respond  to  it.  P9  describes  that  the  number  of 
“likes”  on  a  photo  and  others’  comments  on  it  give  her 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

the  photo  or  posted  comments  because 

enough clues to determine whether to like or comment on 
the photo: 
I decide how to like [a photo] on the basis of the likes that 
has received. If the photo has more than 100 likes it means 
it’s safe to like. For commenting there [are] two parts. You 
understand  the  context  by  looking  at  the  comments  of 
others.  At  that  time  you  could  say  something  by  guessing 
what  others  have  wrote.  So  for  example,  my  friend  had  a 
haircut and many people commented so I wrote “new style 
ha!” Secondly, if you do not understand anything mostly it 
is  safest  to  write  “super  like,  nice  pic,  etc,  etc”.  I  think 
having a visual tool to communicate with your friends helps 
you a lot in socializing. (P9) 
The  last  sentence  of  P9’s  comment  (as  shown  above) 
demonstrates  a  second  factor  in  making  decisions  around 
responding  to  visual  content:  building  and  maintaining 
social  relationships.  Even  when  there  were  not  enough 
clues to interpret the visual content, participants sometimes 
“liked” 
this 
engagement provided emotional and social benefits:  
[I like] mainly photos that I’m tagged in. If a friend posts a 
photograph that I’m not involved in, sometimes I’ll ‘like’ it 
if  they  mention  one  of  their  kids.  It  depends  on  how  I’m 
feeling that day. If I see something and I say, “I miss that 
person,” then maybe I’ll like the photograph just because of 
that. (James) 
Our  participants  were  aware  that  interacting  with  others 
through visual content was an important aspect of the SNS 
experience,  and  they  wanted  to  be  included.  As  a  result, 
despite the challenges, they found ways to be part of these 
interactions and experiences.  
DISCUSSION  
Our findings revealed that blind people engage with visual 
content  on  SNSs  (particularly  photos)  in  various  ways, 
consistent  with  previous  research  [45].  They  take  photos, 
post  them,  tag  people  in  them,  comment  on  them,  and 
“like” others’ photos. Although they cannot see the photos, 
their  social  networks  include  a  large  portion  of  sighted 
friends, and they want to take photos that look good, want 
to  look  good  in  the  photos  taken  of  them,  and  want  to 
interact with others through the visual content prevalent on 
SNSs. 
Photos  serve  important  social  purposes  for  all  SNS  users. 
For  example,  posting  a  photo  from  an  event  is  a  way  to 
document  and  notify  others  about  attending  it.  “Liking”  a 
photo  one  has  been  tagged  in  is  a  way  to  express 
appreciation to the poster and, consequently, to maintain the 
relationship  with  the  poster.  Extending  previous  findings 
from sighted Facebook users [20], our findings demonstrate 
that  interactions  around  photos  are  crucial  to  the  SNS 
experience and to maintaining social connections for blind 
users, just as they are for sighted users.  

Through our participants’ accounts, it became evident that 
knowing the content of a photo is one important component 
in  this  social  process,  but  perhaps  not  the  most  important 
one. The metadata, such as who posted the photo, who is in 
it,  where  it  was  taken,  and  others’  responses  to  it,  were 
fundamental  to  their  social  interactions  with  the  photo. 
People  have  seen  the  value  of  photo  annotations  and 
tagging  in  the  context  of  the  audience  selection  and 
organization  of  photos  [1];  our  findings  indicate  that  such 
practice  can  also  make  a  significant  difference  in  blind 
people’s experience with photos.   
Implications for SNS Design 
Given  the  importance  of  blind  users’  interactions  with 
visual content on SNS, existing technologies could be used 
to  fix  or  alleviate  challenges  that  blind  people  encounter 
when interacting with visual content.  
First, functionality could be incorporated into SNSs to give 
blind  users  greater  autonomy  when  taking,  selecting, 
editing  and  uploading  photos.  Technologies  have  been 
developed  to  help  blind  people  take  better  photos  through 
automatic detection of image focus, framing, rotation, and 
lighting [8,19,40]. Recording and appending audio notes to 
photos  can  both  remind  blind  users  of  a  photo’s  content, 
and  serve  as  a  photo  caption  [16].  In  addition 
to 
incorporating such tools into SNSs, further work could take 
the form of creating editing tools to achieve desired photo 
quality: cropping, applying filters, and more.  
Second,  to  allow  users  to  better  interpret  visual  content, 
alternative text for images could be made available for all 
relevant  visual  elements 
the  SNS 
including  emoji  and  Facebook  stickers. 
experience, 
Computer  vision  algorithms  and  Optical  Character 
Recognition  (OCR)  technology  could  also  be  used  to 
automatically  generate  alternative  text  for  photos  and 
videos.  Our  findings  showed  that  blind  people  make 
decisions  to  respond  to  visual  content  based  on  little 
information,  so  these  technologies  have  the  potential  to 
produce  useful  additional  information,  despite  accuracy 
limitations.  Facebook  has  already  begun  to  consider  OCR 
[28], but the capability should be extended to other SNSs, 
especially  ones  that  are  image  heavy,  like  Instagram  and 
Pinterest.  Existing  functionality  could  also  be  enhanced 
(e.g.,  allowing  the  users  to  tag  regions  of  the  photo  with 
comments instead of only with people), which has shown to 
be  useful  in  helping  blind  people  explore  photo  content 
[23,46].  
Third,  when  faced  with  issues  that  technology  cannot  yet 
address,  such  as  conveying  the  emotional  content  of  an 
image  or  judging  its  aesthetics,  SNS  developers  can  still 
support  blind  users  through  design.  For  example,  when 
posting  a  photo,  the  design  could  make  the  caption  field 
salient,  as  a  reminder  for  users  to  describe  the  photo. 
Designing SNS functionality to better support photo sharing 
within a small, intimate group within the SNS can also help 
alleviate  blind  users’  concern  for  the  aesthetic  quality  of 

that  are  part  of 

1591

their  photos,  and  can  make  it  more  comfortable  and 
convenient to share and ask friends for feedback [29].  
We summarize these design opportunities in Table 2. Many 
would serve users with a range of abilities [14], including 
sighted  users,  and  could  offer  new  interactions  around 
photos and other visual materials to all SNS users. 
Implications for CSCW Research  
One  set  of  implications  of  our  findings  is  for  research  on 
social processes around sustaining meaningful relationships 
in  asynchronous  communication  media.  Unlike  most 
empirical bases for such research, our participants only had 
access  to  textual  cues  while  their  interaction  partners  had 
access  to  both  textual  and  visual  cues.  This  asymmetry  in 
access  to  information  is  an  interesting  direction  to  take  in 
the  research  on  social  relationships  in  computer-mediated 
communication and SNSs.  
In  sharing  visual  content,  we  found  that  blind  users  care 
about the aesthetics of the photos they shared, and wanted 
to have control over the messages delivered through photos. 
Without  seeing 
they  shared,  blind  users 
delegated  this  control  to  sighted  individuals  with  whom 
they had strong, intimate relationships and therefore trusted. 
In  other  cases,  we  saw  evidence  of  self-censorship  [37], 
where  blind  users  chose  to  not  post  photos,  or  chose  to 
share photos with a smaller audience, such as close friends 
on  WhatsApp, 
them  broadly  on 
Facebook.  Previous  work  found  that  participants  of  group 
interactions experienced less trust of one another and more 
vulnerability in text-based media compared to visual-based 
media  and  face-to-face  communication  [4].  Our  work 
highlights  the  role  of  trust  in  a  visual-based  medium  in 
which not all participants have access to the visual cues.  
In  accessing  shared  visual  content,  blind  users  interpreted 

instead  of  sharing 

the  photos 

SESSION: ACCESSIBILITY AND UNIVERSAL DESIGN

the meaning of the visual content based on textual cues in 
metadata  about  the  photo.  Based  on  the  hyperpersonal 
model,  communicating  through  limited-cue  channels  is 
associated with forming more positive impressions of one’s 
interaction  partners  [41].  Adding  a  text  description  to  a 
photo  was  shown  to  worsen  the  impressions  of  others 
online  [39].  In  contrast,  our  findings  suggest  that  blind 
people prefer photos with more text descriptions. This also 
raises  the  question  of  whether  blind  users  perceive  their 
interaction partners the same way as sighted users do, and 
whether this might impact the perceived social value blind 
SNS users derive from these interactions.  
Future  work  could  explore  these  questions  in  order  to 
understand  the  impact  of  channel  accessibility  limitations 
and  asymmetry 
in  computer-mediated  communication. 
Further,  we  call  researchers  to  continue  to  push  the 
boundaries  of  CSCW  research  by  examining  the  use  of 
social technology by various user groups with special needs 
beyond those of the general population.  
TAKING  A  STEP  BACK:  THE  LONG  JOURNEY  TO 
ACCESSIBILITY  
Despite  tremendous  research  efforts  on  web  accessibility 
and  the  development  of  standards,  frameworks,  and  legal 
requirements, our findings demonstrate that a long journey 
lies ahead before accessibility is implemented as a universal 
value.  Most  of  our  participants  are  comfortable  in  using 
technology, but found it challenging to do everything they 
wanted  to  do  on  SNSs.  Due  to  structural  complexity, 
limitations  in  photo  selection  and  editing,  and  increasing 
amounts  of  visual  content,  participants  had  to  use  unique 
practices to interact with others on SNSs. 
Participants  developed  and  used  various  strategies  and 
workarounds  to  overcome  difficulties.  We  saw  creative 
solutions,  such  as  opening  the  mobile  version  of  an  SNS 

 Design Opportunity 
Extend SNS functionality and design 
practices that are successful with blind users 
to other SNS platforms and to computer 
mediated communication services. 
Augment SNS functionality with existing 
technologies to give blind users greater 
autonomy when taking, selecting, editing 
and uploading photos. 

Augment SNS functionality with existing 
technologies to allow blind users to better 
interpret visual content. 

Leverage design principles to tackle issues 
that technology cannot yet address, such as 
conveying the emotional content of images 
or enabling blind users to pass judgment on 
its aesthetics. 

Supports blind 
users 

Impact 
Supports all users  • Extend image-tagging capability to other SNSs, especially ones that are 

Example 

image heavy, like Instagram and Pinterest. 

• Keep SNS API open to allow developers to create accessible tools (e.g., 

Chicken Nugget Windows client for Twitter). 

Supports blind 
users but may be 
appropriated by 
any user 

• Incorporate existing technologies that help blind people take better photos 
through automatic detection of image focus, framing, rotation, and lighting 
[8,19,40].  

• Implement ability to record and append audio notes to photos to both remind 

blind users of a photo’s content, and serve as a photo caption [16].  

• Create accessible editing tools to achieve desired photo quality: cropping, 

applying filters, and more. 

Supports blind 
users 

• Implement alternative text for images for all relevant visual elements that are 

part of the SNS experience, including emoji and Facebook stickers.  

• Use Optical Character Recognition (OCR) technology to automatically 

generate alternative text for photos and videos.  

• Allow users to tag regions of the photo with comments, shown to be useful 

in helping blind people explore photo content [23,46]. 

• Make the photo caption field salient to remind users to describe a photo they 

are about to post. 

Table 2. Design opportunities to improve interactions with visual content. 

1592

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

website on a desktop browser, and relying on geo-tags and 
other  clues  to  interpret  photos  and  make  decisions  about 
whether  to  respond  to  them.  In  these  ways,  participants 
appropriated  SNS  designs  meant  for  one  use  to  another. 
Keeping these designs open to unexpected appropriations is 
important  [10].  For  example,  allowing  one  to  open  the 
mobile version on a desktop browser without redirecting to 
the full desktop version downplays the single authoritative 
interpretation of the designers about which versions should 
be  used  on  which  devices,  and  opens  up  new  possibilities 
and experiences [35]. 
However, workarounds did not always work, and help was 
not  always  available.  Whereas  some  participants  accepted 
that they could not fully access SNSs, others felt frustrated 
and  discouraged,  and  that  they  were  missing  out  on  the 
social  benefits  of  fully  participating  on  SNSs.  Our 
participants were especially irritated when SNSs introduced 
new  dynamic,  visually-oriented  features  without  full 
compatibility with assistive technologies. Designers should 
be aware of how the features and services they create work 
for a variety of user groups: who they are designing for and 
who they are leaving out.  
However,  we  acknowledge  that  there  is  no  single  ideal 
approach to designing accessible services. A recent survey 
of screen reader users showed that over 40% of respondents 
use the screen reader-friendly versions of websites often or 
whenever 
they  are  available  [43].  In  practice,  our 
participants  reported  liking  and  using  the  mobile  site  of 
Facebook even on desktop browsers, which serves as the de 
facto “accessible” version of Facebook. However, there are 
several  potential  problems  with  this  “separate-but-equal” 
approach. Similar to previous findings [44], the participants 
who used the mobile site on their desktop were also aware 
that  some  features  were  missing,  and  perceived  that  they 
were  getting  a  discounted  experience.  The  only  way  to 
eliminate the trade-off between accessibility and richness of 
experience  is  to  provide  a  unified,  accessible  site  for  all 
users, sighted and blind.  
Calls  to  create  one  universally  usable  site  highlight 
accessibility as a design value [36]. A universal interface is 
easier to maintain and more likely to be up-to-date with all 
new  features,  while  separate  websites  will  require  more 
development  and  maintenance.  Furthermore,  interacting 
with  a  universal  interface  would  incentivize  screen  reader 
makers to evolve their product along with web technology 
trends. At the same time, the linear nature of screen readers 
might  be  considered  a  constraint  to  the  aesthetics  of  the 
design and contrary to experiences that are familiar to and 
preferred by sighted users. Further, this approach does not 
fare in practice with increasingly visual-centric web content 
and SNS designs.  
The  goal  of  this  paper  is  not  to  solve  accessibility  issues 
related 
technologies  and  SNSs.  Instead,  we 
contribute  to  the  discussion  by  offering  insights  and 
accounts  of  blind  people’s  experiences  around  visual 

to  web 

literature,  and 

content in SNSs. By describing their practices, challenges, 
and  creative  solutions,  we  hope  to  keep  the  discussion 
around SNS accessibility open.  
CONCLUSION 
We  presented  a  qualitative  study  of  blind  people  who  use 
SNSs,  and  explored  their  practices,  challenges,  strategies, 
and  experiences  through  their  interactions  around  visual 
content  in  SNSs.  Their  motivations  to  use  SNSs  were 
similar to those of sighted people, which have been reported 
in  prior 
include  maintaining  social 
relationships  and  expressing  their  identity  through  social 
interactions. However, blind SNS users faced challenges in 
interacting  with  SNSs  due  to  pervasive  visual  elements, 
complicated  page  structure,  and  infinitely  scrolling  feeds 
that  are  incompatible  with  screen  readers.  The  desire  to 
fully  participate  in  a  mainstream  SNS  experience  that 
centers  on  shared  visual  content  exacerbated 
these 
challenges.  
Our  participants  developed  and  applied  creative  strategies 
to overcome the difficulties they faced: they used multiple 
devices  and  entry  points  to  access  and  interact  with 
different  features;  they  inferred  visual  content  and  made 
interaction  decisions  based  on  non-visual  cues  and  social 
exchanges  around  visual  content;  and  they  ultimately 
sought help from a small group of trusted individuals, close 
friends,  and  family  members.  However,  when  strategies 
failed and help was not available, participants had to forgo 
desired interactions.  
Our  findings  shed  light  on  the  significance  of  social 
interactions around visual content in SNSs, but also brought 
up  questions  about  perception  and  trust  when  interaction 
partners  on  SNSs  have  asymmetrical  access  to  cues  in  a 
computer  mediated  communication  service.  We  hope  to 
enable future research and to inspire designers to consider 
designs that would improve social networking for all users, 
with and without disabilities.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank all of the interviewees and survey participants for 
their  contribution  to  this  work.  Thanks  to  Siddharth  Bajaj 
and Jiang Jian for running the pilot study. Finally, we thank 
Facebook for providing compensation to study participants.  
REFERENCES 
1. Morgan Ames and Mor Naaman. 2007. Why we tag:

motivations for annotation in mobile and online media.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human
factors in computing systems (CHI ‘07), 971-980.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1240624.1240772
Jeffrey P. Bigham, Craig M. Prince, and Richard E.
Ladner. 2008. WebAnywhere: a screen reader on-the-
go. In Proceedings of the 2008 international cross-
disciplinary workshop on Web accessibility (W4A’08),
73-82. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1368044.1368060
Jeffrey P. Bigham, Samual White, Tom Yeh, et al.
2010. VizWiz: nearly real-time answers to visual

2.

3.

1593

questions. In Proceedings of the 23nd annual ACM 
symposium on User interface software and technology 
(UIST ‘10), 333–342. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1866029.1866080 

4.  Nathan Bos, Judy Olson, Darren Gergle, Gary Olson, 

and Zach Wright. 2002. Effects of four computer-
mediated communications channels on trust 
development. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI '02), 135-140. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/503376.503401 

5.  Erin L. Brady, Yu Zhong, Meredith Ringel Morris, and 

Jeffrey P. Bigham. 2013. Investigating the 
appropriateness of social network question asking as a 
resource for blind users. In Proceedings of the 2013 
conference on Computer supported cooperative work – 
(CSCW ‘13), 1225-1236. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2441776.2441915 

6.  Erin Brady, Meredith Ringel Morris, Yu Zhong, 

Samuel White, and Jeffrey P Bigham. 2013. Visual 
challenges in the everyday lives of blind people. In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '13), 2117–2126. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2470654.2481291 

7.  Maria Claudia Buzzi, Marina Buzzi, Barbara Leporini, 
and Fahim Akhter. 2010. Is Facebook really “open” to 
all? International Symposium on Technology and 
Society, Proceedings, IEEE, 327–336.  

8.  Francine Chen, Scott Carter, Laurent Denoue, and 
Jayant Kumar. 2013. SmartDCap: semi-automatic 
capture of higher quality document images from a 
smartphone. In Proceedings of the 2013 international 
conference on Intelligent user interfaces SE (IUI ‘13), 
287–296. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2449396.2449433 
9.  V R Cimarolli and K Boerner. 2005. Social support and 
well-being in adults who are visually impaired. Journal 
of Visual Impairment & Blindness 99, 521–534. 
Retrieved May 20, 2015 from 
http://www.afb.org/jvib/jvibabstractnew.asp?articleid=j
vib990904 

10.  Alan Dix. 2007. Designing for Appropriation. 27–30. 

Retrieved May 20, 2015 from 
http://eprints.lancs.ac.uk/41618/ 

11.  Maeve Duggan and Joanna Brenner. 2013. The 

Demographics of Social Media Users-2012. 
PewResearchCenter, 1–14. Retrieved May 20, 2015 
from http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2013/Social-
media-users.aspx 

12.  Nicole B. Ellison, Charles Steinfield, and Cliff Lampe. 

2007. The benefits of facebook “friends:” Social 
capital and college students’ use of online social 
network sites. Journal of Computer-Mediated 
Communication 12, 4, 1143–1168.  

13.  W. Erickson, C. Lee, S. von Schrader. 2014. 2013 

Disability Status Report: United States. Cornell 
University Employment and Disability Institute(EDI). 

SESSION: ACCESSIBILITY AND UNIVERSAL DESIGN

Retrieved July 29, 2015 from 
http://www.disabilitystatistics.org/ 

14.  T. S. Goldhaber, P. M. Langdon, P. J. Clarkson, et al. 
2012. Designing Inclusive Systems. Springer London, 
London.  

15.  Google. Search for pictures with Google Goggles - 

Search Help. Retrieved May 20, 2015 from 
https://support.google.com/websearch/answer/166331 
16.  Susumu Harada, Daisuke Sato, Dustin W. Adams, Sri 
Kurniawan, Hironobu Takagi, and Chieko Asakawa. 
2013. Accessible photo album. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI ‘13), 2127-2136. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2470654.2481292 

17.  Taina Maarit Huurre, Erkki Juhani Komulainen, and 

Hillevi Marita Aro. 1999. Social support and self-
esteem among adolescents with visual impairments. 
Journal of Visual Impairment and Blindness 93, 26–37. 
Retrieved May 20, 2015 from http://www.afb.org 

18.  Internet.org. A focus on efficiency: A whitepaper from 

Facebook, Ericsson and Qualcomm. (13 September 
2013.). Retrieved May 20, 2015 from https://fbcdn-
dragon-a.akamaihd.net/hphotos-ak-
prn1/851575_520797877991079_393255490_n.pdf 

19.  Chandrika Jayant, Hanjie Ji, Samuel White, and Jeffrey 

P. Bigham. 2011. Supporting blind photography. In 
The proceedings of the 13th international ACM 
SIGACCESS conference on Computers and 
accessibility (ASSETS ‘11), 203–210. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2049536.2049573 

20.  Adam N Joinson. 2008. Looking at, looking up or 

keeping up with people? In Proceeding of the twenty-
sixth annual CHI conference on Human factors in 
computing systems CHI 08, 1027-1036. 
DOI=10.1145/1357054.1357213 

21.  Shaun K. Kane, Jessie a. Shulman, Timothy J. 
Shockley, and Richard E. Ladner. 2007. A web 
accessibility report card for top international university 
web sites. In Proceedings of the 2007 international 
cross-disciplinary conference on Web accessibility 
(W4A ‘07), 148-156. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1243441.1243472 

22.  Richard E. Ladner, Beverly Slabosky, Andrew Martin, 
et al. 2005. Automating tactile graphics translation. In 
Proceedings of the 7th international ACM SIGACCESS 
conference on Computers and accessibility (Assets 
‘05), 150-157. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1090785.1090814 

23.  Walter S. Lasecki, Phyo Thiha, Yu Zhong, Erin Brady, 

and Jeffrey P. Bigham. 2013. Answering visual 
questions with conversational crowd assistants. In 
Proceedings of the 15th International ACM 
SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and 
Accessibility (ASSETS ‘13), 1–8. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2513383.2517033 

24.  Jonathan Lazar, Alfreda Dudley-Sponaugle, and Kisha 
Dawn Greenidge. 2004. Improving web accessibility: 

1594

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Cranor. 2013. The post that wasn’t: exploring self-
censorship on facebook. In Proceedings of the 2013 
conference on Computer supported cooperative work 
(CSCW ’13), 793-802. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2441776.2441865 

38.  Tien Tay, Jie Jin Wang, Richard Lindley, et al. 2007. 

Sensory impairment, use of community support 
services, and quality of life in aged care clients. 
Journal of aging and health 19, 2, 229–241.  

39.  Catalina L. Toma. 2010. Perceptions of trustworthiness 

online: the role of visual and textual information. In 
Proceedings of the 2010 ACM conference on Computer 
supported cooperative work (CSCW '10), 13-22. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1718918.1718923 

40.  Marynel Vázquez and Aaron Steinfeld. 2012. Helping 

visually impaired users properly aim a camera. In 
Proceedings of the 14th international ACM 
SIGACCESS conference on Computers and 
accessibility (ASSETS ‘12), 95-102. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2384916.2384934 
41.  Joseph B. Walther. 1996. Computer-Mediated 

Communication: Impersonal, Interpersonal, and 
Hyperpersonal Interaction. Communication Research 
23, 3-43. 

42.  Web Accessibility Initiative. 2012. WCAG Overview. 

Retrieved May 20, 2015 from 
http://www.w3.org/WAI/intro/wcag.php 

43.  WebAIM. 2014. WebAIM: Screen Reader User Survey 

#5 Results. Retrieved May 20, 2015 from 
http://webaim.org/projects/screenreadersurvey5/ 

44.  Brian Wentz and Jonathan Lazar. 2011. Are separate 
interfaces inherently unequal? In Proceedings of the 
2011 iConference (iConference '11), 91-97. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1940761.1940774 

45.  Shaomei Wu and La Adamic. 2014. Visually impaired 

users on an online social network. In Proceedings of 
the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in 
computing systems (CHI ’14), 3133–3142. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2556288.2557415 

46.  Yu Zhong, Walter S. Lasecki, Erin Brady, and Jeffrey 
P. Bigham. 2015. RegionSpeak: Quick Comprehensive 
Spatial Descriptions of Complex Images for Blind 
Users. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI ‘15), 2353–2362. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2702123.2702437 

A study of webmaster perceptions. Computers in 
Human Behavior 20, 2, 269–288.  

25.  Jonathan Lazar, Aaron Allen, Jason Kleinman, and 

Chris Malarkey. 2007. What Frustrates Screen Reader 
Users on the Web: A Study of 100 Blind Users. 
International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction 
22, 3, 247–269. 

26.  Jonathan Lazar, Brian Wentz, C. Akeley, et al. 2012. 

Equal access to information? Evaluating the 
accessibility of public library web sites in the state of 
Maryland. Designing inclusive systems: Designing 
inclusion for real-world applications, 185–194. 

27.  Jennifer Mankoff, Holly Fait, and Tu Tran. 2005. Is 

your web page accessible? In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing 
systems (CHI’05), 41-50. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1054972.1054979 

28.  Cade Metz. 2015. Meet the team that makes it possible 

for the blind to use Facebook. Wired Magazine, 
February 22, 2015. Retrieved on May 21, 2015 from 
http://www.wired.com/2015/02/meet-team-makes-
possible-blind-use-facebook/ 

29.  Jarno Ojala and Sanna Malinen. 2012. Photo sharing in 

small groups. In Proceeding of the 16th International 
Academic MindTrek Conference (MindTrek ‘12), 69-
76. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2393132.2393148 

30.  Christopher Power, André Freire, Helen Petrie, and 

David Swallow. 2012. Guidelines are only half of the 
story: accessibility problems encountered by blind 
users on the web. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM 
annual conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI ‘12), 433–442. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2207676.2207736 

31.  Ravic Ringlaben, Marty Bray, and Abbot Packard. 
2014. Accessibility of American University Special 
Education Departments’ Web Sites. Universal Access 
in the Information Society 13, 2, 249–254.  

32.  Archie W. N. Roy, Gisela Dimigen, and Marcella 

Taylor. 1998. The Relationship between Social 
Networks and the Employment of Visually Impaired 
College Graduates. Journal of Visual Impairment & 
Blindness (JVIB) 92, 7, 423–432.  

33.  Sharon Zell Sacks, Karen E. Wolffe, and Deborah 

Tierney. 1998. Lifestyles of students with visual 
impairments: Preliminary studies of social networks. 
Exceptional Children 64, 4, 463–478.  

34.  Johnny Saldana. 2008. Coding manual for qualitative 

researchers. Los Angeles, CA: Sage. 

35.  Phoebe Sengers and Bill Gaver. 2006. Staying open to 
interpretation: engaging multiple meanings in design 
and evaluation. In Proceedings of the 6th conference 
on Designing Interactive Systems (DIS '06), 99-108. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1142405.1142422  
36.  Ben Shneiderman. 2000. Universal usability. 
Communications of the ACM 43, 5, 84–91.  

37.  Manya Sleeper, Rebecca Balebako, Sauvik Das, Amber 

Lynn McConahy, Jason Wiese, and Lorrie Faith 

1595

