CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

The Collaborative work of Hospital Porters: Accountability, 

Visibility and Configurations of Work 

Claus Bossen 

Aarhus University 

8200N Aarhus, Denmark 
clausbossen@dac.au.dk 

ABSTRACT 
In this paper, we describe the collaborative work of hospital 
porters.  The  profession  of  hospital  porters  is  understudied 
in  sociology  and  in  Computer  Supported  Cooperative 
Work,  despite  numerous  studies  of  healthcare  IT.  We 
describe  how  a  new  IT  system  for  hospital  logistics 
provided porters with more influence on, and responsibility 
for  their  work;  supported  collaboration  among  porters, 
clinicians,  and  middle  management;  and  effected  a  new 
ecology  of  visibility  and  accountability  of  porters’  work. 
We discuss how the new system simultaneously supported 
collaboration and generated representations and accounts of 
porters’ work. We compare the particular work arrangement 
in this study with other studies of porters’ work, show the 
widely different configurations of how IT and work can be 
organized, and argue for the benefit of making comparative 
studies within CSCW. Finally, we argue for moving beyond 
dualisms of coordination and accountability for work.   
Author Keywords 
Accountability;  cooperative  work;  CSCW;  healthcare  IT; 
hospital  orderlies;  hospital  porters;  hospital  logistics;  task 
management; visibility. 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. 
Miscellaneous. 
INTRODUCTION 
In the last decades, huge investments have been made in the 
design, development, and introduction of IT for healthcare. 
Much attention has been given to electronic patient records 
(EPR)  in  an  effort  to  increase  the  quality  of  care,  support 
coordination of healthcare services, and cooperation across 
settings [8, 10]. However, efforts have also been invested in 
supporting  cooperation  and  awareness  on  wards,  through 
large,  shared  whiteboards  [5,  55];  supporting  coordination 
across departments [4, 25]; and in supporting team work in 

presentation: 

Information 

interfaces 

and 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work 
for  personal  or  classroom  use  is  granted  without  fee  provided  that 
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and 
that  copies  bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page. 
Copyrights  for  components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  the 
author(s)  must  be  honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To 
copy  otherwise,  or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute 
permission  and/or  a  fee.  Request 
to 
permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW  '16,  February  27-March  02,  2016,  San  Francisco,  CA, 
USA 
Copyright  is  held  by the  owner/author(s).  Publication  rights  licensed 
to  ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820002 

lists,  requires  prior  specific 

965

Martin Foss 
Systematic A/S 

8000 Aarhus, Denmark 
mfo@systematic.com 

emergency departments [9, 32] (for an overview of this in 
CSCW  see  [21]).  However,  despite  these  diverse  efforts, 
the primary focus of investments and in research has been 
on  the  two  largest  and  most  prominent  professions: 
physicians  and  nurses.  Non-clinicians  in  healthcare  have 
received little attention, but this will most likely change, as 
the digitization of healthcare develops in depth and scope. 
Here, CSCW  may contribute to the adequate development 
of IT and transformation of non-clinicians’ work.  
In  this  paper,  we  describe  the  work  of  hospital  porters,  a 
low-wage  profession  at  the  lowest  end  of  the  hospital 
hierarchy. Porters have received little attention in academia 
and  in  strategies  for  IT  in  healthcare.  Based  on  the 
implementation of an IT system to support hospital logistics 
by  tracking  artifacts,  equipment,  expensive  medicine, 
transports, and hospital porters, we describe the changes in 
the  collaborative  work  of  hospital  porters,  and  the  new 
possibilities and challenges that arose. The new IT system 
enabled  better  coordination  of  porters’  work,  provided 
porters  with  more  influence  on  their  everyday  work,  and 
made porters, as  well as their tasks, visible and subject to 
new  forms  of  accountability.  Hence,  the  system  both 
supported  cooperation  and  functioned  as  an  accountability 
system.  We  discuss  the  asymmetrical  visibilities  and 
accountabilities that the new system affected, and point out 
the possible ways in which porters’ collaborative work may 
develop,  depending  on  how  IT  has  been  designed, 
implemented, and appropriated. We argue that IT and work 
can  be  configured  in  widely  different  ways  by  comparing 
this case with other studies of porters’ work, and argue for 
the  benefit  of  comparative  studies.  Finally,  we  argue  for 
moving  beyond 
the  dualism  of  coordination  and 
accountability, since these are interrelated and can generate 
various outcomes. 
RELATED WORK: HEALTHCARE IT AND PORTERS 
The  digitization  of  healthcare  gained  momentum  in  the 
early 1990s, with investments in the development of EPRs, 
especially  for  physicians  and  nurses,  the  two  largest  and 
strongest  professions  within  the  domain.  However,  as  the 
processes  of  digitization  expand  in  scope  and  depth,  they 
will most likely involve and affect other professions as well 
[11, 51]. Hospital work is also dependent on a wide range 
of  non-clinical  professions  when  providing  care  and 
treatment 
laboratory 
assistants,  registration  assistants,  social  workers,  kitchen 
staff,  and  porters  [47]. If  not  already  digitized,  their  work 

including  medical 

secretaries, 

importance  of  social  workers,  porters, 

will  most  likely  become  so  within  the  coming  years. 
Presently, there are only few studies describing the work of 
non-clinical  groups  in  healthcare,  and  there  is  a  dearth  of 
studies of hospital porters. 
Non-clinicians have been investigated in a small number of 
studies within CSCW or related fields. Tang et al. point out 
the 
insurance 
company  representatives,  and  staff  in  hospital  external 
facilities, for the efficiency of outpatient flow at a hospital’s 
emergency  department.  They  describe  the  coordination  of 
patient  outflow  as  primarily  non-clinical,  invisible,  and 
unsupported by IT [51]. Abraham and  Reddy describe the 
role of non-clinical staff, and the coordination of intra- and 
inter-departmental  patient  transfers  [1,  2].  Further,  Bossen 
et  al.  describe  medical  secretaries’  work,  and  how  it 
changed  when  an  EPR  was  implemented  [11].  Finally, 
Murphy  et  al.  point  out  the  importance  of  social  workers, 
registration assistants, and care coordinators in coordinating 
patient  care  processes:  However,  the  these  non-clinicians, 
could  not  edit  incorrect  information  or  send  messages  in 
their EPR, which led to inefficient care processes [27]. 
Hospital porters (or orderlies) have received little academic 
attention  at  all.  Even  a  broad  search  resulted  in  only  13 
studies  of  relevance  to  this  paper.  These  may  be  put  into 
three  groups.  Additionally,  12  studies  were  found  that 
somehow include porters, bringing the total to 25 papers.  
A  group  of  three  studies  focuses  on  the  life  and  work  of 
porters  as  a  subject  in  its  own  right.  Saunders  (1979) 
contrasts  the  public  image  of  porters  as  merely  unskilled, 
poorly  paid,  and  work-for-money,  with  the  actuality  that 
they take pride in their work, and see themselves as nurses’ 
aides,  boosters  of  patient  morale,  and  are  generally 
concerned  with  care  [40].  Rapport  (2008,  2009)  provides 
the most in-depth study of porters across all groups. Based 
on  ten  months  of  anthropological  fieldwork  at  a  Scottish 
hospital,  he  describes  porters’  negotiation  of  power, 
invisibility,  and  identity  [36]  [37]:  “Being  a  porter  meant 
coming  to  terms  with  being  a  nothing,  at  the  base  of  a 
hospital  hierarchy  topped  by  doctors”  [37:  p59].  Of  note, 
Strauss et al. (1985), in their classic study of various kinds 
hospital  work,  also  include  “transport  people,”  who  move 
patients, dead bodies, equipment, and samples [47: p54-55]. 
A second group of six studies focuses on making portering 
services effective, either in cases of hospital reorganization, 
or quality improvement projects. Dershin and Shaik (1992) 
engaged  in  a  quality  improvement  project,  re-organized 
patient  transport,  and  reduced  patient  waiting  times  by 
introducing  two-way  radio  communication  between  a 
central  dispatcher  and  porters,  optimizing  staffing,  and 
reducing  extra  work  due  to  insufficient  information  about 
the  transports  [17].  Similarly,  Sullivan  and  Fretzel  (1992) 
focus  on  porter  services  in  the  process  of  arguing  for  a 
method  for  executing  quality  improvement  projects  [50]. 
Bryan  (1998)  describes  efforts  to  improve  porter  services 
after  the  merger  of  two  hospitals,  through  a  computerized 

966

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

staff 

according 

to  demand. 

dispatch  system  and  scheduling  of  recurrent  porter  tasks 
[15].  Lin  (1999)  developed  a  computer-based  heuristic 
algorithm for scheduling the monthly roster of porters at a 
major  hospital  in  Hong  Kong  [26].  Chow-Chu  and  Goh 
(2000) argue for the importance of portering services to the 
overall  performance  of  hospitals,  and  pursued  lower 
response times – for example, from when a request is made, 
until the porter arrives at the site – by minimizing waiting 
times  at  elevators,  training  cleaners  as  additional  porter 
staff  for  peak  periods,  and  pooling  all  porters,  instead 
assigning them to specific departments [16]. Odegaard et al. 
(2007)  provide  a  comprehensive  study  of  porters  second 
only to Rapport’s. Based on a seven-month, mixed-method 
study,  they  aimed  to  make  portering  services  and  the 
hospital’s  overall  performance  more  effective,  and 
two  major  challenges:  communication,  and 
identified 
scheduling 
Inefficient 
communication  between  dispatcher,  departments,  and 
porters meant longer dispatch times and pick-up times, and 
staff scheduling did not adequately take known peak hours 
into consideration [29] (also see [28]). 
A third group of three studies focuses on porters’ work and 
IT.  Xiao  et  al.  (2010)  analyzed  how  “transport  cards” 
support  formal  and  informal  coordination  of  inpatient 
transport [54]. Torkilsheyggi and Hertzum (2014) describe 
the  usefulness  of  pilot  IT  implementations,  and  how  to 
achieve user participation, based on a trial test of a system 
for  coordinating  patient  transport  between  nurses  and 
porters  [52].  Stisen  et  al.  (2014)  investigated  the  potential 
of  wearable  devices  for  porters  migrating  to  an  electronic 
dispatch and positioning system [46].  
A  final  pool  of  twelve  studies  that  address  porters  covers 
various  subjects:  five  studies  address  ergonomics  and  the 
physical  strain  of  porters’  work;  four  papers  address 
differences  among  healthcare  professions,  such  as  life 
expectancy  and  smoking  habits;  two  studies  of  porters’ 
roles  in  during  war  time,  and  in  Papua  New  Guinea 
hospitals; and a book chapter on low-wage jobs in the UK, 
including  care  assistants,  cleaners,  and  porters  (interested 
readers may obtain references from the first author).  
Finally,  it  should  be  mentioned  that  patient  transport  and 
flow  have  been 
through  an  engineering 
approach, applying queuing models, simulation, and patient 
flow  project  management  tools.  However,  these  have  a 
predominantly  operations  management  perspective,  and 
rarely if ever mention porters or their work (See e.g. [23]). 
In  summary,  porters  are  at  the  lowest  end  of  the  hospital 
hierarchy,  and  are  relatively  invisible  there,  and  in  the 
research. They mainly receive attention in connection with 
projects  on  quality 
improvement  or  organizational 
efficiency,  and  few  studies  display  more  than  a  passing 
interest in porters’ work per se [29, 37, 40, 52, 54]. Thus, as 
digitization of healthcare expands in scope and depth, there 
is a need to study hospital porters from a cooperative work 
perspective. 

investigated 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

THEORY 
The  analysis  in  this  paper  is  informed  by  the  strand  of 
symbolic interactionism focusing on work [45, 48], and its 
further development within healthcare [47] and CSCW [44, 
42, 41]. One of the central aims of symbolic interactionism 
is to make visible the effort that goes into the interactions 
among  actors,  which  tends  to  be  overlooked  or  rendered 
insignificant by rationalistic accounts of action [48: chpt 1]. 
Hence,  rather  than  assuming  that  cooperation  takes  place, 
the aim is to make visible how cooperation is achieved by 
actors’  monitoring,  reflection  on,  and  alignment  of  their 
actions,  depending  on  whether 
the  accumulation  of 
interactions  points  to  desired  goals  [ibid].  We  briefly 
outline some of the central concepts of our analysis. 
Since cooperation is an achievement, an initial focus is on 
how  individual  actors’  stances  and  acts  are  aligned  to 
contribute  to  the  cooperative  goals.  Then,  efforts  at 
articulation  work  may  be  made  to  coordinate  tasks  and 
subtasks, which actors to involve and when, equipment, and 
so on. Alignment and articulation work is often reduced, as 
routines,  divisions  of  work,  and  standard  operating 
procedures (SOP) emerge, and will often be minimal – and 
hence  unnoticed  –  as  long  as  interactions  develop  along 
recurrent  patterns  and  trajectories.  Articulation  work  may 
be invested in working out arrangements that agree on who 
does  what,  when,  by  which  means,  according  to  which 
standards,  and  so  on.  [48]  [47].  SOPs  and  arrangements 
may  be  inscribed  as  protocols  for  action  on  different 
materials,  such  as  paper  or  IT  systems,  or  artifacts,  and 
hence  as  coordination  mechanisms,  achieve  a  more  stable 
existence  over  time  and  space  [41:  p165-166].  While 
coordination mechanisms may be understood more broadly 
as  any  material  or  immaterial  way  of  coordinating  work 
(e.g.  [30]),  here  we  employ  it  in  the  above  more  specific 
sense  as  a  combination  of  a  protocol  and  an  artifact.  An 
important factor in the ongoing alignment and coordination 
of work is awareness, with which actors display their own 
acts and monitor others’ acts, and thus recursively adjust to 
how work processes unfold [24, 44]. 
Since  cooperative  work  is  most  often  distributed,  the 
challenges  of  coordination  and  communication  are  greatly 
augmented. Aligning and articulating work and arriving at 
and keeping up arrangements are more cumbersome  when 
not  done  collocated,  and  the  need  for  communication  and 
stabilization  of  routines  and  arrangements  is  stronger,  and 
most  often  solved  through  coordination  mechanism.  This 
pertains  both  to  being  aware  of  the  status  of  the  overall 
cooperative arrangement – the group of cooperating actors 
as constituted by their interdependent activities – as well as 
the  common  field  of  work  –  the  interconnected  processes, 
objects, and actors with which the cooperative arrangement 
interacts [42: p20]. 
Discovering, describing, analyzing, and making cooperative 
work  visible  are  central  to  the  design  and  development  of 
IT  systems,  since  otherwise,  these  are  in  danger  of 

967

is 

hindering,  rather  than  supporting  work,  or  becoming 
outright obsolete (e.g. [14]). However, making work visible 
entails  challenges.  What  work  is  visible  (or  not),  and 
whether  this  is  beneficial  or  detrimental,  depends  on 
context,  and  is  constantly  negotiated.  Star  and  Strauss 
propose  four  ways  in  which  work  may  be  invisible:  by 
creating  non-persons  who  are  not  noticed  (e.g.  domestic 
work);  dis-embedding  background  work  (e.g.  nurses’  and 
secretaries’  work,  which 
taken  for  granted,  and 
unnoticed);  going  backstage  (e.g.  dish-washing;  janitorial 
work);  and  abstraction  and  indicator  manipulation  (e.g. 
visualizing  work  through  graphs  and  tables)  [45].  Being 
invisible in these ways is usually not an advantage for the 
actors with respect to status, salary, or rights. On the other 
hand, keeping work invisible may be a privilege that many 
managers  and  people  in  high  positions  maintain.  Making 
work visible may entail having to account for one’s actions 
according  to  other  peoples’  standards:  hence,  neither  the 
CEO, nor the janitor may be happy to let the other look at 
their  work  schedules.  As  Star  and  Strauss  caution: 
“…forced  representation  of  work  (especially  that  which 
results  in  computer  support)  may  kill  the  very  processes 
which  are  the  target  of  support,  by  destroying  naturally 
occurring information exchange, stories, and networks” [45: 
p24]. Since CSCW systems are often also “technologies of 
accountability”  that  represent  and  produce  accounts  of 
work, while at the same time enabling and supporting that 
work,  the  negotiation  of  (in)visibility  is  often  a  central 
concern,  and  usually  within  the  context  of  asymmetric 
power relations [14, 49]. 
Generalizations  should  be  made  cautiously,  but  from  the 
above  section  on  related  work,  it  seems  that  porters  are 
invisible in several ways. They are not noticed, and become 
“non-persons”:  Rapport 
fieldwork 
experience with “Being a porter meant dealing with being a 
nothing” [37: p57]. Porters also seem subject to processes 
of  “dis-embedding  background  work,”  since  they  mainly 
become visible in cases of “breaching situations,” where the 
normal  hospital  processes  break  down,  or  are  inefficient: 
quality improvement projects [16, 17, 50]; hospital mergers 
[15], restructuring [16]; inefficient use of costly equipment, 
such as that in operating rooms, and CT and MR scanners 
[29]; and negative feedback from other departments }[50]. 
Finally, porters’ work is presented through abstraction and 
indicators,  since  central  factors  of  these  quality  and 
efficiency projects are performance measures and statistics 
through  which  porters’  work 
is  planned  and  made 
accountable to managers [15, 17, 26, 29, 50]. However, as 
we  argue,  much  depends  on  the  actual  ecology  of 
(in)visibility and its asymmetries, which again depends on 
the way IT is designed and introduced, and on how work is 
reorganized.  
SETTING AND METHODS 
To become a porter in Denmark, one must pass a six-week 
course  and  work  in  that  capacity  for  eight  months,  at  the 
end  of  which  one  must  complete  a  20-day  theory  course. 

summarized  his 

However, the position of “hospital porter” is being revised, 
since  some  hospitals  merge  it  with  that  of  “cleaning 
assistant,”  for  a  newer  position  of  “hospital  service 
assistant,”  which  includes  cleaning,  as  well  as  portering 
services.  This  has  met  with  some  resistance,  since  most 
porters are men, some of whom do not want to clean, and 
most  cleaners  are  women,  some  of  whom  find  some 
porters’ tasks too physically demanding [20]. 
The  university  hospital  where  the  current  study  was 
conducted  has  approximately  6,500  employees,  950  beds, 
and  treats  more  than  550,000  outpatients  per  year.  It 
consists  of  five  geographically  distributed  sections,  of 
which the research site – Section South – is the largest. The 
logistics  department 
includes  several  units:  one  for 
sterilizing equipment, Internal Mail, The Chapel, and Porter 
Central.  This  last  employs  114  porters,  of  which  4  are 
women, and a (male) dispatcher who takes care of the daily 
coordination of tasks, porters, and work schedules. 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

TMS aims to make scheduling, coordination, and execution 
of tasks visible to both porters and clinicians. Clinicians can 
request  and  prioritize  porter  tasks,  and  enter  written 
comments, for instance, “Bring lift.” They can also follow 
the status of tasks (pending, booked, started) in a web-based 
desktop  application  available  at  the  wards.  At  their  end, 
porters can view and assign themselves the incoming tasks 
via smartphones. They can also keep themselves updated on 
colleagues’ tasks and locations, in order to coordinate work, 
since  TMS  tracks  their  positions  in  real-time  via  Wi-FI. 
Moreover,  a  large,  widescreen  display  in  the  porters’ 
common room shows an overview of all current tasks and 
their  statuses,  as  well  as  of  porters’  availability  and 
locations.  Thus,  an  overview  of  the  total  workload  is 
provided to porters and the dispatcher. 
TMS  has  been  running  as  a  pilot  project  at  Section  South 
since February 2013. During this test phase, the IT vendor 
developed new features, trying to elicit as much feedback as 
possible before introducing the system at other hospitals.  

Figure 1. Aerial photo of Section South 

the  central  elevator 

The  Porter  Central  is  located  in  the  heart  of  the  main 
building  on  the  1st floor, providing  easy  access  to  the 
basement  corridors  and 
tower 
connecting  the  wards  on  10  different  floors.  However, 
renovations  and  the  addition  of  new  buildings  pose  new 
challenges  to  the  internal  logistics.  Until  last  year,  porters 
worked  in  six  teams  allocated  to  specific  departments, 
which have been pooled, and now cover the whole hospital. 
The  logistics  department  has  considered,  but  not  yet 
implemented, the position of “hospital service assistant.” 
The Task Management System 
The Task Management System (TMS), newly developed by 
an  IT  vendor,  is  a  scheduling  system  that  aims  to  address 
the  challenges  of  coordinating  and  streamlining  porter 
tasks.  Before  TMS,  clinicians  at  the  hospital  phoned  in 
tasks to the dispatcher, who then contacted porters by radio 
or  by  telephone.  A  recurrent  problem  with  information 
being  passed  on  verbally  was  frequent  misunderstandings 
between dispatcher, porters, and clinicians. Also, tasks were 
not  always  given  to  the  closest,  but  to  the  first  available 
porter.  Combined  with  a  constant,  incoming  stream  of 
planned  and  ad-hoc 
inefficient 
workflow,  long  waiting  times,  and  at  worst,  cancelled 
treatments and surgeries. 

tasks, 

this  meant  an 

 
Figure 2. Task list on porter’s smartphone (left); task-request 

interface for clinical staff (right) (translated into English) 

Data collection and processing 
Data  for  this  study  was  generated  in  two  phases  by  the 
second  author.  In  the  first  phase,  the  second  author  took 
part in the pilot project at Section South for six months as 
UX  designer  for  the  IT  vendor.  This  involved  visits  to 
wards,  usability  tests  with  porters  and  clinicians,  and 
meetings  with  the  dispatcher  and  the  logistics  managers. 
The  detailed  knowledge  gained  during 
this  period, 
regarding  TMS,  the  organization  of  porters’  work,  and 
South Section, informed the next phase. 
In  the  second  phase,  the  second  author  was  no  longer 
affiliated  with  the  IT  vendor,  and  conducted  university-
based,  three-stage  ethnographic  fieldwork  over  a  three-
month  period.  First,  23  hours  of  focused  participatory 
observation with nine different porters was conducted over 
five different days (varying among day, evening, and night 
shifts). Comprehensive and detailed field notes were taken 
during  or 
shortly  after  each  observation.  During 
observation, the second author wore a porter’s uniform, had 
a smartphone running the TMS, and participated in porters’ 
work.  Second,  five  different  meetings  were  held  with 
clinicians  and  mid-level-managers,  with  a  common  focus 
on sharing experience of the  use of TMS to handle porter 

968

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

the 

tasks.  The  meetings  were  arranged  by 
logistics 
managers,  and  the  participants  were  internal  hospital  staff 
from various wards using the TMS. The second author was 
invited to participate because of his knowledge of the UX 
design of TMS, and as part of his research. Third, 12 open-
ended  interviews  were  conducted  with  porters,  clinicians, 
the dispatcher, a union representative, and the managers of 
the  logistics  department  (shortest  29  min;  longest  53  min; 
average  36  min).  The 
interviews  supplemented  and 
followed up on the findings from the observation and five 
meetings.  All  meetings  and  interviews  were  recorded  and 
transcribed verbatim, and total 16 hours. 
The second author’s dual role – as first a UX designer and 
then  academic  researcher  –  did  provide  a  strong  basis  for 
the data collection, but at the same time entailed a certain 
ambiguity  of  his  roles  at  the  site.  Sometimes,  it  was 
necessary  to  explicitly  clarify  this  role  and  the  interest  in 
being  in  the  field  in  order  to  clarify  confusions  or 
presumptions: 
Back  in  common  room  two  porters  who  I  previously  followed 
around the hospital during observations ask me why exactly I’m 
interested  in  hospital  porters?  They  previously  saw  me  chatting 
with the Head of Logistics and they might be unclear and a little 
sceptic  about  my  intentions.  I  pointed  out  that  my  presence  had 
nothing to do with them being measured or monitored, but strictly 
had a research purpose. (Field note, November 2014) 
It is possible that the dual roles led to porters, management 
or  the  IT  vendor  to  provide  partial  or  biased  information, 
but  no  such  explicit  situations  were  discovered.  Moving 
between  different  context,  the  second  author  keen  to  act 
responsibly  and  not  disclose  information  that  might  be 
sensitive. Further, in analysing the data effort was made to 
include  all  perspectives  gathered  and  be  aware  of  the 
various perspectives that data reflected. 

Figure 3. Porters and dispatcher looking at the large screen 

display in the common room 

 

The data underwent a preliminary processing and meaning 
condensation to explore the generated data and its analytical 
potential.  Subsequently,  the  data  was  analyzed  with  the 
purpose  of  identifying  common  thematic  characteristics. 
After  thematizing  the  data,  a  more  categorical  process  of 
coding  and  quantifying  the  findings  were  conducted,  to 
narrow down categories, and to help set the scope of further 
analysis.  This 
thematic  codes: 

resulted 

in 

seven 

situational 

organizational  change,  task  prioritization,  coordination  of 
work, 
environment, 
surveillance,  and  business  intelligence.  Subsequently,  the 
analyzed  data  was  worked  into  the  analysis  presented 
below, sensitized by the theories presented above. 

overview,  working 

 

 Figure 4. The hospital porters’ common room. The text says 

“Co-responsibility for seamless patient progress” 

THE COLLABORATIVE WORK OF HOSPITAL PORTERS 
Since  porters’  work  is  inherently  distributed  and  mobile, 
communicating  and  coordinating  tasks  is  challenging.  At 
some hospitals, the work arrangement is based on multiple 
local teams of porters  who communicate face-to-face  with 
the  clinicians.  At  other  hospitals,  porters’  work  has  been 
centralized,  with  a  dispatcher  coordinating  tasks  between 
clinicians  and  porters  via  pagers  or  phones.  In  the  former 
case,  cooperation  and  awareness  are  facilitated  by  co-
location,  whereas  in  the  latter,  a  more  elaborate  work 
arrangement is required. 
Tasks, rhythms, spaces, and places 
Hospital  porters  have  a  variety  of  tasks,  some  of  which 
involve  patient  contact,  such  as  mobilizing  patients  (e.g. 
moving  a  patient  from  the  bed  to  a  wheelchair),  patient 
transportation  in  beds  or  wheelchairs,  and  assisting  other 
staff in cases of cardiac arrest or other kinds of trauma (e.g. 
patient  falls  to  the  floor).  Other  tasks  include  transport  of 
debris,  equipment,  and  beds  to  and  from  departments, 
examination or operating rooms, and the bed-cleaning unit. 
Porter tasks inevitably involve moving around, whether the 
tasks involve mobilizing a patient in one place, or moving a 
patient  or  equipment  from  one  department  to  another. 
However, some places are more central to the porters than 
others.  This  includes  the  Porter  Central  and  the  common 
room; the bed-cleaning unit and depot; the aids and utilities 
depot,  conveniently  next  to  the  Emergency  Department, 
since patients here often need a wheelchair or crutches; the 
reception  desks  at  departments  where  porters  have  to 
announce their arrival; the elevator; and the goods lifts that 
are  accessible  only  with  an  identity  card.  The  latter  two 
often become bottlenecks that cause delays for porters. 
Although  some  tasks  are  recurrent  and  planned,  many 
others are ad hoc. An overall daily rhythm is provided by a 
morning  meeting  at  7am  on  weekdays,  and  the  day, 
afternoon  and  night  shifts  (7am-4pm;  4pm-midnight; 
midnight-7am). During the day shift, most porter tasks are 

969

ad hoc, since the demand arises mainly in connection with 
patient  care,  examinations,  and  treatments,  as  physicians 
make their ward rounds and nurses provide care. 
Although physicians and nurses have their own rhythms in 
the departments [38] [56], porters work across departments 
usually  likely  have  different  rhythms,  which  means  that 
new task requests come without any pattern, except a peak 
around  noon  (see  Table  1).  Most  tasks  are  typically 
scheduled  during  the  afternoon  and  night  shifts,  for 
example, mobilizing (e.g. turning) patients at the intensive 
care  units  every  4  hours,  to  prevent  bedsores,  or  moving 
cleaned beds to departments from the bed depot or cleaning 
unit.  At  all  times,  however,  emergencies  such  as  cardiac 
arrest may interrupt porters’ tasks. 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

between  porters  in  corridors,  chatting,  and  helping  each 
other out with locating places and equipment, for example. 
 
Porters also have contact with other professions, most often 
the nurses who book porter tasks, must be notified when the 
porter  arrives  to  pick  up  or  deliver  equipment  or  patients, 
and  sometimes  help  porters  with 
tasks. 
Although often cordial, this cooperation is at times strained, 
when equipment is missing, either because the nurse did not 
enter it when booking, or because the porter did not read the 
note. Or, when waiting times for porters lengthen, and slow 
departments’ processes, which stresses nurses. 
 

two-persons 

Table 1. Workload during a representative day

On average, 35 porters take care of approximately 700 tasks 
every day. Staffing and workload are displayed in Table 1, 
below, based on data from the TMS from a representative 
day: 75% of all 726 tasks were handled during the day shift, 
which is also when most porters are present. 
Overall,  one  might  think  that  task  unpredictability  would 
stress porters, but instead, they see this as a motivator: 
It’s  the  variety  that  work  can  offer.  You  never  know  your  work 
day.  You  think  you  do, but  you don’t.  It is  different  from day  to 
day, which I highly appreciate. (Male porter, 48 years) 
Another motivating factor is the contact with patients: 
You meet a lot of nice people. Of course, also people in crisis, and 
then it’s great that you can be there for them, when they need it. 
And patients actually use us a lot, ‘cause when a doctor arrives 
there’s  only  time  to  talk  disease,  since  the  doctor’s  time  is 
expensive. No small talk there. So instead, patients off-load a lot 
on us, which I actually appreciate hugely. (Male porter, 34 years) 
Both  statements  align  with  Saunders’  finding  that  “The 
variety of the work and its people-orientation holds … great 
attraction  for  many  porters”  [40:  p31].  At  the  same  time, 
among  the  almost  exclusively  male  porters,  the  tone  is 
straightforward,  comparable  to  that  of  dock  workers,  but 
usually confined within the Porter Central. 
In addition to contact with patients, porters also collaborate 
with  one  another.  Obviously,  this  is  the  case  with  two-
person assignments, for example, lifting a bedridden patient 
when  changing  sheets  or  a  mattress,  or  moving  patients 
from one bed to another. It also includes random meetings 

970

Figure 5. Two porters wheeling a bed into an elevator 

 

the 

changes 

associated  with 

Porters’ work arrangements before the TMS 
To  understand 
the 
implementation  of  TMS,  an  outline  of  the  cooperative 
arrangement of porters’ work before that is in place. Since 
it only serves to set the new work arrangement in context, 
and is based on retrospective accounts from interviews, the 
outline will be brief. 
Previously,  articulation  and  coordination  of  porter  tasks 
were  handled  during  the  day  shift  by  a  central  dispatcher, 
who would receive requests for a porter over the telephone, 
from  the  departments.  Outside  the  day  shift,  calls  were 
automatically  forwarded  to  a  phone  chain,  locating  a 
random porter. 
In  order  to  coordinate  and  delegate  portering  tasks  we  used  to 
have  a  dispatcher  who  worked  full  time  answering  calls  from 
clinical  wards  needing  portering  services.  The  phone  would 
normally  ring  2-3  times  every  5  minutes  and  the  line  was  often 
very  busy  during  the  day  shift.  Outside  day  shifts  and  weekends 
the calls were forwarded to the porters via a phone chain (Head of 
logistics) 
Receiving  calls,  the  dispatcher  would  request  necessary 
information  about  the  task,  such  as  place,  time,  type, 
necessary  equipment  or  means  of  transport,  and  select  a 
porter to do the task, based on his knowledge of the location 
and availability of various porters. To keep an overview, he 
used  various  artifacts:  a  staff  schedule,  a  task  list,  small 
blocks with porters’ names on them, notes, and a division of 
his  desktop  into  two  zones:  one  for  available  porters,  the 
other  for  porters  on  assignment.  After  receiving  calls,  the 
dispatcher wrote a task on the task list, and on a note that 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

was then attached to an available porter’s block,  which in 
turn  was  put  in  the  zone  for  “on  assignment.”  Having 
completed a task, porters would call back to the dispatcher, 
who would then remove the note, and move the block to the 
“available”  zone.  However, 
this  procedure  was  not 
followed strictly, and the dispatcher relied to a large extent 
on  memory  and 
longstanding  knowledge  of  staff, 
departments, rhythms, and so on. 
Even  though  I  have  worked  as  a  porter  here  at  the  hospital  for 
more than 15 years it was necessary to use this very manual and 
old-fashioned  system  in  order  to  organize  and  keep  overview  of 
our workload. (Male Dispatcher, 41 years) 
The  foregoing  way  of  organizing  porters  meant  that 
prioritizing  and  assigning  tasks  were  at  the  dispatcher’s 
discretion,  and  hence  the  articulation  and  coordination  of 
work opaque to the porters, who did not know the overall 
workload,  or  whether  or  not  they  were  as  busy  as  their 
colleagues,  except  when  they  met  during  breaks  in  the 
common room. Their awareness of the overall cooperative 
arrangement  and  the  status  of  the  common  field  of  work 
was limited. 

 

Figure 6. Dispatcher’s desktop: staff schedule, blocks with 

porters’ names, and task list 

Increased visibility and influence of porters 
With the implementation of TMS, the work arrangement for 
the porters’ tasks changed. Departments could now request 
porter  tasks,  just  as  porters  could  accept  requested  tasks, 
without the dispatcher as an intermediary. Departments had 
an overview of all the tasks they had requested, ordered by 
time  of  booking,  though  critical  tasks  were  at  the  top. 
Porters  had  a  list  of  all  requested  tasks  on  their  smart 
phones, also with critical tasks at the top, and the dispatcher 
would have an overview of all tasks, and the location of all 
porters and their availability on his office at porter central. 
For  porters,  TMS  literally  meant  increased  visibility, 
because their smart phones had a frog croak as the ringtone, 
which stood out from all other sounds at the departments.  
Clinicians were curious after we got the system and they heard 
these small croaks from our pockets, when we were in the 
departments. It makes it quite clear that we are present. They are 
used to sounds from equipment in the rooms, but this croaking 
stands out. (Male Porter, 34 years) 
This increased visibility was confirmed by a radiographer:  

971

tasks  on 

I experience the porters differently now. They have become more 
visible out here in the departments (Male Radiographer, 46 years) 
TMS  also  reduced  the  number  of  misunderstandings  or 
duplicate  work  for  porters,  since  the  departments  could 
write requirements for equipment or means of transport into 
the booking request. A medical secretary said: 
It is great that the porter knows the task in advance and can see 
the  patient’s  name,  room  number,  where  the  patient  should  go, 
and if there are any special needs. It makes it easier for me and 
the porter when they arrive here. (Medical secretary, bed ward) 
Similar sentiments were expressed by the porters: 
It  is  cool  that  they  [the  clinicians]  themselves  note  that  I  must 
bring a lift sling, a wheelchair, or a lift. Before, when they phoned 
in, they often f****** forgot to tell us these details, which cost us 
time.  There  are  fewer  misunderstandings  now.  (Male  Porter,  34 
years) 
Another change was that, instead of being assigned tasks by 
the  dispatcher,  porters  accepted 
their  own 
initiative,  based  on  priority,  their  location,  and  a  general 
overview  of  booked  tasks  and  colleagues’  availability  and 
locations.  They  could  actively  use  their  judgment  and 
knowledge  of  how  to  best  coordinate  their  tasks,  and 
contribute  to  the  overall  work  processes.  They  gained 
influence on, and responsibility for their work. 
Previously, we would call the dispatcher when we had completed 
a task, and he sat with all the tasks on a piece of paper and sent us 
out.  He  assessed  which  task  had  highest  priority,  or  what  was 
closest.  We  did  not  have  any  influence  on  that.  With  the  new 
system, I feel it’s less hectic. I know what I am doing now, what 
the  next  task  will  be,  and  I  can  better  plan  two  to  three  tasks 
ahead. It has become more independent. (Male Porter, 48 years) 
Increased awareness 
TMS also meant changes to the awareness actors had of the 
cooperative arrangement as well as of the common field of 
work, since actions of clinicians and porters regarding tasks 
could  be  displayed  to  and  monitored  by  each  other.  As 
mentioned,  porters  now  had  an  overview  of  all  tasks  and 
porters  and  their  statuses,  which  was  a  significant  change 
from previously, when they only got new information from 
the dispatcher, or from colleagues in the common room, or 
from  random  encounters 
the  corridors.  However, 
establishing an overview was still somewhat of a challenge, 
since the smartphone  screens only allowed  for the display 
of three to four tasks at a time, and scrolling was required to 
see the remaining 70 or more pending tasks. 
The increased awareness of tasks and colleagues triggered 
different reactions. On the appreciative side, a porter said: 
Previously, I had a bit of this feeling of “am I the only one making 
an effort?” At that time, the phone called all the time, and when 
you  had  just  ended  a  call,  the  next  would  come  in.  I  became 
stressed. And then you start wondering whether the others just sit 
and drink coffee. But now I can see that they are working as much 
as I am. And I just take one task at a time, and am aware of what 
is most pressing. (Male Porter, 34 years) 

in 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

the  dispatcher  has 

workload,  and  although 
the  best 
overview  of  tasks,  porter  availability  and  location,  he 
cannot  see  the  actual  work,  micro-coordination,  and  local 
contingencies  occurring  in  the  corridors,  and  at  the 
departments. 
New challenges: Prioritizing and new tasks 
Although 
improving  coordination  and  communication 
between  porters  and  departments,  TMS  also  entailed  new 
challenges.  Thus,  porters  reported  that  departments  had 
begun  to  book  tasks  not  previously  handled  by  porters, 
because TMS made booking easier. 
It is a disadvantage of this system that booking is much easier for 
nurses.  All  sorts  of  silly  tasks  come  up.  Previously,  when  they 
phoned in, you could talk them out of it or tell that “you just have 
to walk five meters, and your pillows are right there.” Now we get 
strange bookings, and we do not understand why they do not just 
do it themselves. (Male porter, 48 years) 
Hence,  since  communication  between  departments  and 
porters  was  now  direct,  without 
the  dispatcher  as 
intermediary, the screening of bookings was lost. 
Without the dispatcher, prioritizing tasks was now done by 
the  departments  themselves.  Normally,  porters  prioritize 
tasks  according  to  when  they  were  booked,  though  some 
patient-related  tasks  have  higher  priority  than  others:  this 
includes CT scans, transport of heart, chemo, thrombosis or 
trauma patients, and tasks from the Emergency Department. 
At  the  same  time,  clinicians  at  the  departments  can  label 
tasks  as  “critical”  or  “normal.”  Although  porters  take 
“critical” to mean “life-threatening,” clinicians at times use 
“critical” in the sense of “urgent” – especially when waiting 
times are long. An observation note:  
Looking  at  bookings  with  an  experienced  porter.  A  critical  task 
pops  up  in  TMS.  It  is  red,  the  sound  is  different,  and  it  is 
automatically at the top of the list of the porters’ phones. It says 
“Patient in wheelchair.” This is not a critical task he says, and is 
a bit annoyed about the difference between porters’ and nurses’ 
interpretation  of  “critical.”  Some  nurses  order  “critical”  tasks 
when  waiting  times  are  longer,  he  says.  (Field  note,  October 
2014) 
The  problem  is  partly  one  of  perspective.  Although 
departments  prioritize  depending  on  a  patient’s  state,  and 
on their own stress and articulation of work, porters have to 
prioritize  tasks  from  different  departments:  They  consider 
their  overall  workload,  knowledge  of  local  contingencies, 
such  as  queues  at  elevators,  in  addition  to  understanding 
“critical” as “life-threatening,” rather than “urgent for us.” 
New  routines  also  developed.  Since  Radiology  required 
many  simple  tasks  demanding  little  time  or  within  a 
particular  time  frame,  they  agreed  with  porters  to  note 
“23:59” as the required time. These tasks would then be at 
the  end  of  the  list  of  bookings,  and  the  porters  dealt  with 
them whenever appropriate during the day. 

However, another porter felt less relief and more stress: 
We  still  walk  incredible  distances.  More  than  before,  if  you  ask 
me.  Previously,  we  could  sit  down  for  five  minutes,  and  have  a 
break  in  addition  to  the  morning  and  lunch  breaks.  We  can’t, 
really, any more. Your conscience sees that we are behind. There 
are always tasks to do. (Male Porter, 42 years) 
For  the  same  reasons,  the  large  screen  in  porter  central 
displaying  all  tasks,  was  often  turned  off:  The  porters  did 
not like the beeping and display to tell them that tasks were 
waiting when having their breaks.  
For  the  clinicians,  TMS  provided  a  visible  list  of  all  the 
booked tasks at the department, and they could keep track 
of  whether  or  not,  when  and  for  what  time  a  request  had 
been  made,  and  whether  it  had  been  booked  by  a  porter. 
However, they could not see the locations of porters, or the 
overall waiting times or workloads of porters. They gained 
more awareness of their own bookings, but not of bookings 
of other departments, or the porters’ workload.  
Mentally, if we knew that waiting times were long, then ok. Then 
that is the situation. It would be nice to know. Maybe, it could be 
communicated? (Female Radiographer, 37 years) 
For  the  Radiology  Department  in  particular,  the  lack  of 
mutual  awareness  among  departments  was  a  problem:  In 
cases of critical incidents, they could not inform the other 
departments to not send patients: 
When  we  have  a  long  list  of  patients  coming  in  from  different 
departments, and a trauma case suddenly arrives, then all plans 
go  askew  and  we  close  everything.  The  problem  is  that  neither 
porters nor other departments can see that we have a trauma case, 
and shouldn’t send over any patients. (Female Radiographer, 37 
years) 
TMS  does  not  presently  support  such  communication  on 
waiting  times  or  trauma  cases  at  Radiology,  for  example, 
because  it  was  primarily  developed  with  the  porters  in 
mind. 
As for the dispatcher, his function was maintained, though 
his  tasks  have  changed  somewhat.  As  mentioned,  the 
dispatcher has two screens with overviews of all tasks and 
the locations of all porters. These large screens provide him 
with a better overview of all tasks than the porters have on 
their  smartphones,  and  at  times,  he  intervenes  and  calls 
porters to assign them tasks, if he thinks they have missed a 
nearby  or  high  priority  task.  Also,  he  still  receives  phone 
calls  from  departments,  mainly  concerning  the  length  of 
waiting  times,  or  technicalities  of  the  TMS.  Hence,  IT 
support has become part of his job. 
Overall,  TMS  means  improved,  though  still  asymmetrical 
and  partial,  awareness  of  the  work  arrangement.  Porters 
now know the status of tasks and colleagues and can hence 
align  and  articulate  work  themselves,  though  gaining  a 
general  overview  of  all  tasks  is  challenging;  departments 
can  see  their  own  bookings,  but  not  those  of  other 
departments,  nor  the  locations  of  porters  or  the  overall 

972

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Accountability: The Porter Management Info system 
Although TMS partially increased awareness and enabled a 
new  kind  of  cooperation,  it  was  also  a  technology  of 
accountability. Its database on all tasks included a range of 
timestamps  for  when 
tasks  were  booked,  accepted, 
commenced,  rejected,  and  completed,  and  which  could  be 
used to visualize and account for porters’ work in different 
ways. 
During  the  trial  implementation  the  first  prototype,  which 
we  call  Porter  Management  Info  (PMI),  the  use  of  the 
database was developed by the second author. It displayed 
the  number  of  tasks  completed  per  department,  kinds  of 
tasks  per  week,  day,  and  hour,  and  average  response  and 
waiting times. Through meetings between the vendor, head 
of 
logistics,  hospital  management,  dispatcher,  and 
clinicians, three different aims for such a system emerged: 
a)  to  report  on  Porter  Central’s  performance  to  hospital 
management,  and  pinpoint 
inefficient  organization  of 
hospital  logistics;  b)  to  communicate  with  departments  to 
explain  interconnections  between  their  and  porters’  work 
rhythms,  and  explain  how  and  when  increased  waiting 
times  emerged;  c)  to  gain  insight  into  porters’  work  and 
optimize it, within Porter Central. 
For hospital management, portering services are important, 
since they influence many other processes, and optimization 
is a priority. For example, PMI was used to pinpoint which 
departments would be hardest hit by a planned reduction of 
elevator  capacity  owing 
thus, 
management  could  take  preventive  measures.  Also,  the 
head of the logistics department used PMI to document that 
Porter  Central  needed  additional  staff,  if  tasks  were  to  be 
completed  on  time,  and  should  hire  six  new  employees. 
Local  management  sees  the  potential  of  being  able  to 
investigate work details. The dispatcher said: 
S*** always rolls downhill. Every time there is a scolding in this 
house, it usually comes to us. So I need this to document that there 
were problems with an elevator, or that a patient was not ready. 
Maybe  a  nurse  wasn’t  present.  It’s  to  keep  our  slate  clean,  and 
show what the real cause for delay is (Dispatcher, 41 years) 
As for communication with other departments, an example 
is the head of logistics using PMI to show Radiology  that 
they were the heaviest users of porter services, and that they 
tended to book tasks less than five minutes before needing 
them.  Since  it  took  an  average  of  seven  minutes  to  walk 
from Porter Central to Radiology, the statistics for waiting 
times  were  significantly  in  the  negative,  and  with  good 
reason,  since  porters  would  already  be  behind  schedule 
before commencing these tasks. 
Finally, the head of logistics and the dispatcher used PMI as 
a 
tool  at  Porter  Central,  for  staff  scheduling  and 
optimization.  For  example,  at  a  morning  meeting,  the 
dispatcher  would tell the porters that  he could see in PMI 
that  they  accepted  tasks  from  the  Department  of  Internal 
Medicine  last,  and  encouraged  them  to  prioritize  these 
more. However, the head of logistics and the dispatcher did 

to  maintenance,  and 

not present the PMI statistics or diagrams to the porters, so 
for them it was opaque what management could see in PMI. 
Also, the dispatcher had a large screen in his office showing 
PMI data, which was not available on the large screen in the 
porters’ common room. 
Porters acknowledged local management’s need for PMI in 
communication  with  hospital  management  and  other 
departments, but were also uneasy about being surveyed: 
…I  think  that  is  what  troubles  most  of  us –  the  feeling  of  being 
surveyed. Everything has to be registered. How long we are to do 
tasks, and so on. (Male porter, 48 years) 
On the other hand, the head of logistics was less worried: 
I  think  the  porters  know that  we,  as  management,  do not  survey 
them … But there is more self-regulation now. And that lessens the 
need for us to run around and keep an eye on them. We don’t need 
to, and we don’t bother, either (Head of logistics) 
He  was  more  concerned  about  internal  competition  and 
bullying among porters, due to the increased transparency. 
Depending  on 
the  actual  use  and  organizational 
implementation, this concern may not be totally unfounded: 
Dershin  and  Shaik  report  that  “transporter  reports”  on 
individual porters’ performance acted as an incentive tool, 
with  management  recognizing  the  best-performing  porter, 
and increasing competition among porters [17: p118]. More 
generally, Barker describes how self-managing teams ended 
up  tightly  monitoring  one  another’s  performances,  and 
enforcing concertive control [6]. 
However, TMS and PMI also introduce a potential conflict 
about how to define tasks. The dispatcher and departments 
understood  tasks  to  begin  when  a  porter  arrived  at  the 
department, whereas for a porter, a task may begin when he 
goes to get a wheelchair needed for the task. Similarly, for a 
porter, a task may not be “complete” when he arrived with a 
patient  at  a  department,  but  when  he  had  put  back 
equipment in place: 
For me, a task begins when I book it, and it is not over until I have 
put back the oxygen-pump, lift, and all equipment in their places. 
So a task may take half an hour, but in management’s terms it has 
taken 15 minutes. What are we doing in the missing 15 minutes? I 
think it is wrong to register in that way. I might already commence 
a task when going to the depot to get a lift. (Porter, 48 years) 
TMS did not allow porters to be engaged in two tasks at a 
time, which, however, might easily be the case: on the way 
to commence, or during one task, a porter might pick up a 
piece  of  equipment  needed  for  the  next  upcoming  task.  A 
strict  rule  regarding  how  to  register  had  not  yet  been 
enforced,  maybe  because  TMS  had  only  recently  been 
implemented, but if the representations that PMI produces 
obtain a directing and controlling role, this may change, and 
a “flip-over effect” may arise [33] [39]: Rather than being a 
representation  of  work,  PMI  may  become  a  procedure  for 
that  work.  Then,  who  and  how  “23:59,”  “commenced,” 
“completed,” and the time between tasks (“idle” or “on the 
move between tasks”) are interpreted becomes important. 

973

case 

for 

thinking 

about 

(in)visibilities 

All in all, TMS worked as a system for the coordination of 
portering  services  and  cooperation,  and  gave  porters  more 
influence  on,  and  responsibility  for  their  work,  increased 
awareness  of  the  overall  field  of  work  for  porters, 
departments,  and  local  management,  though  it  was  still 
partial  and  asymmetrical.  TMS  also  made  it  possible  to 
account for porters’ work, through statistics, diagrams, and 
provided  data  on  individual  tasks,  and  thus  may  also  be 
regarded as a technology of accountability.  
DISCUSSION 
The introduction of TMS meant porters had more influence 
on their work, awareness increased among all collaborators 
though  this  was  distributed  asymmetrically;  and  that 
porters’  work  was  made  visible  and  accountable  in  new 
ways, by new actors, including top management. Next, we 
discuss  two  aspects  of  this  change:  First,  the  relative 
openness  or  configurability  of  porters’  work  arrangement, 
which suggests possible implications  for re-design as  well 
as  spurs  reflections  on  the  rationales  of  porters’  work 
arrangements  across  settings.  Second,  the  implications  of 
this 
and 
accountabilities of work within CSCW. 
Configurations of hospital porters’ work arrangements 
The present work arrangement was the result of the recent 
pooling  of  porters  to  cover  the  hospital  as  a  whole,  the 
introduction of TMS, and the working out of new routines 
and  the  work  arrangement.  However,  the  resulting  work 
arrangement is only one of several possible configurations 
of  how  to  organize  porters’  work,  and  in  the  following 
paragraphs  we  both  suggest  new  opportunities  for  design 
and argue that there is a variety of ways to organize porters’ 
work.  This  is  in  line  with  studies  that  point  to  the 
configurability  and  flexibility  of  the  relations  between 
technology  and  organization  of  work  when  designing, 
implementing and appropriating IT systems [3, 7, 31]. 
Suggestions 
several 
contingencies in the present case. First, the function of the 
dispatcher  was  maintained,  due  in  part  to  the  need  for 
someone to have an overview of the 70+ ongoing tasks in 
TMS  on  a  large  screen,  since  overviews  on  the  small 
screens  on 
the  porters’  smartphones  were  difficult. 
However, this may be addressed by giving porters tablets or 
phablets  that  have  larger  screens,  and,  therefore,  better 
support  overview.  Another 
the 
dispatcher’s  function  was  management’s  doubts  about  the 
porters’  ability  to  collectively  coordinate  tasks  on  their 
own.  However,  this  could  be  addressed  by  developing  a 
culture of responsibility and accountability. 
Another 
asymmetrical 
the  present 
(in)visibilities of the work arrangement, which can also be 
changed. For example, the overview screen for all tasks and 
porters’ 
the 
departments, and thus give departments information on the 
porters’ overall  workload. Redesigns already suggested by 
the  departments  include  the  display  of  information  on 

locations  could  be  made  available 

reason 

for  keeping 

contingency 

is 

re-design 

emerge 

for 

from 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

average waiting times, or a chat function, so that porters or 
the  dispatcher  can  inform  departments  of  challenges  of  a 
larger  workload,  problems  with  elevators,  or  Radiology 
being  busy  with  trauma.  As  for  the  porters,  PMI  statistics 
could be made available on the large screen in the common 
room, and be discussed at the morning meetings, in order to 
show  what  information  PMI  has,  make  its  use  by  the 
dispatcher  and  head  of  logistics  transparent  to  the  porters 
and involve the porters in optimizing their services. 
The  configurability  of  work  arrangements  of  porters  work 
can be further elaborated by considering alternatives based 
on the studies presented in the section on Related Work. At 
some hospitals, porter services are decentralized, with tasks 
being ordered and carried out from  within  wards. In other 
hospitals, a central dispatcher hands on bookings to teams 
of four porters, who then coordinate internally on their own. 
Finally,  some  hospitals  have  pooled  all  porters,  and 
coordinate  through  a  central  dispatcher.  In  several  cases, 
pooling  all  porters,  as  in  our  case,  was  pursued  to  ensure 
greater  flexibility  and  efficiency  [15,  16].  In  another 
instance,  optimization  required  a  mix  of  local  teams  and 
pooling, to lessen demand on the overall services, by giving 
the department that used the  porters most its own team of 
porters  [29].  Such  configurability  for  technology-work 
relations  is  not  new  [3]  [31].  However,  as  several  authors 
have argued, there is a need to develop approaches to how 
and  why  similar  work  processes  using 
the  same 
technologies  differ  [ibid].  Randell  et  al  (2011)  use  multi-
cited  fieldwork  to  compare  patient  handovers  and  specify 
the  heterogeneity  of  practices,  actors  and  purposes  [35], 
while  Schmidt  et  al  (2007)  compare  two  oncology  wards 
and  argue  for  identifying  ‘deep  commonalities’  across 
settings, in addition to  making specific design suggestions 
for specific sites [43]. 
From the different studies upon porters’ work three specific 
challenges  –  or  ‘deep  communalities’  -  can  be  identified: 
communication,  coordination,  and  finding  the  adequate 
level  of  staffing.  As  for  the  challenge  of  communication 
several  studies  show  that  insufficient  information  is  a 
central source of stress, extra work for porters, and delayed 
completion  of  tasks,  and  that  thus  two-way,  direct  and 
hence  de-centralised  communication  between  porters  and 
clinicians seem to be called for. However, coordination of 
distributed actors seems in these studies to call for a central, 
coordinative place or function such as a porter central and a 
dispatcher  as  long  as  porters  do  not  themselves  have 
overview  of  all  tasks  and  colleagues.  Empirically,  the 
tendency  for  centralized  coordination  seems  to  outbalance 
the  need  for  direct  communication:  In  one  setting,  the 
centralized IT dispatch system could not communicate with 
porters, who instead had to call the dispatcher for new tasks 
or  clarifications  [15].  In  another  setting,  porters  received 
tasks  on  pagers  from  a  central  dispatcher  [16].  In  a  third 
case, a newly implemented IT system only allowed nurses 
to  send  booked  tasks  via  text  message  to  porters,  who 
however, could not respond or call back [52]. Finally, in a 

974

to 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

two-way 

fourth  case, 
radio  communication  between 
dispatcher  and  porters  was  supported,  but  not  between 
porters and clinicians [17]. 
The  tendency  for  centralization  is  augmented  by  the  third 
challenge  of  finding  an  adequate  level  of  staffing.  Since 
porters and tasks are distributed in space, and the number of 
unscheduled  tasks  is  high,  finding  a  balance  between 
having  enough  staff  in  peak  periods,  and  not  having  too 
much idle staff in other periods, requires information on the 
overall  workload  during 
the  day  and  week.  Hence 
management  efforts  in  our  case  and  other  studies  to 
generate  data  on  the  number  of  tasks,  their  duration, 
waiting,  dispatch  times,  location  of  porters,  and  so  forth 
[15-17, 26, 28, 50]. 
However, the rationales of two-way, direct communication; 
coordination  of  tasks;  and  finding  an  adequate  level  of 
staffing must not necessarily lead to more or less centrally 
controlled  work  arrangements:  As  this  study  of  TMS  and 
the  above  discussion  of  the  case’s  contingencies  shows, 
computer  support  can  be  designed  in  ways  that  enables 
decentralized  decision-making  and 
lets  porters  have 
influence on and responsibility  for their  work. Whether or 
not  one  or  the  other  solution  is  called  for  will  depend  on 
specific contexts and aims. 
Comparative  studies  of  work  arrangements  –  in  this  case; 
porters’ work – may serve to point out the specificities and 
contingencies  of  single-site  studies,  as  well  as 
the 
heterogeneity  of  possible  solutions  and 
their  overall 
rationales.  Thus,  we  support  the  call  for  studies  that  go 
across sites in order to spur to reflections on how IT design, 
implementation,  and  appropriation  can  be  formed  towards 
different goals [35, 43]. 
Accountabilities and visibilities 
CSCW  systems  often  simultaneously  support  cooperative 
work and are sources of data for the generation of accounts 
of that work, which has led to noting the dual functions of 
such systems [18, 49], and the possible conflicts that  may 
arise  between  accounts  for  work  from  “within”  and 
“without”  [14,  39].  However,  although  we  acknowledge 
potential conflicts, we argue that the changes brought about 
by IT systems in the ecology of (in)visibilities of work go 
beyond dualisms. 
In  sociological  theory  and  political  science,  accountability 
is  an  old  issue  which  has  received  considerable  new 
attention  in  the  last  decade,  probably  connected  to  the 
emerged  of  New  Public  Management’s  combination  of 
centralized control and de-centralised agency. Basically, in 
these  studies  accountability  is  about  being  answerable  to 
others who can legitimately claim to demand an account of 
one’s actions [13: p6]. The ensuing central question is then 
"…  who  is  accountable  to  whom,  for  what,  by  which 
standards, and why?” [ibid: p10]. The diversity of answers 
to  each  of  these  elements  entails  a  multitude  of  possible 
kinds  of  accountability.  For  example,  distinctions  can  be 

975

for 

for  ordering  and  accounting 

made  between  political,  legal,  administrative,  professional 
and social accountability depending on the forum to whom 
accountability  is  presented;  or  corporate,  collective  or 
individual  accountability  depending  who  is  asked  to  be 
accountable [12]. However, at its core accountability arises 
from an implicit demand in social relations for actors to be 
able to provide accounts of their actions. 
This is a central theme within ethnomethodology [22]. Thus 
Suchman  (1993)  points  to  the  constitutive  way  in  which 
technologies 
the 
movements of lizards and aeroplanes are the same [49], and 
Bowers  et  al  (1995)  show  how  an  IT  system  designed  to 
account for and make work visible to an external customer, 
ordered cooperative work in ways that hindered rather than 
supported 
this  work  [14].  Their  distinction  between 
workflow as accounted for from ‘within’ and ‘without’ has, 
with  other  studies,  been  influential  in  pointing  out  the 
potential  conflicts  between  ordering  and  accounting  for 
CSCW systems. For example, Dourish (2001) discusses the 
‘dual  use’  of  workflow  technologies  and  distinguishes 
between  three  critical  aspects:  How  IT  by  the  way  of 
ordering work disrupts the natural flow of interaction; how 
the  embedded  categorization  embedded  in  this  ordering 
makes certain aspects visible and other not, thus reflecting 
the order of those to whom accounts are told; and lastly, the 
theoretical  foundations  of  workflow  technologies  [18].  He 
suggests  solving  the  tension  between  the  dual  uses  by 
decoupling  the  presentation  of  work  from  its  ordering. 
Further,  Eriksen  (2002)  investigates  different  meanings  of 
accountability in CSCW and HCI and points to the central 
question of accountability of what to whom? [19]  
In  our  case,  TMS  did  not  at  the  time  of  our  study  have 
effects  that  hindered  work  even  though  it  served  to  order 
and  make  visible  that  work,  especially  through  PMI.  This 
may  be  attributed  to  the  fact  that  TMS,  in  the  sense  of 
Dourish,  made  work  visible  and  was  decoupled  from  the 
actual  ordering  of  work  which  was  done  by  porters 
themselves  (and  the  dispatcher).  At  the  same  time,  this 
study was conducted in the early stages of implementation, 
and  if  PMI’s  representations  for  work,  including  the 
definition  of  when  tasks  begin,  are  coupled  closer  to 
assessments  and  remuneration  of  that  work,  a  conflict 
between accounting and ordering may evolve. Then PMI’s 
account  of  work  from  ‘without’  may,  for  example,  lead 
management  to  wonder  what  porters  do  in  those  ‘idle’  15 
minutes in which they go to get, for example, a wheelchair 
before  arriving  at  the  ward.  The  further  away  from  the 
porters’ work, the representations of work in TMS and PMI 
travel  the  higher  the  risks  of  decisions  and  orderings  of 
work detrimental to situated work practices. 
At  the  same  time,  our  case  shows  that  accounts  and 
representations of work may have multiple roles and effects 
that  go  beyond  a  dualism  of  ordering  and  accountability. 
Thus, for porters TMS provided more influence over their 
work  and  assurance  that  colleagues  were  also  making  an 

lessening 

technologies,  even  from 

effort, as well as at the same time causing stress due to the 
continuous stream of incoming tasks, and unease over being 
monitored.  For  local  management,  PMI  was  used  to 
negotiate  for  more  staff 
the  workload  of 
individual  porters;  to  plan  around  foreseeable  problems 
connected with maintenance; to discover porters’ attribution 
of low priority to tasks from a certain department; to work 
out  the  staff  roster;  and  to  show  Radiology  that  they 
requested tasks at the last minute. TMS and PMI might also 
become  incentive  devices  or  occasions  for  bullying.  TMS 
and  PMI  had  both  dis-  and  advantageous  effects  for  the 
work arrangement, and there is not a clear contrast between 
‘good’ before and ‘bad’ after their implementation. Indeed, 
even the distinction between organizing work from ‘within’ 
and from ‘without’ breaks down, since TMS increased the 
transparency  of  the  cooperative  arrangement  and  the 
common  field  for  work:  It  was  through  TMS  that  porters 
were  enabled  to  coordinate  work  themselves.  This  finally 
raises  the  question  of  whether  it  is  a  given  that  oral 
narratives  are  better  at  accounting  for  work  than  tables, 
schedules, and IT. If ways of ordering work are at the same 
time  ways  of  making  that  work  accountable,  it  cannot  be 
assumed  that  narratives  are  better  at  doing  this  than  other 
media  or 
the  actors’  own 
perspectives.  
All  in all,  we argue  for  moving beyond a duality between 
ordering and accounting for work, and propose instead that 
research  on  this  issue  should  be  guided  by  a  more  open 
question:  How  is  work  ordered  and  made  accountable  by 
which technologies and with which effects? EPRs and other 
healthcare IT as audit tools are not necessarily detrimental 
to  the  work  of  doctors  and  nurses  [53],  and  may,  more 
generally,  be  sources  of  self-reflection  and  decision-
making,  as  well  as  of  external  transparency  and  the 
regulation of healthcare [34]. Most likely, this applies more 
generally for IT systems and work processes. 
CONCLUSION: 
 …the  Hospital  planned  to  introduce  a  computer  system  which 
would locate where the porter was on the site at any time, as well 
as what job he had been allocated, and how long they had been 
engaged in it. For the present, however, this “Day of Judgement” 
was a threat only (Rapport, comment on fieldwork on porters in 
2000-1 [37: p108]) 
As  the  process  of  digitization  of  healthcare  expands  in 
scope and depth, it will affect non-clinical groups, including 
porters, registration assistants, social workers, and medical 
secretaries, who have hitherto received little attention. This 
paper  has  described  the  cooperative  work  of  hospital 
porters,  and  the  various  effects  that  a  coordination  and 
accountability system may have on their work. Their work 
is  understudied,  low-paid,  physically  strenuous,  and  has  a 
low status. But contrary to expectations, such as Rapport’s, 
above,  we argue that although IT for hospital porters may 
indeed  lead  to  managerial,  “cogs-in-a-wheel”  approaches 
and  surveillance,  IT  can  also  increase  influence  on, 
responsibility  for,  and  reflection  on  work.  The  outcomes 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

will  depend  on  the  actual  design,  implementation,  and 
usage.  Porters’  and  other  professions’  work  can  be 
configured in various ways to the enrichment or detriment 
of work life and organizations. Detailed studies, as well as 
comparisons,  can  open  up  the  contingency  of  actual  work 
arrangements  and  open  up  a  spectrum  of  possible 
configurations. Finally, we argue to move beyond a dualism 
between coordination of and accountability for work, since 
these are interrelated and co-constitutive. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Warm thanks to the porters and managers at Section South. 
REFERENCES 
1.  Joanna Abraham and Madhu C. Reddy. 2008. Moving 
patients around: a field study of coordination between 
clinical and non-clinical staff in hospitals. In 
Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 2008 ACM 
conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
(CSCW´08), 225-228. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1460563.1460598 

2.  Joanna Abraham and Madhu C. Reddy. 2013. Re-

coordinating activities: an investigation of articulation 
work in patient transfers. In Proceedings of the 
Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Computer 
supported cooperative work (CSCW´13), 67-78. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2441776.2441787 

3.  Ellen Balka and Ina Wagner. 2006. Making things 

work: dimensions of configurability as appropriation 
work. In Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 2006 
20th anniversary conference on Computer supported 
cooperative work (CSCW´06). 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1180875.1180912 

4.  Jakob Bardram. 2000. Temporal Coordination. On 

Time and Coordination of Collaborative Activities at a 
Surgical Department. Journal of Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work 9: 157-187. 

5.  Jakob Bardram, Thomas Riisgaard Hansen and Mads 

Søgard. 2006. AwareMedia – A Shared Interactive 
Display Supporting Social, Temporal, and Spatial 
Awareness in Surgery. In Proceedings of the 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
(CSCW´06), 109-118. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1180875.1180892 

6.  James R. Barker. 1993. Tightening the Iron Cage. 

Concertive Control in Self-Managing Teams. 
Administrative Science Quarterly 38, 3: 408-437. 

7.  Stephen R. Barley. 1988. Technology as an Occasion 

for Structuring: Evidence from Observations of CT 
Scanners and the Social Order of Radiology 
Departments. Administration Science Quarterly 31: 78-
108. 

8.  Marc Berg. 1996. Practices of Reading and Writing: 

the Constitutive Role of the Patient Record in Medical 
Work. Sociology of Health & Illness 18, 4: 499-524. 

976

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

9.  Pernille Bjørn and Ellen Balka. 2007. Health Care 

Categories have Politics too: Unpacking the 
Managerial Agendas of Electronic Triage Systems. In 
Proceedings of the Proceedings of the Tenth European 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
(ECSCW´07), 371-390. 

10.  Claus Bossen. 2006. Representations at Work: A 

National Standard for Electronic Health Records. In 
Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 2006 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
(CSCW´06), 69-78. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1180875.1180887 

11.  Claus Bossen, Lotte Groth Jensen and Flemming Witt. 

2012. Medical secretaries' care of records: the 
cooperative work of a non-clinical group. In 
Proceedings of the Proceedings of the ACM 2012 
conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
(CSCW´12), 921-930. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2145204.2145341 

12.  Mark Bovens. 2014. Public Accountability. Oxford 

University Press. 

13.  Mark Bovens, Thomas Schillemans and Robert E. 

Goodin. 2014. Public Accountability. Oxford 
University Press. 

14.  John Bowers, Graham Button and Wes Sharrock. 1995. 

Workflow from Within and Without: Technology and 
Cooperative Work on the Print Industry Shopfloor. In 
Proceedings of the Proceedings of the Fourth 
European Conference on Computer-Supported 
Cooperative Work (ECSCW´95), 51-66.  

15.  Wendy Bryan. 1998. Rising to the challenge: portering 

services at the Queen Elizabeth II Health Sciences 
Centre. Leadership in Health Services 11, 3: 1-5. 

16.  Clare FP Chow-Chua and Mark Goh. 2000. A quality 

roadmap of a restructured hospital. Managerial 
Auditing Journal 15, 1/2: 29-41. 

17.  Harvey Dershin and Michael S. Schaik. 1992. Quality 

improvement for a hospital patient transportation 
system. Hospital & health services administration 38, 
1: 111-119. 

18.  Paul Dourish. 2001. Process Description as 

Organisational Accounting Devices: the Dual use of 
Workflow Technologies. In Proceedings of the 
Proceedings of the 2001 International ACM 
SIGGROUP Conference on Supporting Group Work 
(GROUP´01), 52-60. 

19.  Sara Eriksen. 2002. Designing for accountability. In 
Proceedings of the Proceedings of the second Nordic 
conference on Human-computer interaction, 177-186.  

20.  Jacob K. Eskildsen and Ann-Kristina Løkke Nielsen. 

2008. The Upgradingof the Skillls of Nursing 
Assistants and Cleaning Staff in the Danish Public-
Sector Hospitals. In Low-Wage Work in Denmark, 

Niels Westergaard-Nielsen, New York, Sage 
Foundation, 218-257 

21.  Geraldine Fitzpatrick and Gunnar Ellingsen. 2012. A 

Review of 25 Years of CSCW Research in Healthcare: 
Contributions, Challenges and Future Agendas. 
Journal of Computer Supported Cooperative Work 22, 
4-6: 1-57. 

22.  Harold Garfinkel. 1967. Studies in Ethnomethodology. 

Polity Press. 

23.  Randolph Hall. 2013. Patient flow: reducing delay in 

healthcare delivery. Springer Science+Business Media. 

24.  Christian Heath, Marcus Sanchez Svensson, Jon 
Hindmarsh, Paul Luff and Dirm vom Lehn. 2002. 
Configuring Awareness. Journal of Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work 11, 3-4: 317-347. 

25.  Diana S. Kusunoki and Aleksandra Sarcevic. 2015. 

Designing for Temporal Awareness: The Role of 
Temporality in Time-Critical Medical Teamwork. In 
Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 18th ACM 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
& Social Computing (CSCW´15), 1465-1476. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2675133.2675279 

26.  CKY Lin. 1999. Microcomputer-based workforce 

scheduling for hospital porters. Journal of management 
in medicine 13, 4-5: 251-262. 

27.  Alison R. Murphy, Madhu C. Reddy and Nathan J. 

McNeese. 2014. Exploring the perceptions and use of 
electronic medical record systems by non-clinicians. In 
Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 2014 conference 
on Designing interactive systems (DIS´14), 429-432. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2598510.2600884 

28.  Fredrik Odegaard, Li Chen, Ryan Quee and Martin L. 
Puterman. 2007. Improving the Efficiency of Hospital 
Porter Services, Part 2: Schedule Optimization and 
Simulation Model. Journal for Healthcare Quality 29, 
1: 12-18. 

29.  Fredrik Odegaard, Li Chen, Ryan Quee and Martin L. 
Puterman. 2007. Improving the Efficiency of Hospital 
Porter Services, Part 1: Study Objectives and Results. 
Journal for Healthcare Quality 29, 1: 4-11. 

30.  Gerardo A. Okhuysen and Beth A. Bechky. 2009. 

Coordination in Organizations: An Integrative 
Perspective. The Academy of Management Annals 3, 1: 
463-502. 

31.  Wanda J. Orlikowski. 2000. Using Technology and 

Constituting Structures: A Practice Lens for Studying 
Technology in Organizations. Organization Science 11, 
4: 404-428. 

32.  Sun Young Park, Yunan Chen and Scott Rudkin. 2015. 
Technological and Organizational Adaptation of EMR 
Implementation in an Emergency Department. Acm 
Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 22, 1: 1-
24. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2656213 

977

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Journal of Computer Supported Cooperative Work 11, 
3: 285-298. 

45.  Susan Leigh Star and Anselm Strauss. 1999. Layers of 
Silence, Arenas of Voice: the Ecology of Visible and 
Invisible Work. Journal of Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work 8: 9-30. 

46.  Allan Stisen, Henrik Blunck, Mikkel Baun Kjærgaard 

and Kaj Grønbæk. 2014. Handheld versus wearable 
interaction design for professionals: a case study of 
hospital service work. In Proceedings of the 26th 
Australian Computer-Human Interaction Conference 
(OzCHI '14), 260-269. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2686612.2686651 

47.  Anselm Strauss, Shizuko Fagerhaugh, Barbara Suczek 

and Carolyn Wiener. 1985. Social Organization of 
Medical Work. University of Chicago Press. 

48.  Anselm Strauss. 1993. The Continual Permutations of 

Action. Aldine de Gruyter. 

49.  Lucy Suchman. 1993. Technologies of Accountability: 
Of Lizard and Aeroplanes. In Technology in Working 
Order, Graham Button (ed). Routledge, 113-126. 

50.  Nancy Sullivan and Karl U Frentzel. 1992. A patient 

transport pilot quality improvement team. QRB. 
Quality review bulletin 18, 7: 215-221. 

51.  Charlotte Tang, Yunan Chen and Soyoung Lee. 2014. 
Non-clinical work counts: facilitating patient outflow 
in an emergency department. Behaviour & Information 
Technology 34, 6: 585-597. 

52.  Arnvør Torkilsheyggi and Morten Hertzum. 2014. User 

participation in pilot implementation: porters and 
nurses coordinating patient transports. In Proceedings 
of the Proceedings of the 26th Australian Computer-
Human Interaction Conference on Designing Futures: 
the Future of Design (OzCHI '14), 290-299. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2686612.2686654 

53.  Brit Ross Winthereik, Irma van der Ploeg and Marc 

Berg. 2007. The Electronic Patient Record as a 
Meaningful Audit Tool: Accountability and Autonomy 
in General Practitioner Work. Sci Technol Hum Val 32, 
1: 6-25. 

54.  T. Xiao, P. M. Sanderson and M. Lee. 2010. Patient 

transport cards support formal and informal 
coordination in a hospital department. Proceedings of 
the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual 
Meeting 54, 12: 904-908. 

55.  Yan Xiao, Caterina Lasome, Jacqueline Moss, Colin F. 
Mackenzie  and  Samer  Faraj.  2001.  Cognitive 
Properties of a Whiteboard: a Case Study in a Trauma 
Centre.  In  Proceedings  of  the  Seventh  European 
Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work 
(ECSCW´01), 259-278. 

33.  Kathleen H. Pine and Melissa Mazmanian. 2014. 
Institutional logics of the EMR and the problem of 
'perfect' but inaccurate accounts. In Proceedings of the 
Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer 
supported cooperative work & social computing 
(CSCW´14), 283-294. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2531602.2531652 

34.  Kathleen H. Pine and Max Liboiron. 2015. Emerging 

Insights on Building Infrastructure of Data-Driven 
Transparency and Accountability of Organizations. In 
iConference 2015 Proceedings. 

35.  Rebecca Randell, Stephanie Wilson and Peter 

Woodward. 2011. Variations and Commonalities in 
Processes of Collaboration: The Need for Multi-Site 
Workplace Studies. Journal of Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work 20, 1-2: 37-59. 

36.  Nigel Rapport. 2008. The Discipline of Being Hosptial 

Porters: Transcending Hierarchy and Institution. In 
Exploring Regimes of Discipline: The Dynamics of 
Restraint, Noel Dyck (ed). Berghahn Books. 

37.  Nigel Rapport. 2009. Of orderlies and men: hospital 

porters achieving wellness at work. Carolina Academic 
Press. 

38.  Madhu Reddy and Paul Dourish. 2002. A Finger on the 

Pulse: Temporal Rythms and Information Seeking in 
Medical Work. In Proceedings of the 2002 ACM 
conference on Computer supported cooperative work 
(CSCW '02), 344-353. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/587078.587126. 

39.  Mike Robinson and Liam Bannon. 1991. Questioning 

Representations. In Proceedings of the European 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
(ECSCW´91), 219-233. 

40.  Ken Saunders. 1979. The Hospital Porter: A 

Behavioural Profile of on Occupation in the World of 
the Core of the Sick. Employee Relations 1, 4: 30-32. 
41.  Kjeld Schmidt and Carla Simone. 1996. Coordination 

Mechanisms: towards a Conceptual Foundation of 
CSCW Systems Design. Journal of Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work 5, 2-3: 155-200. 

42.  Kjeld Schmidt. 2002. Remarks on the Complexity of 
Cooperative Work (2002). In Kjeld Schmidt (2011) 
Cooperative Work and Coordinative Practices, pp 167-
199. Springer. 

43.  Kjeld Schmidt, Ida Wagner and Marianne Tolar. 2007. 
Permutations of Cooperative Work Practices: A study 
of two oncology clinics. In Proceedings of the 2007 
international ACM conference on Supporting group 
work (GROUP '07), 1-10. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1316624.1316626. 

44.  Kjeld Schmidt. 2002. The Problem with 'Awareness': 

Introductory Remarks on 'Awareness in CSCW'. 

978

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

56.  Eviatar Zerubavel. 1979. Patterns of Time in Hospital 

Life: a Sociological Perspective. University of Chicago  
Press. 

 
 

979

