CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Strangers on Your Phone: Why People Use Anonymous 

Communication Applications  

Katherine Sutton 

Vassar College 

Poughkeepsie, NY 12604 

kasutton@vassar.edu 

 
Figure 1. An example post on Whisper 

[16]  but  not 

users  seek  anonymity  in  their  activities  online  [16]. 
Anonymous  communication  applications  such  as  Whisper 
(Figure 1), Secret (now closed), and YikYak provide ways 
for  people  to  connect  through  smartphones  and  interact 
anonymously  on  any  topic  to  an  anonymous  audience. 
Previous work has documented broad motivations for being 
anonymous  online 
looked  at  how 
communication tools empower these motivations.  
We  need  to  reexamine  anonymous  communication  now 
because  the  communication  landscape  has  dramatically 
changed from the early days of the Internet.  Many  people 
are  constantly  connected  through  multiple  social  media  to 
almost  everyone  in  their  lives  everywhere  they  go  [10]. 
Social  media  users  on  Facebook  and  Twitter  experience 
context-collapse  as  their  communications  across  each 
channel  hit  multiple  audiences,  each  related  to  a  different 
social  identity  for  the  user  with  different  expectations  of 
behavior  [39].  People  may  choose 
to  communicate 
anonymously  with  certain  friends  or  acquaintances,  or  a 
deviant or hobby group, to keep those interactions separate 
and secret from other people they know [2,16]. Earlier work 
described  how  people  communicate  on  their  computers  in 
web-based MUDs, Usenet, and Second Life [9, 35, 39], but 
the rise of mobile devices and apps has made casual, even 
constant, 
communication 
possible.  This  technological  change  leads  us  to  ask  how 

location-based 

anonymous 

Ruogu Kang 

Laura Dabbish 

Carnegie Mellon University 

Carnegie Mellon University 

Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
ruoguk@cs.cmu.edu 

 

Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
dabbish@cmu.edu 

to 

ABSTRACT 
Anonymity  online  is  important  to  people  at  times  in  their 
lives.  Anonymous  communication  applications  such  as 
Whisper  and  YikYak  enable  people  to  communicate  with 
strangers  anonymously  through  their  smartphones.  We 
report results from semi-structured interviews with 18 users 
of  these  apps.  The  goal  of  our  study  was  to  identify  why 
and how people use anonymous apps, their perceptions of 
their audience and interactions on the apps, and how these 
apps  compare  with  other  online  social  communities.  We 
present  a  typology  of  the  content  people  share,  and  their 
motivations  for  participation  in  anonymous  apps.  People 
share  various  types  of  content  that  range  from  deep 
confessions  and 
jokes  and 
momentary  feelings.  An  important  driver  for  participation 
and  posting  is  to  get  social  validation  from  others,  even 
though  they  are  anonymous  strangers.  We  also  find  that 
participants  believe  these  anonymous  apps  allow  more 
honesty,  openness,  and  diversity  of  opinion  than  they  can 
find  elsewhere.  Our  results  provide  implications  for  how 
anonymity  in  mobile  apps  can  encourage  expressiveness 
and interaction among users. 
Author Keywords 
Anonymous  communication,  anonymity,  self-disclosure, 
computer-mediated communication, privacy, social media.  
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.3. Group and Organization Interfaces. 
INTRODUCTION 

lighthearted 

secrets 

“Solitude  is  fine  but  you  need  someone  to  tell  that 
solitude is fine.” 

― Honoré de Balzac 
Given  the  proliferation  of  communication  platforms  and 
traceability of online activities, most people believe that it 
is difficult to be completely anonymous online without any 
identifying  trace  [28].  At  the  same  time,  many  Internet 
Permission to  make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be  honored. 
Abstracting with  credit  is  permitted. To copy  otherwise, or republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02$15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820081 
 

359

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

anonymously 

in 

for  people 

find  community 

interact  with  others 

people 
through 
smartphones and why they do so. What benefits do people 
get  out  of  mobile  communication  without  identification? 
Can  people 
these  anonymous 
communication apps?  
In  this  study  we  extend  our  understanding  of  motivations 
for  anonymity  by  analyzing  users’  activities  and 
motivations on anonymous communication applications on 
their smartphones. We find that these applications provide a 
place 
to  share  personal  emotions  and 
experiences,  positive  or  negative,  without  their  needing  to 
track  their  disclosure  boundaries  and  to  fear  negative 
reputational  consequences. Unlike  designated  confessional 
online  communities 
in  which  people  mainly  share 
confessions and secrets [36], people using mobile apps such 
as  Whisper  also  share  funny,  entertaining  posts.  Also, 
despite  the  lack  of  a  cohesive  and  persistent  set  of 
identifiers,  as  users  have  in  many  online  communities, 
people in our sample reported that these apps provide social 
support  and  validation  for  their  feelings,  experiences,  and 
self-identity. They said people are honest and open in this 
setting.  They  said  they  were  able  to  open  themselves 
because of the lack of accountability for what they said and 
lack  of  connection  to  their  real  world  identity.  These 
benefits  have  been  observed  in  studies  of  some  online 
communities but in the case of anonymous mobile apps, the 
benefits  occurred  even  without  such  pro-social  features  as 
moderation  and  group 
those 
communities [18, p.79-83].  
Anonymous Communication Applications 
Anonymous  communication  applications  (e.g.,  Whisper, 
YikYak,  and  Secret)  are  software  programs  designed 
mainly  for  mobile  devices.  They  allow  people  to  share 
messages with other users of the same application without 
any  connection  to  their  identity  or  among  their  messages. 
Unlike  the  quasi-anonymous  email  and  Web  communities 
that  support  group  identity  and  specific  topics  such  as 
financial  trading,  transgender  transition,  new  motherhood, 
or cancer treatment (which often require moderation and/or 
registration),  anonymous  mobile  apps  are  designed  for 
crowds without an agenda or specific topic. Users can find 
very little identity information on these apps except others’ 
general location at the city or state level. Previous research 
on  these  apps  suggests  that  people  using  Whisper  interact 
more often with co-located than with distant users [38].   
Research  so  far  indicates  that  people  disclose  personal 
information and express their personal needs and wishes on 
these apps. Linguistic analysis of Whispers shows a higher 
frequency of first person pronouns in Whisper posts than in 
other  social  media  such  as  Facebook  and  Twitter  [7,38]. 
The  social  psychological  literature  suggests  that  self-
disclosure may be motivated by social approval, intimacy, 
relief of distress, social control, or identity clarification [8]. 
People  are  more  willing  to  disclose  to  strangers  because 
doing so can mitigate some disclosure risks [30]. Disclosure 

identity  markers  of 

“confessions,” 

category  was 

[5].  People  may 

risks  include  rejection  by  listeners,  reduction  of  one’s 
autonomy  and  personal  integrity,  loss  of  control  or  self-
efficacy,  and  the  possibility  of  hurting  or  embarrassing 
others  [24].  Disclosing  online  can  feel  safer.  People 
disclose more about the self in the online context compared 
to what they do in the offline context [15], and they disclose 
more  online  when  the  medium  contains  less  information 
about  real  identity  [27].  Correa  et  al  [7]  asked  MTurk 
workers to annotate 477 Whisper posts, and found the most 
popular 
followed  by 
“relationships,” “meetup,” and “QnA/Advice.” Along with 
self-disclosure,  questions  and  advice  seeking  posts  are 
common  in  Whisper  [38],  as  they  are  in  4chan/b/  [4]  and 
Facebook  Confession  Board 
feel 
anonymous  advice  is  more  honest  than  advice  from 
identified sources [22].   
Ephemerality 
is  another  characteristic  of  anonymous 
communication.  According  to  Bernstein  et  al.  [4],  the 
median life of a post on 4chan /b/ is 3.9 minutes, and 43% 
of the posts do not receive any reply. The authors propose 
that  ephemerality  removes  a  “rich  get  richer”  effect  and 
raises  community  participation  because  users  have  to 
quickly  reply  to  a  thread  to  keep  it  alive.  Similarly,  more 
than 50% of Whispers receive no replies, and most replies 
arrive  within  1  day  after  a  post  has  been  made  [38]. 
Although  Whisper  posts  do  not  automatically  expire,  a 
significantly higher proportion of this content gets deleted 
either  by  moderators  or  by  users  themselves  than  other 
social media (18% vs. 4% on Twitter).  
There is limited qualitative work delving into the subjective 
experiences  of  users  of  anonymous  apps;  most  existing 
research  uses  text  analyses  to  detect  behavioral  patterns. 
There remain open questions about the nature and form of 
participation  in  these  apps  given  their  limited  affordances 
for  developing  interpersonal  bonds  or  common  group 
identity,  two  theoretical  factors  that  sustain  social  groups 
online [29].  
Identity in Online Communities 
In  online  communities  that  lack  persistent  user  identifiers, 
group  identity  can  play  an  important  role.  There  is  rich 
literature  on  self-expression  and 
image  management 
associated  with  one’s  self-identity  [12].  Online  identity 
signals  the  credibility  of  an  information  source,  helps  to 
build  trust  between  group  members,  and  motivates  people 
to  contribute  to  online  communities  in  order  to  build 
reputation.  In  Donath’s  study  of  Usenet  groups  [9], 
anonymous  accounts  were  commonly  used  when  people 
wanted  to  reveal  personal  information  or  discuss  legal 
matters, or when they just wanted to keep their participation 
secret from others they knew. Studies of anonymity in the 
early days of the Internet suggested it could be a dangerous 
medium  leading  to  angry,  antisocial  behavior  towards 
others,  such  as  “flaming”  –  angry  or  hateful  speech  [17]. 
Nonetheless,  researchers  also  discussed  the  benefits  of 
anonymity  for  equalizing  participation  in  groups  [17],  for 

360

SESSION: RELATIONSHIPS AND ROMANCE

the 

anonymity  of 

encouraging communications among weak ties [39], and for 
the freedom to share ideas and be open and honest without 
social constraint (e.g. GDSS research by [23]).  
The 
Internet  provides  people 
opportunities  for  identity  experimentation.  Gross  [14] 
proposed the Internet as a so-called identity playground for 
teens. Half of the students in their study had pretended to be 
someone  other  than  themselves  on  the  Internet  –  mainly 
someone  older –  a  desired  or  future  identity.  Similarly,  in 
Stern’s  work 
[32],  adolescents  constructed  personal 
websites  as  “touched-up  versions  of  themselves.”  (p.106) 
Using the shield of online anonymity to explore alternative 
identities  is  not  only  seen  in  teens,  but  also  in  adults.  In 
Turkle’s early work of MUDs [35], she describes the virtual 
communities  as  “laboratories”  for  people  to  explore  and 
experiment  with their different selves  (p.12).  Recent  work 
shows that people create online dating profiles to reflect an 
“ideal  self”  instead  of  their  actual  self  [11].  On  the  other 
hand, Bargh et al. [2] argued that people are more able to 
disclose their so-called true self on the Internet because the 
anonymous environment reduces expectations and the risks 
of  social  sanction  that  exists  in  face-to-face  interactions. 
The disinhibiting effect of anonymity online can lead to a 
higher  level  of  self-disclosure  [2],  discussion  of  taboo 
topics    and  unpopular  opinions  [5],  and  unusual  acts  of 
generosity [34]. 
To  explore  how  anonymity  influences  communication  on 
mobile anonymous communication apps, we asked: 
RQ  1.  How  and  what  do  people  post  on  anonymous 
communication apps?  
We also wanted to examine why people participated. 
RQ 2. What experiences or contexts motivate people to use 
anonymous communication apps?  
Community Development 
Wellman and Gulia’s work in the beginning days of online 
communities explored the question of whether or not people 
can form communities in the virtual world [39]. They found 
that Usenet, IRC channels, and discussion groups not only 
served  the  purpose  of  information  exchange,  but  also 
provided  emotional  support  and  companionship  for  their 
members.  In  Turkle’s  book,  Alone  Together  [36],  she 
explored how people use anonymous confessional sites like 
PostSecret.  She  observed 
these  sites  are  not 
communities  because  “communities  are  places  where  one 
feels  safe  enough  to  take  the  good  and  the  bad.”  (p.238) 
Some  users  she  interviewed  were  discouraged  by  the 
amount of criticism and negativity they experienced on the 
site.  We  hope  to  explore  the  same  question  as  applied  to 
these new anonymous communication apps. 
To explore whether or not these anonymous communication 
apps encourage community among the members, we asked: 
RQ  3.  Are  there  virtual  communities  in  these  anonymous 
communication apps?  

that 

introduced, 

people 
sharing 

Anonymous vs. Identified Online Communication 
Social  network  sites  like  Facebook  allow  people  to  build 
their  images  and  history  online  and  maintain  relationships 
with real life connections. Over the years since these sites 
have 
were 
however, 
become 
increasingly  cautious  about 
their  personal 
information or opinions on social network sites because of 
the  higher  risks  associated  with  their  identity  tied  to  the 
content they post [33]. Disclosure on Facebook carries risks 
such  as  social  rejection  and  damage  to  self-presentation 
[20,37]. Others may block or unfriend posters because they 
post  too  often  about  politics  [31].  Participants  in  some 
studies describe how they attempt to mitigate posting risks 
by moving communication to other channels [37]. Marwick 
&  boyd  [21]  describes  how,  in  order  to  manage  different 
social boundaries, adults and teens both use different sites 
(e.g.,  Facebook  and  MySpace)  to  communicate  with 
different  connections,  or  to  switch  among  communication 
channels  (e.g.,  post  in  Facebook  vs.  text  message).  In 
addition  to  maneuvering  in  identified  social  networks  to 
protect  their  identity  and  privacy,  some  people  choose  to 
share anonymously without their real names attached to the 
content they post. Leavitt [19] describes how Reddit users 
use  anonymous  throwaway  accounts  to  disclose  personal 
information  (such  as  asking  for  advice  or  feedback  about 
controversial problems), and to manage boundaries between 
their different accounts on reddit.  
To  explore  these  phenomena  as  they  might  or  might  not 
apply  to  anonymous  communication  apps,  we  posed  the 
following research question: 
RQ  4.  How  do  people  choose 
communication apps versus identified social networks? 
METHOD 
We  conducted  eighteen  semi-structured  interviews  with 
anonymous  communication  application  users  to  better 
understand  how  and  why  people  participate  in  these  apps. 
The  first  thirteen  interviews  (P1-P13)  were  condcuted  in 
Summer 2014, and the last 5 interviews were conducted in 
Spring  2015  (P14-P18).  The  findings  were  not  different 
across  these  two  time  periods,  so  the  data  have  been 
combined. Participants were recruited through flyers posted 
in a major city in the east coast of U.S., a participant pool of 
a  research  university  in  the  east  coast,  and  through 
Craigslist postings. We recruited participants who had used 
at  least  one  of  the  anonymous  communication  apps 
Whisper,  Secret,  and  YikYak.  The  majority  of  our 
participants used Whisper.  
Each  interview  session  lasted  approximately one  hour and 
focused on how participants used the application, the posts 
they  made  and  viewed,  and  their  perceptions  of  the 
application dynamics and other users of the application. We 
conducted interviews in person (4 out of the 18 interviews) 
or  over  the  phone,  Gtalk  or  Skype.  Participants  also  sent 
specific posts mentioned during the interview via email for 
later reference during analysis and coding. 

to  use  anonymous 

361

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

ID  Gender  Age  Occupation 

Anonymous 
app(s) they use 
Whisper, Secret 
Whisper 
Whisper, Secret 

Whisper 
Whisper 
Whisper 
Whisper 
Whisper, Secret 
Whisper  

Whisper 

Student 
Student 

19 
20 
22  Hospitality 

worker 
19 
Student 
22 
Student 
23 
Student 
21 
Student 
26 
Student 
29  Admin. 
assistant 
27  Admin. 
assistant  
Student 

Features of The Apps 
All  three  applications  were  available  on  iOS  and  Android 
smartphones. Users could only post via their smartphones. 
Whisper  had  a  website  displaying  popular  whispers  and 
various  categories  of  whispers  that  people  can  access  on 
their  computers  (https://whisper.sh/). 
  Users  on  both 
Whisper and YikYak were not connected to other users on 
any  existing  social  networks.    Posts  on  both  Whisper  and 
YikYak contained location information: each Whisper post 
displayed city level location information, and each YikYak 
post  showed  a  blurred  area  map  in  the  background.  
Whisper posts always had a background image and texts on 
top  of  the  image.  Each  reply  also  included  a  background 
image. YikYak posts only contained text. Secret connected 
users with their friends and friends of their friends based on 
existing  social  networks  such  as  email  contacts.  Secret 
posts that were not from a friendship circle were displayed 
with  city-level  location  information.  At  the  time  when  we 
conducted  the  first  12  interviews,  Secret  allowed  users  to 
add a background image but later they removed that feature.  
Whisper  randomly  assigned  a  username  to  each  user  at 
initial signup, but users could change their usernames any 
time.  The  default  setting  for  posting  on  YikYak  did  not 
require users to attach a username to their posts, and replies 
on  YikYak  were  identified  by  random  avatars.  YikYak 
users  had  the  option  of  editing  a  “handle”  if  they  want  to 
added an identifier to each post. Secret posts did not have 
usernames attached, and replies were identified by avatars 
randomly  assigned  to  each  user.  Users’  avatars  changed 
every time they replied to a different post. 
Users  interacted  with  others  in  three  ways:  posting, 
acknowledging another’s post (hearting a post on Whisper 
or Secret; upvoting or downvoting in YiYak), replying to a 
post  (on  Whisper,  YikYak,  and  Secret),  or  sending  direct 
messages to another person (only available on Whisper and 
Secret).  Users could flag posts on all three apps.  
Participants 
Participants in the study reported ages between 19 and 29 
(mean  age  23.5  years);  11  were  female  participants  and  7 
were  male  participants.  Our  sample  is  typical  of  the 
demographic  breakdown  of  Whisper,  according  to  a  prior 
count by [7], who reported that most of Whisper users are 
between age 17 and 28 and 70% of them are women. Table 
1 shows some demographic information of our participants 
and 
they  use. 
Seventeen participants used Whisper and 5 participants had 
also tried Secret (but they mainly talked about their usage 
of  Whisper  during  the  interviews).  One  user  used  the 
application YikYak. Nine participants also mentioned using 
other  anonymous  communication  services  during 
the 
interview, including TextSecure (a private messaging app), 
PostSecret,  FML 
(http://www.fmylife.com/),  Facebook 
confession board, and Reddit. Our sample used a variety of 
other social apps  as well (16/18 used Facebook, 11/18 used 
Twitter, 11/18 used Instagram, and 8/18 used Snapchat).  

the  anonymous  communication  apps 

362

P1 
P2 
P3 

P4 
P5 
P6 
P7 
P8 
P9 

P10 

P11 
P12 
P13 
P14 
P15 
P16 
P17 

P18 

M 
M 
F 

F 
F 
F 
M 
M 
F 

F 

F 
F 
M 
M 
M 
F 
F 

F 

Whisper  

22 
29  Yoga teacher  Whisper, Secret 
23 
23 
22 
22 
29 

Whisper 
Whisper 
Whisper 
YikYak 
Whisper 

Student 
Student 
Student 
Student 
Research 
specialist 
Student 

24 

Whisper, Secret 

Table 1. Study participants. 

In recruiting, we stratified our sample across usage duration 
with one third of our sample being new users (1-3 months 
in  the  app),  one  third  being  moderate  duration  users  (4-8 
months  in  the  app),  and  one  third  long  term  users  (12 
months or more). We also split our sample across users who 
had posted in the application (10/18) versus those who only 
browsed and read posts by others (8/18). 
Interview Analysis  
We  transcribed  our  interview  audio  records  and  analyzed 
the  transcripts  following  a  grounded  theory  approach  [6]. 
The 
transcripts  were  coded  using  Dedoose  software 
(http://dedoose.com/).  Within  the  interviews  we  identified 
descriptions  of  application  usage,  the  posting  and  reading 
behavior.  Two  researchers  independently  coded  subsets  of 
the  interviews,  discussed  and  resolved  differences,  and 
clarified  code  definitions.  We  first  open  coded  participant 
responses about their motivations for using the application, 
posts  they  made  and  viewed  on  the  site,  and  social 
perceptions.  We  then  performed  axial  coding,  conducted 
affinity  diagramming  to  group  categories  of  concepts,  and 
developed a series of themes on each topic: application use, 
types  of  posts  people  made  and  why,  and  types  of  posts 
they 
the 
application,  perceptions  of 
the 
applications  and  contrasts  with  other  social  media.    We 
refined the themes during the writing process.  
Post-Coding 
We supplemented our interview responses with qualitative 
analysis  of  posts  on  the  applications.  The  posts  we  coded 

liked  and  disliked,  motivations  for  using 
the  other  users  of 

SESSION: RELATIONSHIPS AND ROMANCE

were from three sources: we randomly collected 125 posts 
from the applications Whisper and Secret in June 2014; we 
also  coded  the  posts  that  our  participants  had  posted  on 
those  applications;  and  we  extracted  the  posts  that  our 
participants  reported  seeing  on  those  applications.  Three 
researchers worked together to code the posts according to 
their topic, to the emotion expressed, and to the motivations 
that seemed to be behind the posts. We used the categories 
from  this  analysis  to  confirm  and  extend  the  themes  from 
our  interview  analysis,  and  to  validate  the  types  of  posts 
that participants described in our interviews. Table 2 below 
summarizes the result of the integrated coding of posts we 
collected from the applications and posts mentioned during 
interviews.  
RESULTS 
We  found  that  participants  interacted  on  anonymous 
communication  apps  to  disclose  predominantly  personal 
information  or  emotions  (positive  and  negative),  and  that 
they  felt  short-lived  connections  with  other  users  in 
response to content or aspects of content they could relate 
to.  In  the  following  sections,  we  first  present  how  people 
used Whisper, YikYak, and Secret, the types of posts they 
made in the applications, their motivations for making posts 
and  what  they  got  out  of  reading  others’  posts,  and  their 
perceptions  of  community  on  the  app.  Lastly,  we  discuss 
how  participants  viewed  anonymous  communication  apps 
versus identified social networking sites. 
How People Used the Apps  
Anonymous  apps  provided  a  periodic  distraction  and 
diversion from everyday life for the participants, but also an 

emotional outlet without social consequences.  A majority 
of  our  participants  (browsers  and  posters)  visited  the  app 
for  five  to  fifteen  minutes  a  day.  They  reported  browsing 
and  liking  posts  before  they  went  to  bed,  or  to  pass  time  
when  they  had  some  downtime  throughout  the  day,  e.g. 
when they were on the bus or waiting in line. They tended 
to  look  at  popular  posts,  nearby  posts,  and  occasionally 
search for topics, such as music, technology, and fashion, in 
which they were interested. 
Some participants in our sample reported their usage of the 
apps declined over time. Two longer-term users of Whisper 
mentioned  that  they  visited  the  app  very  frequently  when 
they  first  started  using  it  (several  times  a  day)  but  used  it 
much  less  now  (two  to  three  times  a  week)  because  were 
irritated  by  seeing  lots  of  rude  argumentative  or  overly 
sexual  posts  (P17  and  P18).  Participants  who  posted 
frequently  early  on  also  said  they  posted  less  frequently 
over  time,  especially  after  getting  unwanted  responses  to 
their  posts.  For  example,  P1  who  posted  when  he  first 
began  using  Whisper  had  switched  to  only  browsing 
because he received too many direct messages and requests 
for further contact in response to the posts he made.  
What People Posted on Anonymous Applications 
We  next  examined  the  types  of  posts  people  made  on  the 
applications. Table 2 summarizes main categories of posts 
revealed  in  our  analysis.  Our  findings  echo  prior  research 
showing 
the  majority  of  posts  were  personal 
disclosures  [7,38].  Many  of  these  posts  expressed  strong 
personal  opinions,  or 
shared  personal  experiences, 
confessions, and negative feelings such as anger or sadness 

that 

Types of posts 
Personal 
Distress release 

Social venting 

Self-expression 

Entertaining confession 

Positive stories 

Seeking interaction 

Impersonal 
General entertainment 

Information sharing  

Subcategories 

Example posts 

Sad, negative emotions, 
confessions of bad behavior, bad 
experiences 
Conflict, relationship problems 

Self-reflection about identity, 
personal opinions, aspirational 

Funny self-observations, funny 
habits, pranks 
Overcoming challenges, 
achievements, positive 
experiences, news 
Meet-ups, asking for advice, 
question discussion starters 

Non-personal jokes, quotes, 
observations 
Interests, facts, local information 

“I was like I can't believe I wanted to get through school to 
work full-time.” (posted by P17) 

“You’re extremely difficult to work with. I wish I could 
clone you make them your manager so you know how 
much you suck.” (Seen by P3) 
“I love being a solitary human being. I enjoy reading in a 
park, the library, at a bar, at a restaurant. I don’t need 
many friends to have fun.” (posted by P3) 
“I swear about my bosses all of the time in a language I 
know they don’t speak. Their dog too.” (posted by P10) 
“I’ve got five kids and I’m a single mom. I woke up to my 
oldest son helping his younger siblings clean their rooms 
and get read. Parenting done right.” (seen by P5) 
“I never know what to do with my hair – What’s a 
hairstyle that works for curly hair?” (posted by P12) 

“Summertime and the living is easy” (posted by P16) 

“I like Game of Thrones.  I can’t wait until next season.” 
(seen by P2) 

Table 2. Post categories identified in our study. (These categories are not mutually exclusive.) 

363

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

and 

admissions  of 

(coded  in  Table  2  as  distress  release  and  social  venting). 
Some posts served the purpose of identity clarification and 
did  not  always  contain  strong  emotions  (Table  2;  self-
expression).  People  also  shared  posts  that  were  more 
lighthearted,  fun,  and  entertaining  (Table  2;  entertaining 
confessions  &  positive  stories).  Many  posts  were  made 
seeking  responses  (Table  2;  seeking  interaction)  either  in 
person, in replies and one-on-one messages, or chat in other 
channels.  People  also  made  impersonal  posts  with  quotes, 
facts,  or  information  about  topical  interests  (Table  2; 
general entertainment, Information sharing).  
Why People Post on Anonymous Applications 
Despite  the  lack  of  affordances  for  social  identity  or 
relationship  development,  participants  had  mainly  social 
reasons for posting on the applications.  Sometimes people 
explicitly  sought  social  interaction,  asking  for  replies  to 
their  posts  or  interactions  outside  of  the  app  such  as 
chatting  or  a  “meetup”.  Sometimes  they  just  wanted  to 
share their personal stories or momentary feelings without 
any expectation of responses.  
Using The Crowd for Social Validation 
According to participants, a primary motivation for creating 
posts  in  the  apps  was  to  obtain  social  validation  from  the 
crowd of application users. They used the diffuse members 
of the application as a social litmus test of their behaviors, 
frailty  or  unusual 
opinions, 
characteristics.  They  wanted 
their 
opinions  or  thoughts  were  normal,  whether  people  would 
disapprove of something they had done, how bad it would 
seem to others, or how a wide set of people thought about 
an issue of personal relevance.    
For example, a 22-year-old hospitality worker posted about 
being a solitary person (Figure 1; Table 2, self-expression 
category example post) and said she posted it on Whisper to 
see whether others were like that too. She said she always 
felt pressured to go out with friends and colleagues in real 
life but what she really enjoyed was reading by herself. The 
hearts to her post made her feel like there were other people 
who felt the same way. She said: 
“It’s nice to have some validation that you aren’t the only 
one that feels that way.”(P3) 
Despite the anonymity in the apps, participants sometimes 
sought  opinions  about  their  own  behavior  indirectly. 
Seemingly impersonal questions to the crowd or statements 
were another way to acquire opinions about the user’s own 
behavior.  For  example,  after  P4  got  a  tattoo,  she  posted  a 
question  to  get  people’s  opinions  about  tattoos.  The  post 
read  “tattoos  on  a  girl  yes  or  no?”  not  revealing  anything 
about herself or the fact that she had one. As she said: “it's 
interesting to figure out what people think about that.”  
Participants  used  the  apps  to  get  opinions  from  the 
(presumably)  more  diverse  and  more  objective  audience 
than  they  would  find  on  their  other  social  media.  For 
instance, P6 said: 

to  know  whether 

“I  guess  anyone  who  has  Whisper  can  check  it  so  it's 
beyond  your  Facebook  friends,  1,000  people  you  already 
know.  So they might have other interests, might be cooler 
to  like  Lord  of  the  Rings  on  Whisper  than  to  like  it  on 
Facebook.” (P6) 
Nevertheless, participants were aware that anonymity took 
away  accountability  and  responsibility.  Two  participants 
said that they did not want advice from random strangers on 
the  Internet  and  they  would  prefer  advice  from  friends 
because they knew them better. 
The  social  validation  motivation  for  posting  we  observed 
seems  similar  to  the  approval  and  identity  clarification 
goals  described  in  the  previous  literature  mainly  among 
teenagers.  Teenagers  share  personal  information  on  their 
personal  webpages  for  the  purpose  of  seeking  connection 
and  validation  [32];  we  found  young  adults  doing  so  on 
these  apps.  According  to  prior  work,  a  goal  of  self-
disclosure is to be liked or accepted by others, and previous 
work has found these disclosures can help communicators 
clarify  their  identity  by  allowing  them  to  convey  accurate 
information  about  themselves  [3,8].  In  the  anonymous 
applications,  people  shared  their  personal  opinions,  habits 
or  stories  even  without  sustained  interaction.  When  the 
anonymous  audience  responded  positively  with  hearts  or 
upvotes,  even  with  no  further  conversation,  they  felt  they 
were not alone and that their behavior was acceptable.  
Making Short-Term Connections 
Although  it  was  unusual  in  our  sample  of  interviewees, 
many posts on the anonymous applications were explicitly 
looking  for  interactions  or  “hookups”  with  other  users. 
These  could  be  online  one-on-one  chat  interactions  or 
meetings in real life. For example, P1 had used the app to 
talk to people online and to meet them in real life. He had 
also  posted  specifically  to  get  responses  from  people  who 
wanted to chat one-on-one, with a post saying, “if anybody 
wants  to  chat,  message  me.”  It  seems  like  most  of  these 
posts  were  seeking  short-term  communication  or  sex,  but 
we  do  not  have  evidence  to  discover  whether  these 
interactions  ever  developed  into  longer-term,  intimate 
relationships.  Four  participants,  all  female,  expressed  an 
aversion to this type of posts, saying they were “spammy,” 
“disgusting,” or defeated “the purpose of the app.”  
Some of our participants responded to requests for contact. 
For example, P2 sent a direct message to another user in his 
local  area  asking  if  anyone  had  Game  of  Thrones  DVDs 
and  offering  to  buy  them.  Posts  aiming  at  making 
connections may have a higher level of risk of exposing the 
poster,  and  these  posts  were  more  likely  to  include 
identifying  information  such  as  selfies  (photos  of  the 
poster),  or  the  poster’s  location,  or  personal  interests.  For 
example, P7 saw a friend posting a selfie on a post that said 
“Anyone in [his city] want to talk or something?” using the 
“Nearby” feature of Whisper (Figure 2).  

364

SESSION: RELATIONSHIPS AND ROMANCE

in 

their 

Avoiding Social Risk and Context Collapse  
Participants  also  used  the  apps  to  release  emotions  or 
secrets  without  risking  social  consequences  such  as 
offending  others,  secrets  being  found  out  by  others,  or 
harming  one’s  image  online.  In  the  social  psychology 
literature,  it  has  been  reported  that  writing  about  a  secret 
can  improve  people’s  health  conditions  [26].  Turkle  [35]  
has  argued  that  the  virtual  world  is  a  “safer  place  to 
ventilate” (p.199), This motivation seemed to be prominent 
in  the  posts  coded  as  distress  release  and  social  venting 
(Table 2). For example, P18 complained about work-related 
issues on Whisper, and said she did not care about getting 
feedback  or  responses  because  she  just  needed  to  get  her 
opinion out there.  
lack  of  social  boundaries  on  Whisper  meant 
The 
participants  did  not  have 
to  deal  with  conflicting 
expectations  from  different  social  groups,  or  the  context 
collapse  problem 
in  social  media  [21].  The  above 
participant  P18  indicated  that  she  posted  her  complaints 
about her work on Whisper rather than other social media 
because  her  coworkers  were  friends  on  the  other  social 
media she used (Facebook and Instagram). This motivation 
is  similar  to  what  Kang  et  al.  [16]  reported  about  the 
motivations  to  seek  anonymity.  They  reported  that  people 
used  anonymity  as  a  way  to  manage  overlapping  and 
difficult  social  boundaries 
lives,  essentially 
eschewing all of them by being completely anonymous. An 
administrative  assistant 
from 
differential audience expectations on Whisper versus other 
social media: 
“I  didn’t  really  have  an  audience  in  mind.  It’s  one  of  the 
things  I  like  about  Whisper  is  that  I  don’t  have  to  think 
about  that.  When  I  post  to  Facebook,  et  cetera,  because  I 
have so many family members and then people that I’m sort 
of in touch… I have to always make really careful decisions 
about what’s public vs. what’s for just these people.” (P10) 
In  addition  to  removing  the  concern  of  managing  one’s 
social  boundaries,  sharing  on  anonymous  communication 
apps, as implied in the above quote, did not require as much 
effort  to  construct  or  polish  one’s  post  as  did  posting  on 
identified social networking sites.  
Participants  said  they  did  not  need  to  consider  how  to 
manage their online image on these apps. P1, who also used 
Tinder  to  find  connections,  said  he  cared  less  about  his 
grammar  on  Whisper  as  compared  with  Tinder;  when  he 
talked  to  others  on  Tinder,  he  would  phrase  his  words 
better.  A  woman  who  had  shared  her  story  about  an 
unrequited  love  to  PostSecret  thought  posts  on  Whisper 
were easy to make, in contrast to the effort required when 
she had to buy a post card, write her secret down, and mail 
the post card to PostSecret (P9).  
Sharing Momentary Information  
Some participants posted to share feelings or thoughts they 
had  that  were  stimulated  by  the  situation  they  were  in  at 

talked  about 

freedom 

365

 

Figure 2. View of the Nearby tab in Whisper app 

that moment. For example, P15 posted a joke in frustration 
while  she  was  driving  and  stuck  in  traffic  because  of 
construction  she  saw  everywhere  on  the  road.  Her  post 
read: “In [her town] it’s either winter or construction.” She 
said  she  wouldn’t  post  something  like  that  on  Facebook 
because  it  wasn’t  important  enough,  expressing  that  some 
things are not “monumental enough to post on Facebook.”  
These in-situ posts often involved observations or thoughts 
about  people  around  the  poster  that  couldn’t  be  shared  or 
said out loud. Frustration was a common driver for these in-
situ  posts.  They  also  included  posts  about  conflicts  or 
arguments with other people (Table 2, social venting). The 
administrative  assistant  also  posted  after  a  drunken  fight 
with  her  husband,  saying  that,  “I’m  pretty  sure  I  made  a 
mistake  marrying  my  husband  but  I  have  two  more 
weddings  to  get  through  before  I  can  get  a  divorce.”  She 
appreciated  the  anonymity  of  this  post  the  next  morning 
because there were no real consequences.  She said: 
“In  the  morning  I  look  at  this  and  even  though  I  know  it 
doesn’t  matter  because  nobody’s  seen  it  I’m  just  kind  of 
mortified  that  I  even  thought  that…  But  that’s  why  I  like 
Whisper is you can post something like that and there’s not 
really consequences since it is anonymous.”(P10) 
How People View Anonymous Communications 
The majority of our participants used the apps for browsing 
posts  made  by  others.  We  were  interested  in  why  they 
enjoyed reading posts from others and what benefit they got 
out of reading these posts, given the barriers of anonymity 
and ephemerality to forming relationships with the posters. 
We  found  that  participants’  motivations  for  reading  posts 
fell  into  three  main  categories:  connection,  entertainment, 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

they  had  gone 

and  social  comparison.  We  also  noticed  aversion  towards 
offensive content people saw on the site. 
Feeling Connected to People Like Me 
Our  participants  liked  the  posts  that  sparked  feelings  of 
similarity  or  empathy,  and  estimated  that  the  posts  they 
could resonate with were more likely to get popular. These 
posts  were  about  funny  habits,  similar  life  experiences,  or 
similar  problems 
through  or  were 
experiencing  (such  as  the  loss  of  a  close  relative,  being 
saddled  with  student  loans).  Three  participants  mentioned 
they  liked  to  see  people  overcoming  difficulties  in  their 
lives that seemed relevant to their own lives. For example, 
P5  liked  a  post  by  a  single  mom  about  raising  five  kids 
(Table 2, positive stories) because she had a big family and 
could empathize with how hard that situation must be: 
“It’s  nice  to  see  that  people  are  fighting  through  things, 
and like in this situation that would really stink. I’m a child 
of four, and so I know how crazy it gets just from both of 
our parents.  So then it’s like someone with five kids I’d be 
like wow. I’d give them props.”(P5) 
People also resonated with objective topics that signaled a 
common  social  identity  outside  of  the  app,  such  as  posts 
about the school attended, local news, or local restaurants. 
Participants  did  not  restrict  their  activity  or  viewing  to  a 
single  topic  or  interest,  but  especially  liked  posts  that 
connected  with  their  own  interests.  Some  participants 
mentioned  they  were  more  attracted  to  posts  about  music, 
fashion,  technology,  or  TV  shows  that  matched  their  own 
interests.  On  the  other  hand,  the  anonymous  apps  did  not 
seem  to  serve  interest-based  information  needs  very  well. 
Two participants mentioned searching for things they were 
interested in but failed to find satisfying results.  
Being entertained 
Participants  enjoyed  reading  entertaining  or  sensational 
posts made by others for their amusement or shock value. 
Several  participants  enjoyed  reading  personal  negative 
confession  posts  for  their  shock  value  (Table  2,  distress 
relief and social venting). For example, P18 said: “it’s like a 
reality TV on your phone.” P13, an undergraduate student 
majoring  in  engineering,  said:  “It’s  kind  of  a  madhouse. 
Like,  people  will  post  some  of  their  deepest,  darkest 
secrets.”  He  liked  reading  about  people’s  “life-changing 
problems”  because  he  believed  people  were  sharing  the 
actual problems they had.  
Half  of  the  participants  said  they  enjoyed  reading  more 
lighthearted  confessions  and  entertaining  posts 
for 
amusement. For example, P11 said:  
“A lot of people just post these really intense confessions, 
or things like that. And it’s kind of good to see that people 
can also just post these really funny things on it.”(P11) 
Aiding Downward Social Comparison 
Distressing  posts  also 
social 
comparison  or  schaudenfreude  [40].  Two  participants  (P5 

stimulated  downward 

366

and  P11)  said  learning  about  other  people’s  problems 
helped them put their own lives into perspective, and made 
them feel more motivated to handle their own problems.  
“It  kind  of  put  things  in  perspective  for  me...  There  were 
times where I would be like oh my gosh in my life. And then 
I would see other people and their issues, and then I would 
be thankful for what I have, and like myself.” (P5) 
Disliking Misinformation and Offensive Content 
An  obvious  drawback  of  anonymity  is  that  it  lacks  social 
(and  legal)  accountability  for  rumors,  misinformation,  and 
offensive  content.  Several  participants  complained  about 
seeing  posts  that  were  offensive  to  women,  posts  that 
included  nudity  or  overly  sexual  content,  and  prejudicial 
posts about people’s religion or race. As in Turkle’s work 
[36],  a  few  of  our  participants  doubted  the  truthfulness  of 
posts and mentioned that stories they saw on Whisper were 
farfetched  and  did  not  seem  realistic.  The  engineering 
student (P13) thought popular posts he saw were “presented 
in  a  way  that  can  grab  your  attention.”  P4  said,  “some 
people  might  just  exaggerate  details  to  get  people  to  feel 
sorry for them.”  
Perceptions of the Crowd and Level of Community  
We were interested in whether there really was a sense of 
community among users of this application despite the lack 
of  affordances  for  connection  and  identification.  Users  in 
the  application  couldn’t  associate  individuals  with  posts 
most of the time and posts didn’t persist for long periods in 
the application. It was often difficult to refind a particular 
post seen in the past. Our analysis of posts and responses to 
posts revealed, perhaps counter intuitively, that participants 
still felt connection to the messages and emotions of other 
users sometimes motivating direct interaction.  
User Identities  
Our participants perceived other users of the applications to 
be mostly teenagers or young adults. Some described user 
identities  using  specific  demographics  such  as  “LGBT 
group, female.”  Most of them made this estimation based 
on the type of content they saw in the app. One said, “It's a 
lot of people talking about things like hooking up and like 
meeting people out at bars and stuff. It makes me think of a 
younger population (P18).” The YikYak user guessed there 
were  other  college  students  on  the  application  because  of 
her location (a college neighborhood) and the fact that the 
application used her location to show nearby posts.  
Location provided an identity signal unique to these apps in 
comparison to other web-based online communities. Posters 
could use the “nearby” feature of Whisper and YikYak to 
focus their attention on the people geographically close to 
them.  This  shared 
level  of 
informational  or  emotional  support  they  gained  from 
interaction.  There  were  other  ways  of  signaling  identity 
through  posts,  such  as  by  indicating  special  interests  or 
affiliations.  For  example,  one  participant  posted  about  a 
local  baseball  team,  using  a  phrase  that  only  fans  would 

increased 

identity 

the 

SESSION: RELATIONSHIPS AND ROMANCE

themselves  by  posting  selfies  as 

understand,  signaling  he  was  a  fan  and  intended  to  elicit 
responses from other fans (P16).  
We  asked  participants  to  estimate  how  anonymous  they 
were on the site, and most of them were quite confident that 
they were anonymous. One exception was the woman who 
also  used  PostSecret;  she  thought  Whisper  was  not  as 
anonymous  as  PostSecret  because  Whisper  posts  could 
potentially  be 
tracked  electronically.  The  engineering 
student  (P13)  even  took  additional  steps  to  anonymize  his 
identity  such  as  using  a  Burner  app  to  create  temporary 
phone  number  for  Tinder  or  Craigslist  and  using  an  app 
TextSecure to send encrypted messages. 
Self-deanonymizing  and  deanonymizing  others  were 
frowned upon by our respondents, and not something they 
had  done  through  their  posts  in  the  app.  One  participant 
(P7)  deanonymized  a  friend  on  Whisper  when  he 
recognized him, later deleting his identifying reply because 
the  original  poster  became  upset  after  being  publicly 
deanonymized  and  he  did  not  want  to  hurt  his  friend’s 
feelings. Our participants observed other users occasionally 
deanonymizing 
the 
background of their posts, typically in posts requesting in-
person meetups. 
User Interactions 
Participants  mentioned  seeing  a  variety  of  replies  ranging 
from supportive and encouraging messages, suggestions, to 
extreme  opinions,  criticism,  and  offensive  comments.  P7 
said Whisper was similar to a “giant psychologist” whereby 
people  unload  their  problems  and  others  console  them.  
People  seem  to  bond  with  others  based  on  the  similar 
problems they have experienced or on their shared interests, 
but  this  connection  may  be  weak  and  short-lived.  As 
described  earlier,  hearts  (or  upvotes  on  YikYak)  could 
signal validation or support, and people tended to heart (or 
upvote) posts that they felt were relevant to them or funny 
posts they liked. However, the meaning of “heart” could be 
ambiguous (similar to the ambiguity of likes on FCB [5]). 
P11  said  she  usually  hearted  funny  posts  on  Whisper,  but 
would feel awkward if she hearted sad posts.  
It can be challenging to keep one’s interactions appropriate 
while using anonymous communication apps because of the 
disinhibiting  effect  of  anonymity.  The  engineering  student 
noted regarding some spiteful replies he saw to a woman’s 
post: “These people were just digging into this woman and 
showing absolutely no remorse” (P13). Replies on Whisper 
usually  consisted  of  personal  opinions,  which  sometimes 
could be considered as crossing the line of appropriateness, 
especially  because  they  were  coming  from  complete 
strangers.  For  instance,  P4  posted  about  her  relationship 
problems  on  Whisper,  but  erased  her  original  posts  after 
getting inappropriate responses from other men. She said:  
"They  were  just  people  putting  their  two  cents  in  about 
things that I didn't post about.  People were saying, "Oh, he 
must not be making you happy in other ways," and things 

367

information,  and  not 

that I didn't say anything about, so just people looking way 
too  far  into  the  situation.   And  this  feels  really  personal 
really fast for things that I wasn't asking for. " (P4)  
Whisper allowed people to send direct messages to others, 
usually initiated by posts. Some people used them to seek 
further  interactions  such  as  meeting  in  real  life.  These 
interaction  requests  sometimes  drove  people  away  when 
they were unwanted or inappropriate.  The college student 
who  was  looking  for  responses  on  her  tattoo  received 
replies  asking  for  her  ASL  (age,  sex  and  location),  and 
pictures  of  her  tattoo.  Eventually  she  stopped  replying  to 
the  messages  when  they  got  “too  personal”  (P4).    P1 
enjoyed  messaging  others  on  Whisper,  but  did  not  pursue 
further interactions when a 30-year old guy asked him out.  
Rules to Behave on Anonymous Apps 
Maintaining  anonymity  on 
the  apps  was  considered 
important by a lot of users. Several people mentioned that 
they  would  advise  newcomers  not  to  disclose  overly 
personal 
to  post  pictures  of 
themselves.  In  general  people  tended  to  say  there  was  no 
rule or norm in the community, because it should be a place 
where people can say whatever they like to say. However, 
vulgarity, explicit sexual language, spam, and harsh replies 
showed  some  negative  effects  on 
the  community. 
Sometimes  these  types  of  content  made  people  leave  the 
app. P18 used Whisper less frequently now because she was 
turned off by too much sexual content on the site; P17 used 
it less because she was irritated by some posts and replies.  
People  had  conflicting  views  of  what  the  purpose  of  the 
community  was.  P5  thought  Whisper  was  a  serious  app, 
saying “everyone is vulnerable here.” P8 said the purpose 
of the app was for getting support from other people or just 
for getting something off your chest. On the contrary, P15 
would  advise  new  comers  to  not  to  take  Whisper  too 
seriously,  because  anonymity  makes  it  untrustworthy.  P4 
also held similar view of Whisper - “I would never use [it] 
for  really  intimate  parts  of  my  life.”  Several  participants 
were mainly using the apps for entertainment purposes. P7 
even  deleted  one  of  his  posts  when  he  thought  the  replies 
overstepped the fun boundary. The YikYak user P16 didn’t 
think people should post serious opinions on the app at all.  
Comparison with Other Communities 
Each  anonymous  communication  app  had  some  unique 
characteristics  that  were  different  from  other  anonymous 
applications or communities that had different appeal. Our 
participants  reported  being  anonymous  on  other  systems 
like reddit, Tumblr, Facebook Confession Board, FML app, 
and  PostSecret  but  sometimes  for  different  reasons.  Three 
Whisper users also used Tumblr, but they thought Whisper 
was  designed  for  people  to  vent  about  their  problems, 
whereas  Tumblr  was  for  entertainment  purposes  and 
sharing  impersonal  fun  stuff  (such  as  fandom  and  artistic 
content).  P3  noted  that  she  has  Tumblr  friends  in  real  life 
and even meets them or connects with them on Facebook, 
but  she  would  never  do  that  with  other  users  on  Whisper. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

P11  thought  Whisper  was  similar  to  FML  in  serving  the 
purpose  of  making  people  feel  better  about  their  lives  by 
looking  at  others’  problems,  but  the  stories  on  FML  were 
more extreme, and probably only happened to one person, 
whereas the posts on Whisper were more common.  
All  but  two  participants  we  interviewed  had  Facebook 
accounts.  Four  participants  mentioned  that  they  used 
Facebook  much  less  frequently  recently  and  rarely  shared 
their personal status. They considered Facebook as a place 
for the “older generation,” and they only shared big events 
or links and photos on it. On average, each participant used 
3  other  social  sites  or  apps.  When  we  asked  them  to 
compare 
the  anonymous  communication  apps  with 
identified  communities,  participants  said  anonymous  posts 
were more personal, more open and more honest – “you can 
be yourself because there’s no retribution (P9).” P1 thought 
people were more honest and truthful on Whisper because 
they  did  not  need  to  worry  about  managing  others’ 
impressions of them. Participants thought the communities 
on  anonymous  communication  apps  tolerated  different 
religious  and  political  beliefs  than  the  more  identified 
communities they were in and had a more diverse audience. 
As in previous research [22], our participants reported that 
the feedback they received on Facebook was more personal 
and in-depth than anonymous feedback (P2). Some people 
said  they  saw  similar  types  of  posts  and  interactions  on 
Whisper  and  Facebook  or  Twitter,  such  as  quotes,  and 
encouraging responses like “good job.” 
DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS 
Our  study  shows  that  many  people  share  their  personal 
opinions,  experiences  and  confessions  with  others  on 
anonymous  applications,  for  the  reasons  of  seeking  or 
providing social validation, building connections, avoiding 
problems  of  context  collapse  and  impression  management 
on identified social media, and sharing momentary feelings. 
A lack of accountability can mar interactions in these apps, 
but the unique interaction patterns and the benefits people 
gain from using these apps suggest design implications for 
online communities and social networking sites. 
Exchanging Social Support Without Identification 
The main anonymous feature on these apps is that there is 
usually no consistent username or handle. Unlike previous 
work  [35]  in  which  users  adopt  different  identities  with 
different  personalities  in  the  virtual  world,  people  cannot 
build consistent identity or reputation on these apps. There 
is no need to play an “ideal self” on these apps since there 
is no reputation or personal history. People likely use these 
apps to disclose fragments of their multifaceted identity or 
the  unconventional  parts  of  themselves.  It  is  known  that 
self-disclosure  increases  intimacy  among  group  members 
[8, 37]. We also found people easily bond with a complete 
stranger on these apps when they share similar experiences 
or feelings.  
A  primary  reason  that  people  post  and  view  anonymous 
posts is to gain social validation and social support from the 

community.  Our  finding  suggests  that  social  support  and 
social approval can be provided by strangers in anonymous 
communities.  This  finding  strikingly  resembles  early 
research on Usenet nearly 20 years ago [39] – online groups 
often are supportive in nature. Hearts and upvotes in these 
apps  are  lightweight  methods  to  signal  validation  and 
connection. However, we do not know whether or not the 
connections  users  find  on  these  apps  would  evolve  into 
longer-term, intimate relationships. Even the veteran users 
we  interviewed  have  only  used  the  apps  for  about  a  year. 
Future  research  should  examine  whether  or  not  this 
temporary support and connection lasts, and whether or not 
it contributes to users’ well-being in the long run. 
The Ephemerality of Anonymous Communication 
The new form of location-based interaction on smartphones 
enables  momentary  and  in-situ  information  sharing  which 
was  previously  impossible  in  web-based  communication. 
Our  finding  suggests  that  some  user-generated  content 
might be ephemeral by nature and could be shaped by the 
design  of  the  communication  media.  For  instance,  our 
participants  reported  that  they  seldom  went  back  to  find 
previous posts they have made on Whisper or YikYak. An 
important self-disclosure goal on identified social networks 
such as Facebook is to keep a record of personal history for 
one’s  own  use  [37,41].  These  anonymous  communication 
apps may not support this purpose. P9 compared Whisper to 
reddit, and pointed out the lack of history in Whisper: “It’s 
kind  of  meteor  flashes  in  the  pan.” The  fact  that  people’s 
identities are not tied to the content they created also makes 
it  impossible  to  establish  reputation  or  history  as  in  other 
online communities. The recent demise of Secret [1] raises 
the  question  of  the  sustainability  of  these  communication 
apps. Post ephemerality might contribute to decreased user 
engagement: without a reputation attached to a community, 
it is easy for user to quit and join other communities. 
The lack of identity association, however, also reduces the 
burden of generating and sharing content, which could lead 
to  more  content  generation.  People  sometimes  post  very 
momentary  feelings,  and  these  types  of  content  may  not 
need  to  stay  long  on  the  Internet.  SnapChat’s  feature  of 
allowing user to set how long their content lives before they 
share  it  with  their  friends  seems  to  support  this  need  for 
ephemerality. An important design question is: can people 
accurately  estimate  how  long  their  data  need  to  persist 
before they share the content?  
Mitigating Negative Interactions 
The  challenge  of  introducing  anonymity  into  other  online 
communities is  how to mitigate  negative interactions such 
as offensive or sexually explicit content. Birnholtz et al [5] 
shows  that  using  anonymity  in  a  localized  identified 
community  (FCB)  only  produces  a  small  amount  of 
negative  comments,  but  the  responders  on  FCB  are 
identified by their own Facebook profile. We could expect 
the amount of negativity to increase if the identities of those 
who responded are removed. A possible solution is to use 

368

SESSION: RELATIONSHIPS AND ROMANCE

identity  signals  to  mitigate  the  negativity  of  anonymous 
communication,  such  as  location,  affiliation,  or  domain  of 
interest.  Our  findings  also  suggest  that  shared  identities 
such  as  location  or  school  might  motivate  more  positive 
interactions in anonymous communications.  
Future  work  could  conduct  experiments  to  examine  the 
relationship  between  the  level  of  identification  and  the 
amount of negativity people receive in anonymous or quasi-
anonymous  online  communication  environments.  Some 
existing  communities  already  give  users  the  choice  of 
temporary anonymity such as Quora (an online Q&A site), 
and a significant minority chooses to be anonymous when 
replying or following certain questions [25]. 
Limitations 
A  limitation  of  our  work  is  that  we  did  not  get  rich  data 
about  negative  interactions  on  these  apps.  A  few  of  our 
participants  talked  about  their  discomfort  when  received 
unwanted  connecting  requests  or  harsh  comments,  but  we 
did not talk to anyone who has sent these messages. Social 
desirability  bias  might  make  this  problem  challenging  for 
qualitative research: people tend to under-report behaviors 
that may be viewed unfavorable by others. Future research 
could examine the characteristics of negative or undesirable 
interactions on these apps or on other communities such as 
Quora or reddit. The result of these studies could help build 
automatic content filters of these apps.  
Another  limitation  is  that  we  have  a  comparatively  small 
sample size, and most of our participants lived in the same 
city.  Although  our  sample  matches  the  demographic 
characteristics  of  Whisper  users  described  in  other  larger 
scale study [7], our small sample size may prevent us from 
detecting  all  possible  reasons  that  motivate  people  to  use 
these  apps.  Individual  demographic  differences  such  as 
gender identity, profession, and location may also influence 
people’s behavior and motivations. These questions can be 
more  appropriately  answered  in  a  larger-scale  quantitative 
study using methods such as online survey.  
CONCLUSION 
We have conducted an interview study to explore how and 
why people use anonymous, location-based communication 
apps. Many people share personal experiences, confessions, 
or opinions on these apps to gain social validation from the 
anonymous  crowd.  People  also  benefit  from  sharing  or 
reading 
lighthearted,  entertaining  posts.  Anonymous 
responses  are  sometimes  considered  as  more  honest  and 
valuable than what people would get from identified social 
networks. 
incorporating 
anonymity  and  ephemerality  in  online  communities  may 
foster  content  generation,  and  raise  some  future  research 
questions  of  how  to  manage  undesired  interactions  in 
anonymous communication.   
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Rebecca  Weir  was  very  helpful 
the 
interviews.  We  also  thank  Sara  Kiesler  for  editorial 

findings  suggest 

in  conducting 

  Our 

that 

suggestions,  and  thank  the  anonymous  participants  for 
sharing  their  stories  with  us.  This  work  was  supported  by 
NSF grants CNS1040801, CNS1345305, and CNS1221006. 
REFERENCES 
1.  Secret Shuts Down. Retrieved from 

http://techcrunch.com/2015/04/29/psst/ 

2.  John A. Bargh, K.Y.A. McKenna, and G.M. Fitzsimons. 

2002. Can You See the Real Me  ? Activation and 
Expression of the “ True Self ” on the Internet. Journal 
of social issues 58, 1, 33–48.  

3.  Roy F Baumeister. 1982. A self-presentational view of 

social phenomena. Psychological bulletin 91, 1, 3. 

4.  Micheal S Bernstein, A Monroy-Hernández, D Harry, P 
André, K Panovich, and G Vargas. 2011. 4chan and/b: 
An Analysis of Anonymity and Ephemerality in a Large 
Online Community. In Proc. of ICWSM '11, 50-57. 

5.  Jeremy Birnholtz, Nicholas Aaron, Ross Merola, and 

Arindam Paul. 2015. “ Is it Weird to Still Be a 
Virgin  ?:” Anonymous , Locally Targeted Questions on 
Facebook Confession Boards. In Proc. of CHI '15, 
2613-2622.  

6.  Juliet M Corbin and A L Strauss. 2008. Basics of 

qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for 
developing grounded theory. Sage Publications, Inc. 

7.  Denzil Correa, Leandro Araújo Silva, Mainack Mondal, 

Fabrício Benevenuto, and Krishna P Gummadi. The 
Many Shades of Anonymity  : Characterizing 
Anonymous Social Media Content. In Proc. of ICWSM 
'15, 71-80. 

8.  Valerian J Derlega, Janusz Grzelak, and others. 1979. 

Appropriateness of self-disclosure. Self-disclosure: 
Origins, patterns, and implications of openness in 
interpersonal relationships, 151–176. 

9.  Judith S Donath. 1999. Identity and deception in the 

virtual community. Communities in Cyberspace 1996, 
London, 29–59.  

10. Maeve Duggan, N Ellison, C Lampe, A Lenhart, and M 

Madden. 2015. Social Media Update 2014. Retrieved 
from http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/01/09/social-
media-update-2014/ 

11. Nicole Ellison, R Heino, and J Gibbs. 2006. Managing 
Impressions Online: Self-Presentation Processes in the 
Online Dating Environment. Journal of Computer-
Mediated Communication 11, 2, 415–441. 

12. Erving Goffman. 1959. The presentation of self in 

everyday life. Anchor Books, New York, 1959. 

13. Mark S Granovetter. 1973. The strength of weak ties. 

American journal of sociology, 1360–1380. 

14. Elisheva F. Gross. 2004. Adolescent internet use: What 

we expect, what teens report. Journal of Applied 
Developmental Psychology 25, 6 SPEC. ISS., 633–649. 

369

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

15. Adam N. Joinson. 2001. Self-disclosure in computer-
mediated communication: The role of self-awareness 
and visual anonymity. European Journal of Social 
Psychology 31, 2, 177–192.  

16. Ruogu Kang, Stephanie Brown, and Sara Kiesler. 2013. 

Why Do People Seek Anonymity on the Internet?: 
Informing Policy and Design. In Proc. of CHI '13, 
ACM, 2657–2666.  

17. Sara Kiesler, Jane Siegel, and Timothy W. McGuire. 

1984. Social psychological aspects of computer-
mediated communication. American Psychologist 39, 
10, 1123–1134.  

18. Robert E Kraut and P Resnick. 2011. Building 

Successful Online Communities: Evidence-Based Social 
Design. The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts 
London, England. 

19. Alex Leavitt. 2015. “ This is a Throwaway Account ”: 

Temporary Technical Identities and Perceptions of 
Anonymity in a Massive Online Community. In Proc. of 
CSCW '15, 317-327. 

20. Eden Litt, Erin Spottswood, Jeremy Birnholtz, Jeff 

Hancock, Madeline E Smith, and Lindsay Reynolds. 
2014. Awkward Encounters of an “Other” Kind: 
Collective Self-Presentation and Face Threat on 
Facebook. In Proc. of CSCW '14, 449–460.  

21. Alice E Marwick and danah boyd. 2011. I tweet 

honestly, I tweet passionately: Twitter users, context 
collapse, and the imagined audience. New media & 
society 13, 1, 114–133. 

22. Meredith Ringel Morris, Kori Inkpen, and Gina Venolia. 

2014. Remote Shopping Advice  : Enhancing In-Store 
Shopping with Social Technologies. In Proc. of CSCW 
'14, 662–673.  

23. Jay F Nunamaker, Lynda M Applegate, and Benn R 

Konsynski. 1988. Computer-Aided Deliberation: Model 
Management and Group Decision Support: Special 
Focus Article. Operations Research 36, 6, 826–848. 
24. Julia Omarzu. 2000. A Disclosure Decision Model: 
Determining How and When Individuals Will Self-
Disclose. Personality and Social Psychology Review 4, 
2, 174–185.  

25. Sai Teja Peddinti, Aleksandra Korolova, Elie Bursztein, 
and Geetanjali Sampemane. 2014. Cloak and Swagger: 
Understanding Data Sensitivity Through the Lens of 
User Anonymity. S&P’14, 493–508.  

26. James W Pennebaker, Janice K Kiecolt-Glaser, and 

Ronald Glaser. 1988. Disclosure of traumas and immune 
function: health implications for psychotherapy. Journal 
of consulting and clinical psychology 56, 2, 239. 

27. Hua Qian and Craig R. Scott. 2007. Anonymity and 

self-disclosure on weblogs. Journal of Computer-
Mediated Communication 12, 4, 1428–1451.  

28. Lee Rainie, S. Kiesler, R. Kang, et al. 2013. Anonymity, 

privacy, and security online. Pew Research Center. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2013/09/05/anonymity-
privacy-and-security-online/ 

29. Yuqing Ren, Robert Kraut, and Sara Kiesler. 2007. 

Applying common identity and bond theory to design of 
online communities. Organization studies 28, 3, 377–
408. 

30. Zick Rubin. 1975. Disclosing oneself to a stranger: 
Reciprocity and its limits. Journal of Experimental 
Social Psychology 11, 3, 233–260.  

31. Christopher Sibona and Steven Walczak. 2011. 

Unfriending on facebook: Friend request and 
online/offline behavior analysis. Proceedings of the 
Annual Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences, 1–10.  

32. Susannah Stern. 2007. Producing Sites, Exploring 

Identities: Youth Online Authorship. In Youth, Identity, 
and Digital Media, David Buckingham (ed.). The MIT 
Press, Cambridge, MA, 95–117.  

33. Fred Stutzman, Ralph Gross, and Alessandro Acquisti. 

2013. Silent Listeners: The Evolution of Privacy and 
Disclosure on Facebook. Journal of Privacy and 
Confidentiality 2, 7–41.  

34. John Suler. 2004. The online disinhibition effect. 
Cyberpsychology & behavior  : the impact of the 
Internet, multimedia and virtual reality on behavior and 
society 7, 3, 321–6.  

35. Sherry Turkle. 1995. Life on the Screen. Identity in the 
Age of the Age of Internet. Touchstone, NY, NY, USA. 

36. Sherry Turkle. 2012. Alone together: Why we expect 
more from technology and less from each other. Basic 
books, NY, NY, USA. 

37. Jessica Vitak and Jinyoung Kim. 2014. “You can’t 
block people offline”: examining how facebook’s 
affordances shape the disclosure process. In Proc. 
CSCW ’14, 461–474.  

38. Gang Wang, Bolun Wang, Tianyi Wang, Ana Nika, 

Haitao Zheng, and Ben Y Zhao. Whispers in the Dark  : 
Analysis of an Anonymous Social Network Categories 
and Subject Descriptors. In Proc. of IMC '14, 137-150. 

39. Barry Wellman and Milena Gulia. 1998. Net surfers 

don’t ride alone: Virtual communities as communities. 
Communities in Cyberspace, 167–193.  

40. Thomas A Wills. 1981. Downward comparison 

principles in social psychology. Psychological bulletin 
90, 2, 245. 

41. Xuan Zhao, Niloufar Salehi, and Sasha Naranjit. 2013. 

The many faces of Facebook: Experiencing social media 
as performance, exhibition, and personal archive. Proc. 
of CHI '13, 1–10.  

370

