CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Time to reflect: Supporting health services over time by 

focusing on collaborative reflection 

Anind K. Dey, Sara Kiesler 
Carnegie Mellon University 

Pittsburgh, PA 

Madhu Reddy 

Northwestern University 

Evanston, IL 

{anind, kiesler}@cs.cmu.edu 

mreddy@northwestern.edu 

 

Gabriela Marcu 
Drexel University 
Philadelphia, PA 

gmarcu@drexel.edu 

in 

records  and 

routines 

in 

standardized 

time-critical  services 

ABSTRACT 
When  health  services  involve  long-term  treatment  over 
months or years, providers have the ability, not present in 
acute emergency care, to collaboratively reflect on clients’ 
changing health data and adjust interventions. In this paper, 
we  discuss  temporality  as  a  factor  in  the  design  of  health 
information  technology.  We  define  a  temporal  spectrum 
ranging  from 
that  benefit  from 
standardization  to  long-term  services  that  require  more 
flexibility.  We  provide  empirical  evidence  from  fieldwork 
that  we  performed  in  organizations  providing  long-term 
behavioral  and  mental  health  services  for  children.  Our 
fieldwork 
this  context  complements  and  provides 
contrasts  to  previous  CSCW  studies  performed  in  time-
critical  hospital  settings.  Current  literature  shows  a  bias 
toward 
the 
implementation of health information technology, a policy 
that  may  not  be  appropriate  for  long-term  health  services. 
We discuss how the design of information systems should 
vary based on temporal factors.  
Author Keywords 
Health 
services; 
reflection. 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.3 Group and Organization Interfaces: Computer- 
supported cooperative work; J.3 Computer Applications: 
Life and Medical Sciences—Medical information systems. 
INTRODUCTION 
Health  information  technology  (HIT)  that  collects,  stores, 
and  displays  client  health  data  and  interventions  can 
improve  accuracy,  efficiency,  and  collaboration  in  service 
delivery, resulting in better care. Historically, the design of 
HIT  has  emphasized  standardization  of  both  medical 
records and the practices that surround them, with a focus 
on  tightly  coordinated  tasks,  especially  in  emergency 

systems;  collaboration; 

information 

to 

consequences  of 

settings [3, 43]. The focus on standardization and inflexible 
coordination persists, despite mounting evidence from both 
research  [12]  and  practice  [20]  of  the  limitations  and 
unintended 
this  approach.  Diana 
Forsythe’s pioneering work in medical sociology described 
the  problem  of  over-standardization  over  20  years  ago, 
reasoning  that  HITs  “are  designed,  built,  and  evaluated 
according  to  procedures  that  ‘delete  the  social’  and  mute 
the voice of users” [10].  
Forsythe’s  work  and  that  of  others  suggests  a  need  for 
taking  a  sociotechnical  approach 
the  design  and 
implementation of HIT, to take into account organizational 
factors,  workflow,  and  social  interactions  in  addition  to 
technical  factors  [12,  26].  However,  there  remains  a  gap 
between  methodological  approaches  and  clear  conceptual 
models  of  the  role  that  HIT  plays  when  it  is  not 
standardized. Recent reviews of the literature in 2010 [26] 
and 2013 [9] indicate that we still lack an understanding of 
how providers work together across health services settings 
in  which  standardization  and  tight  coordination  has  not 
been implemented, and may not be either possible or useful. 
In  this  work,  we  contribute  to  the  move  away  from 
standardization  by  building  on  sociotechnical  approaches, 
and toward concrete descriptions of new roles and functions 
of  technology  in  health  service  delivery.  With  extensive 
fieldwork, we have defined a temporal spectrum (Figure 1) 
based  on  four  pairs  of  characteristics  derived  from 
empirical  data:  structured  or  unstructured,  sequential  or 
iterative,  predictable  or  unpredictable,  and  standardized  or 
adaptive. 
The ends of our spectrum represent two main categories of 
care:  time-critical  acute  care  and  long-term  chronic  care. 
We have represented these categories as ends of a spectrum 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be  honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.  
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA   
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00   
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820079 

 
Figure 1. The temporal spectrum of health services we define in 

this paper, and use as a lens to discuss the design of HIT. 

 

954

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

1 

is 

across 

distributed 

time.  Figure 

to  demonstrate  a  need  for  models  of  care  that  reflect  a 
changing healthcare system that is becoming more complex 
and 
an 
oversimplification  of  health  service  delivery,  meant  to 
emphasize how little we know about this spectrum and how 
much  still  needs  to  be  filled  in  by  future  research.  For 
example, diagnostic work falls somewhere in the center of 
the  spectrum,  as  it  may  or  may  not  be  time-critical,  and 
only certain symptoms elicit a sense of urgency. Diagnostic 
work  is  unpredictable  in  that  the  process  and  outcome 
cannot  be  known,  but  practices  can  be  sequential  and 
standardized. 
Health  services  are  likely  to  involve  elements  across  the 
spectrum depicted in Figure 1, and also to fluctuate across 
points along the spectrum over time. A child on the autism 
spectrum generally requires long-term services to help him 
develop  over  time,  but  critical  incidents  are  also  common 
and require an urgent response to behaviors that are unsafe. 
Even the most structured and protocol-driven settings will 
have unexpected events that require flexibility, and even the 
most unpredictable environments will include some amount 
structure or protocol-driven responses.  
The temporal spectrum in Figure 1 serves as a starting point 
for  defining  how  practices  that  are  motivated  by  different 
time scales should be supported. We focus on temporality 
as a motivator in healthcare work, complementing a typical 
focus on efficiency and accuracy, to understand the various 
ways  in  which  temporality  drives  services.  The  leftmost 
part  of  the  spectrum  is  well  represented  in  the  literature: 
health services in acute care tend to involve a large number 
of  protocols 
standardized 
workflows. In this work, we begin to fill in the rest of the 
spectrum  by  understanding  what  happens  when  there  is 
more  time  to  reflect,  to  adapt  services  more  to  individual 
needs, and to remain flexible and malleable over time. To 
understand  these  types  of  services,  we  studied  behavioral 
intervention for children with special needs. 
This  paper  addresses  the  research  question:  How  do  we 
design  HIT  to  support  health  services  provided  over  time, 
when  there  is  more  time  to  reflect  on  data  and  less  of  an 
ability  to  standardize  all  practices?  We  explore  how  HIT 
might  be  designed  to  address  different  requirements  and 
challenges  than  are  required  in  time-  and  safety-critical 
clinical settings. For example, behavioral interventions such 
as  cognitive  behavioral  therapy  and  smoking  cessation 
programs  take  time  and  adjustments  to  produce  results. 
Consequently,  HIT  should  support  these  interventions  by 
enabling  flexible  coordination  and 
iterative  decision-
making among providers. The goals of this paper align with 
a recent theme in the CSCW community of slowing down, 
and  thinking  about  temporality  without  assuming  that  the 
ultimate  goals  need  relate  to  speed,  efficiency,  or  formal 
structures [21, 25]. 

for  decision-making  and 

are 

services 

coordinated 

RELATED WORK 
Much of the literature on collaboration in health services is 
drawn  from  studies  in  acute  care  contexts—especially 
hospital  environments  [1,  2,  5,  14,  26,  31,  32,  37].  Time- 
and safety-critical coordination has been studied in-depth in 
contexts  such  as  trauma  resuscitation  [39]  and  emergency 
rooms  [32].  In  these  high-risk  environments,  information 
sharing  tends  to  be  focused  and  fast,  supporting  mutual 
awareness  and  distributed  cognition.  When  temporality  is 
discussed, the focus is typically on time-critical aspects of 
health services [19, 37]. Few studies have investigated how 
health 
and 
organizations  (e.g.,  [13,  47]),  especially  non-clinical 
organizations (e.g., [34]). These types of studies are needed 
for the CSCW community to form a holistic and ecological 
view of health services.  
Collaborative reflection  
In their review of 25 years of CSCW research in healthcare, 
Fitzpatrick  and  Ellingsen  [9]  identify  key  themes  and 
contributions 
hospitals, 
standardization,  electronic  health 
records,  and  other 
structured  aspects  of  services.  Two  themes  of  particular 
relevance to the present paper are (i) temporal coordination 
and (ii) expanding contexts of healthcare work – emerging 
but  still  limited  areas  of  contribution.  One  of  their 
concluding  recommendations  was  a  need  to  address  new, 
integrated models of care:  

across 

focus 

show 

time 

that 

a 

on 

“New  models  of  care  have  emerged  that  look  beyond 
the 
individual  hospital  or  episodic  encounter  of 
healthcare.  There  is  the  notion  of  life-long  patient-
centric records that cross institutional and professional 
boundaries… There is also an increasing push of care 
into the home and the community, driven by the needs 
of  chronic  conditions, 
integrated 
‘spectrum of care’ model” (p. 651) 

reflecting  an 

The  spectrum  of  temporality  that  we  present  in  this  paper 
scopes  the  variety  of  services  needed  from  episodic 
encounter to life-long care, and what could lie in between. 
The complexity of health service delivery across time and 
place is a current theme in the HIT literature. For example, 
Marcu,  Dey,  and  Kiesler  use  the  term  collaborative 
reflection  to  describe  the  processes  observed  in  health 
service  delivery  that  cannot  be  standardized  [23].  Short-
term activities comprise of recording data, interpreting data, 
and  corroborating 
these 
activities inform the long-term process of treating complex 
and  unpredictable  chronic  conditions.  The  spectrum 
described  in  the  present  paper  continues  to  consider  the 
variety of activities and processes that need to be supported 
by HIT. 
Harrison,  Koppel,  and  Bar-Lev’s  review  [12],  using 
sociotechnical  analysis, 
identifies  common  unintended 
consequences  of  HIT.  These  unintended  consequences 
relate  to  the  temporal  spectrum  that  emerged  from  our 
empirical investigations: 

interpretations  with  others; 

955

•  Structured: 

overload 

“Causing 

by 
overemphasizing  structured  and  ‘complete’  information 
entry or retrieval.” (Pine and Mazmanian [33] also report 
this problem.) 

cognitive 

•  Sequential: “Misrepresenting collective, interactive work 

as linear, clearcut, predictable workflow.” 

•  Predictable:  “Interface  unsuitable  for  highly  interruptive 

context.” 

•  Standardized: 

“Misrepresenting 

as 
information transfer” (Mentis [26] also notes the need to 
represent and communicate more informal and subjective 
information.) 

communication 

breaks 

to  describe 

down.  Despite 

Working  toward  an  alternative  to  these  characteristics  of 
HIT that are biased toward standardization, we draw from 
descriptions  of  work  such  as  sensemaking,  improvisation, 
and reflection. 
Sensemaking, improvisation, and reflection 
Theoretical constructs of collaboration have primarily been 
used  to  improve  our  understanding  of  time-critical  and 
structured  aspects  of  health  services.  For  example, 
sensemaking  is  a  concept  often  cited  in  CSCW  literature. 
Weick’s foundational work [46] described the enactment of 
sensemaking,  or  how  the  process  of  making  sense  of 
information  plays  out  through  the  actions  of  individuals 
within  an  organization,  including  what  happens  when  the 
process 
the  wide-ranging 
applicability  of  sensemaking,  in  health  service  research,  it 
has  primarily  been  used 
time-critical 
information seeking and coordination in contexts such as an 
emergency  department  and  a  surgical  intensive  care  unit 
[32, 40].  
Sensemaking-related  concepts  of 
improvisation  and 
reflection have the potential to help us understand the less 
structured,  predictable,  and  time-critical  aspects  of  health 
services,  however  these  theoretical  perspective  have  not 
been  used  as  much  in  this  context.  For  example,  Klein, 
Moon, 
a 
macrocognitive  model  [18]  that  describes  the  iterative 
process of framing and interpreting data. Frames are used to 
“shape the data (for example, a house fire will be perceived 
differently  by  the  homeowner,  the  firefighters,  and  the 
arson  investigators)”  and  they  also  “change  as  we  acquire 
data” (p. 1). Through a bidirectional process, frames “shape 
and define the relevant data, and data mandate that frames 
change  in  nontrivial  ways”  (p.  1).  The  frame  metaphor 
captures  unpredictability  and  a  sensemaking  process  that 
unfolds over time.  
Others  have  described  unpredictability  as  improvisation, 
comparing  it  to  the  actions  of  skilled  jazz  musicians  [27, 
41].  During  improvisation,  skill  and  memory  is  applied  to 
unexpected,  non-routine  events.  Miner,  Bassoff,  and 
Moorman’s  field  study  showed  how  improvisation  was 
embedded  in  organizational  work  over  time  [27,  p.  327]. 
Their  observations  are  similar  to  those  made  in  other 

and  Hoffman’s  Data/Frame  Theory 

is 

SESSION: HOSPITAL WORK

studies of sensemaking in organizations [2, 30], suggesting 
that flexibility is a quality that should be explored unfolding 
over time. When unpredictable events arise in the moment, 
the ability to respond and improvise appears to be an ability 
shared among members of an organization and embedded in 
their collective practices. 
Much  of  organizational  theory  has  focused  on  long-term 
processes, but the concepts of improvisation and reflection 
have distinguished these processes from those that are time-
critical. Miner and colleagues [27] describe how short-term 
improvisation can “serve as a ‘trial’ in long-term trial-and-
error learning” [27, p. 321]. Schön [41] describes reflection 
as  the  process  that  allows  professionals  to  handle  the 
“complexity, uncertainty, instability, uniqueness, and value 
conflicts”  (p.  14)  involved  in  domains  like  medicine, 
management, and engineering.  
Organizational coupling 
Karl Weick first described the advantages of loose coupling 
between  people, 
tasks,  and  rewards,  which  enables 
organizations 
to  adapt  and  survive  under  uncertain 
conditions  [45].  O’Looney  [29]  discusses  loosely  coupled 
systems as sets of organizations working together for social 
service delivery. Our fieldwork focused on both the internal 
coordination of organizations, and their ability to coordinate 
externally with other organizations. 
The organizations we focused on in our study were loosely 
coupled  because  providers  needed  to  be  flexible  and 
adaptive in order to coordinate long-term treatment for each 
child.  Characteristics  of  a  loosely  coupled  organization 
include:  a  lack  of  rigidly  defined  roles  and  formal  ties; 
collaboration  that  predominantly  happens  informally  as 
needed to serve the needs of its clients; and events that are 
usually  unpredictable  [29,  45].  The  traits  that  enable 
organizations to be adaptive and malleable in order to meet 
the  needs  of  the  people  it  serves  are  also  traits  that  make 
technology  generally  unavailable  or  problematic 
for 
supporting these services. Marcu et al.’s [24] study of the 
persistence  of  paper-based  records  in  special  education 
provided  empirical  evidence  of 
the  challenges  of 
incorporating technology in these types of organizations. 
Harrison  [11]  extended  the  concept  of  organizational 
coupling 
the 
practices  and  processes  through  which  health  service 
organizations  coordinate  and  accomplish  their  work.  He 
distinguished 
organic 
sociotechnical systems. According to Harrison, mechanistic 
systems as more standardized, bureaucratic, and inflexible – 
traits that enable organizations to serve a higher number of 
patients  with  more  efficiency  and  scalability.  Organic 
systems  tend  to  be  more  flexible,  adaptive,  and  malleable 
over time – traits that enable more individualized services 
according  to  needs  that  may  change  over  time.  Harrison’s 
concept of an organic system is similar to our discussion of 
HIT  that  is  more  flexible  and  can  support  unstructured, 
unpredictable types of coordination.  

between  mechanistic 

information  systems, 

to  sociotechnical 

and 

956

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

clinical 

contexts, 

and 

improve 

METHODS 
The  goal  of  this  work  is  to  complement  field  studies  in 
time-critical 
our 
understanding  of  alternatives  to  standardization  in  the 
design of HIT. To this end, we conducted our fieldwork in a 
non-clinical  context  exemplifying  unpredictability  and  a 
need  for  flexibility:  behavioral  and  mental  health  services 
for  children  with  special  needs,  provided  within  a  school 
setting.  
In prior work within the context of behavioral and mental 
heath  services,  we  found  an  overreliance  on  paper-based 
records, and problems with adopting and incorporating HIT 
[24]. We were surprised by the use of paper records, despite 
their  inadequacy  for  collaborative  reflection  [23].  The 
purpose of the present study was to further investigate this 
technology  non-use  and  understand  what  aspects  of  these 
health  services  defied  standardization  and  HIT  adoption. 
Believing that HIT has failed to meet the unique needs of 
this  setting,  we  set  out  to  examine  the  process  of 
collaborative reflection enacted in these health services, and 
relate our observations to the standardization of HIT.  
Over  the  course  of  two  years,  we  conducted  151  hours  of 
fieldwork  at  seven  organizations  providing  behavioral  and 
mental health services for children with special needs. Six 
of  the  sites  were  schools  (two  with  residential  programs), 
and  one  was  a  therapy  center  providing  after-school 
programs. While the organizations differed somewhat, their 
behavioral and mental health services were similar. 
We  observed  clinical  services  that  were  integrated  with 
educational  services  to  address  behavioral,  emotional,  and 
mental  health  needs.  We  observed  and 
interviewed 
treatment  teams  providing  these  services,  which  were 
comprised  of  psychiatrists,  mental  health 
therapists, 
specialists,  personal  aides,  and  clinical 
behavioral 
supervisors.  We 
behavioral 
specialists,  teaching  staff,  and  aides,  whose  roles  were 
central to coordination of services. Children had diagnoses 
such  as  attention  deficit  hyperactivity  disorder,  autism 
spectrum  disorders,  trauma,  oppositional  defiant  disorder, 
and  anxiety  disorder.  The  organizations  we  studied 
provided  treatment  in  the  form  of  behavioral  intervention, 
frequent  positive 
reinforcement,  cognitive  behavioral 
therapy,  and  psychiatric  medications.  In  our  fieldwork  we 
focused  on  the  coordination  of  these  services  among 
members of the treatment team, according to the individual 
needs of each child. 
We  collected  data  through  naturalistic  observation  in 
classroom,  hallway,  and  conference  room  settings  that 
encapsulated both formal and informal interactions [8, 22]. 
We conducted contextual inquiry [4] with the providers to 
understand their practices and collaborative workflow. We 
conducted 129 semi-structured interviews and focus groups 
with providers to collect data on their opinions and attitudes 
toward  their  use  of  HIT.  We  visited  sites  at  least  once  a 
week,  sometimes  several  times  a  week.  During  fieldwork 

interviewed 

primarily 

we  took  detailed  notes,  and  the  research  team  met  after 
fieldwork  sessions  to  discuss  and  interpret  the  data.  We 
used an iterative process to discuss themes while continuing 
to gather field data. The research team met several times a 
week to analyze and compare fieldwork data.  
Our  approach  to  collecting  and  analyzing  field  data  was 
based on constructivist grounded theory [6]. We focused on 
gathering rich data using theoretical sampling across team 
members  and  contexts,  constant  comparison  with  data 
previously  collected,  and  inductive  thematic  analysis.  We 
analyzed  data  by  comparing  our  findings  to  the  literature, 
and  came  to  interpret  our  findings  using  organizational 
theory. Emergent themes in our data led us to connect our 
findings to literature on organizational coupling and organic 
sociotechnical  systems,  which  we  use  to  present  our 
findings in the following section. 
FINDINGS 
In this section, we describe the empirical data that formed 
the  basis  for  our  temporal  spectrum  of  health  services  in 
Figure  1.  The  process  of  collaborative  reflection  that  we 
observed  was  unstructured,  iterative,  unpredictable,  and 
adaptive.  Practices  were  unstructured  because 
the 
individual  and  subjective  nature  of  behaviors  being 
monitored  made  data  management  difficult  to  standardize. 
Practices were iterative because monitoring and interpreting 
progress  with  behavioral 
interventions  was  complex. 
Practices were unpredictable because behaviors were ever-
changing.  Practices  were  adaptive  because  services  were 
designed  to  respond  to  the  unique  behavioral  needs  and 
progress of each individual. 
Unstructured 
The  nature  of 
services  defies 
standardization  but  treatments  and  progress  have  to  be 
monitored. Due to the myriad of relevant data, efforts have 
been made to find ways to standardize data monitoring. We 
witnessed  this  challenge  when  we  observed  some  schools 
attempting  to  standardized  school-wide  data  monitoring. 
All  students  in  these  schools  were  asked  to  follow  rules, 
such as “be safe,” “use kind words,” “complete work,” and 
“follow directions.” These rules were the basis of shaping 
behavior,  giving  positive  behavioral  reinforcement,  and 
recording  behaviors  in  a  standard  way.  For  example, 
providers  would  respond  to  violence  toward  a  peer  or 
property  destruction  by  reminding  a  student  to  be  safe, 
physically and verbally intervening, and then recording the 
incident  on  a  paper  data  sheet.  One  goal  of  these  records 
was to help treatment teams reflect on cases collaboratively 
and make sense of a child’s behaviors.  
Despite  the  apparent  structure  of  this  approach,  records 
varied widely. A record of an incident might be as simple as 
adding to a running tally of the number of times a behavior 
had occurred that day, or it might include details such as the 
duration  of  the  behavior,  names  of  peers  involved,  or  an 
antecedent  event,  which  could  provide  insight  into  the 
psychological trigger of the behavior. The amount of detail 

education 

special 

957

it  would 

those 

them  because 

team  members  with 

the  data.  Providers 

in a record varied across providers, based on their workload 
and  personal  work  style,  and  encouraged  by  virtue  of  the 
subjective  nature  of 
resisted 
standardization  of  both  records  and  some  of  the  practices 
surrounding 
interfere  with 
individualized  and  adaptive  services.  However,  a  tradeoff 
was inconsistency from one child’s data to another—which 
especially  affected 
larger 
caseloads,  such  as  psychiatrists  and  clinical  supervisors. 
Schools  used  training  and  inter-rater  reliability  checks  to 
maintain  data  reliability  as  much  as  possible,  but  data 
fidelity remained a challenge. 
The  process  of  collaborative 
reflection  was  also 
unstructured, and the record system was not flexible enough 
to  support  it.  Due  to  the  challenges  with  keeping  records 
that  are  flexible  enough  for  this  process,  reflection  was 
often  not  driven  by  data.  For  example,  during  a  progress 
review  meeting  we  observed,  a  therapist  asked  a  provider 
working  exclusively  in  that  child’s  classroom  about  the 
frequency  of  a  newly  exhibited  behavior.  In  response,  the 
provider  made  a  guess  that  the  behavior  was  lowering  in 
frequency based on his intuition and the amount of pen ink 
taking  up  one  of  his  data  sheets.  In  another  meeting,  we 
observed  a  different  provider  making  up  an  estimate 
because  she  also  did  not  have  detailed  enough  data  to 
produce an accurate frequency: “I would say maybe 5% of 
those points happened out of the room [when the child was 
in  the  hallway  or  outdoors]”.  The  data  did  not  provide  an 
adequate  measure  to  be  used  for  reflection,  because  data 
sheets  were  not  flexible  enough  to  be  adapted  to  the 
individual and changing behaviors of each child.  
Iterative 
Sometimes, we observed that data was accurate but still not 
useful for reflection because it was not adaptive to changing 
needs in an iterative process. That is, data sheets were not 
easily  adapted  or  updated  as  new  measures  needed  to  be 
used  to  address  a  child’s  needs.  We  observed  one  review 
meeting in which a record keeper, therapist, and psychiatrist 
were discussing a child’s progress and struggling to use the 
data  for  collaborative  reflection.  The  therapist  concluded 
that  “the  data  may  be  accurate  but  it’s  not  reflecting  how 
he’s  really  doing”.  The  data  that  they  needed  in  that 
moment during the child’s long-term development was not 
available due to the difficulty of keeping up-to-date records 
during  an  ever-changing  and  unpredictable 
treatment 
process. 
Coordination  of  services  was  an  ongoing  and  iterative 
process  in  the  special  education  environment.  Behavioral 
intervention  in  special  education was an inductive process 
of  continuously  monitoring  behaviors,  interpreting  data  to 
understand progress, and iteratively adjusting interventions 
based on observed trends. A large number of stakeholders 
coordinated on a daily basis around the data as part of an 
iterative  process  of  determining,  applying,  and  evaluating 
interventions. Because providers spent the majority of their 

SESSION: HOSPITAL WORK

expertise 

compared 

time working directly with the children, leaving little time 
for  formal  coordination,  their  coordination  was  embedded 
in everyday practices. 
To  give  children  the  resources  and  support  they  needed, 
providers  with  different 
their 
observations and interpretations regularly. On a typical day, 
a  teacher,  teaching  aide,  speech  therapist,  occupational 
therapist,  psychiatrist,  and  supervisor  might  all  have 
discussed one child’s data together or in smaller groupings. 
For example, a clinical specialist such as a speech therapist 
or psychiatrist was depended upon for clinical expertise, but 
an  education  paraprofessional  such  as  a  teaching  aide 
worked  with  the  child  on  a  daily  basis  and  had  the  most 
intimate understanding of that child’s progress. Both types 
of  stakeholders  contributed  their  personal  knowledge  to 
managing a child’s case.  
During  this  iterative  process,  records  were  not  easily 
adapted  or  updated,  resulting  in  continuously  increasing 
work  for  record  keepers.  One  record  keeper  recounted  a 
conversation with his supervisor during which he was once 
again asked to record more data without additional support. 
Having tried different ways to ask for support, he suggested 
to his supervisor: “we should do time studies to figure out 
how  long  all  of  these  recording  activities  will  take.”  The 
supervisor  rejected  the  idea,  saying,  “this  isn’t  a  factory.” 
The record keeper’s reaction was “yes, it is”—revealing his 
disappointment  that  the  demands  of  record  keeping  were 
interfering with his direct work with children. This record 
keeper  often  shared  his  feelings  with  us,  typically  using 
sarcastic humor to express his frustration with supervisors’ 
unrealistic expectation that he manage both “clerical work” 
and  providing  behavioral 
for  multiple 
children:  “they’re  turning  this  into  an  office  job—inside  a 
petting zoo!” These tensions that we observed related to the 
unequal  burden  of  data  management  revealed  that  the 
organizational  culture  was  democratic  and  meant  to  be 
empowering  but  a  lack  of  adequate  HIT  meant  that  data 
management practices contradicted those cultural values.  
Supervisors also tended to have unrealistic expectations that 
an  incident  be  recorded  in  the  moment  or  immediately 
thereafter.  The  accuracy  and 
timeliness  of  a  record 
depended on the provider’s availability to create the record, 
and they were often busy with tasks of higher priority such 
as working directly with a child. The gap between what was 
expected  and  what  was  possible  was  a  significant  issue 
during HIT design work—some supervisors were unaware 
of this gap, and all of them were unsure of how to address 
it. We saw frustration among the record keepers expected to 
create  and  manage  records  without  adequate  support  or 
tools, and their frustration grew with each passing month. 
Unpredictable 
The provider-to-child ratio in the settings we observed was 
high  due  to  the  need  for  close  supervision  and  frequent 
behavioral  reinforcement.  Children’s  ever-present  and 
changing needs and behaviors required providers to support 

interventions 

958

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

in 

jump 

one  another  and 
to  fulfill  responsibilities. 
Regardless of whether providers held roles such as teacher, 
therapist, or supervisor, to ensure the safety and wellbeing 
of children and providers alike, all providers were trained to 
respond to behavioral incidents, and did so at a moment’s 
notice  when  the  need  arose.  For  example,  when  a  child 
grew frustrated and left the classroom, at least one provider 
would follow him into the hallway (or outside) to ensure his 
safety,  talk  him  through  managing  his  emotions,  and 
generally wait him out until he was able to calm down and 
move  on.  This  intervention  might  take  minutes  or  hours. 
Meanwhile,  the  remaining  providers  in  the  classroom 
needed to continue the current activity with the rest of the 
children,  and  ensure  that  record  keeping  continued.  A 
provider from outside the classroom, such as a therapist or 
supervisor,  sometimes  filled  in  if  additional  support  was 
needed.  As  such  episodes  were  unpredictable  and  could 
accumulate  across  multiple  children  at  any  given  moment 
without  warning,  providers  were  always  ready  to  share 
responsibility at a moment’s notice.  
Providers manually recorded data throughout a school day, 
and did not use specific, uniform rubrics or codes. People, 
locations, activities, and types of data sheets changed many 
times throughout one day. Different people collected data in 
different situations. These sources of variance increased the 
complexity  of  using  data  for  coordination.  The  various 
stakeholders  who  collected  and  used 
the  data  were 
dependent on one another because they each only knew part 
of  the  story  –  i.e.,  they  were  present  for  different  events, 
and  they  had  different  perspectives  and  expertise  with 
regard  to  the  data.  Moreover,  the  dynamic  environment 
required  coordination  in  many  contexts,  ranging  from 
formal  case  review  meetings,  to  chaotic  moments  in  the 
classroom, to informal interactions with other providers in 
the school hallway.  
Providers  responsible  for  manually  capturing  data  and 
managing records were consistently overburdened, and the 
unpredictability  of  their  environment  further  complicated 
their responsibilities. If a provider was busy responding to 
an incident and intervening, he or she would not be able to 
create the record until later. Recording accurate data in the 
moment  was  challenging,  and  providers  adopted  unique 
practices 
their  work  as 
conveniently  as  possible,  in  a  way  that  worked  for  them. 
Freeform annotations and note taking, such as jotting down 
notes on the margins of a piece of paper or on a post-it note, 
were common. Providers even wrote on their hands during 
a critical incident when they did not have access to paper. 
They had researched software options but nothing provided 
the flexibility of paper. 
In  the  organizations  we  studied,  HIT  only  came  into  play 
when it was required for reporting data to other agencies for 
billing  and  auditing  purposes.  Providers  were  frustrated 
with the software’s lack of usability and how cumbersome 
it  was  to  manually  transfer  data  from  paper  to  multiple 

them  accomplish 

to  help 

959

reports  and  graphs.  Complicating  the  task  of  creating 
records  was  that providers  (and  especially  record  keepers) 
were responsible first and foremost for children’s safety and 
behavioral  intervention.  Many  informants  spoke  about  the 
logistical  impossibility  of  balancing  all  of  the  tasks  they 
were responsible for: “there is no clerical time within the 40 
hr work week, you do billing and paperwork on your own 
time.”  There  were  some  efforts  to  incorporate  use  of 
Microsoft Excel and specialized iPad apps into this process, 
but they were not successful. 
Adaptive 
Children had unique needs and developed at their own pace, 
requiring  adaptive  services.  Providers  therefore  relied 
heavily  on  individual  children’s  data  to  monitor  progress 
and adjust interventions as needed. They recorded data on a 
child’s  appropriate  social  interactions  with  peers  and 
providers, self-management of emotions, and adherence to 
instructions and rules. They manually recorded data in the 
form  of  quantitative  measures  (frequency,  duration),  and 
qualitative observations (activities or factors that preceded 
the behavior, details about the nature of the behavior).  
The  subjective  and  individual  nature  of  this  type  of  data 
required  a  trained  behavioral  specialist  to  record  events 
manually and interpret them. Any new technology or device 
was  difficult  to  introduce  in  this  setting  due  to  the 
challenges of managing diffuse behavioral data. Behavioral 
data tended to require a trained provider to observe an event 
in the real world, interpret the event to record it in a useful 
way,  and  then  use  their  understanding  of  the  child  to 
understand what the data revealed about a child’s progress 
over time. These organizations had attempted to incorporate 
iPad  apps  and  web-based  tools  for  data  management,  but 
their persistent use of paper-based records, and struggles to 
transition to the iPad or specialized applications illustrate a 
lack  of  appropriate  systems  to  fit  their  workflow.  Our 
findings  align  with  those  of  studies  in  other  contexts  that 
have 
unintended 
consequences  of,  introducing  HIT  [12,  26,  33,  42].  Our 
findings  suggest  that  the  unintended  consequences  of  HIT 
are,  at  least  in  part,  caused  by  the  difficulties  of  defining 
problems,  standardizing  services,  and  finding  appropriate 
technology.  
Another  example  of  providers’  struggle  with  maintaining 
adaptive  services  with  inadequate  HIT  was  that  insurance 
companies 
for  billing 
purposes, such as detailed logs of work hours and activities. 
Each provider was required to justify their work with each 
child,  sometimes  down  to  the  minute,  in  order  to  receive 
each  paycheck.  School  administrators  passed  down  these 
instructions  to  their  employees,  sometimes  with  specific 
software  to  be  used  for  reporting  records  for  billing. 
Insurance  companies  requested  daily  narratives  to  be 
written  for  each  child,  outlining  their  treatment  and 
progress. These narratives were to be entered into a poorly 
designed  and  time-consuming  piece  of  software.  Audits 

required  specific 

problems  with, 

information 

uncovered 

and 

SESSION: HOSPITAL WORK

were  common,  sometimes  once  a  year,  adding  to  the 
pressure of having to create detailed and accurate records so 
as to not create problems for oneself or the organization.  
Administrators were in a difficult position, having to adhere 
to  requirements  from  insurance  companies,  and  passing 
these down to their employees. Meanwhile, providers were 
more  concerned  with  the  nuances  of  carrying  out  a 
treatment  plan,  rather  than  reporting  out  progress  so 
regularly. Providers were driven to record data that would 
help  them  and  their  team  with  collaborative  reflection  for 
making treatment decisions. They were therefore frustrated 
when records were required to be created for mere logistical 
purposes, and took up a significant amount of the time they 
had with the children. The day before an audit, for example, 
some  providers  who  typically  worked  full  time  in  a 
classroom  had  to  take  time  completely  away  from  their 
regular  jobs  in  order  to  find  a  quiet  place  to  sit  at  a 
computer  and  work  on  records.  Even  more  frustratingly, 
last  minute  requests  for  more  data  continued  to  come  in 
from their supervisors. 
DISCUSSION 
The  persistent  use  of  paper-based  records  in  special 
education,  and  struggles  to  transition  to  HIT,  illustrate  a 
lack  of  appropriate  flexible  systems  to  fit  the  behavioral 
health workflow. This problem is not unique to the context 
of behavioral health services. A broader literature suggests 
that  paper-based  tools  persist  because  they  are  flexible 

enough  to  support  informal  and  mobile  coordination  [31, 
44].  Bardram  and  Bossen  [2]  described  a  need  for  mobile 
work in health services. Although their study was in a more 
time-critical  hospital  setting,  they  identified  a  need  to 
support  unstructured  aspects  of  services  involving  ad  hoc 
and  unforeseen  configurations,  not 
just  routines  and 
protocols.  Our  findings  also  suggest  broader  applicability 
by  echoing  four  of  O’Looney’s  [29]  characteristics  of 
loosely  coupled  organizations  (see  Table  1):  services  are 
adaptive  to  individual  and  environmental  needs;  services 
are  inductive  and  malleable  over  time;  standardization  is 
avoided;  and  problems  (and  technology)  are  difficult  to 
define.  
We  found 
the 
organizations  we  studied  and  those  that  provide  time-
critical  services  is  the  loose  coupling  exhibited  in  their 
coordination practices. Our findings show that many of the 
unintended consequences in the HIT literature [12, 26, 33, 
42] can be explained by a mismatch between the flexibility 
and  loose  coupling  required  to  provide  services,  and  the 
inflexibility  and  overstandardization  of  HIT 
that  are 
intended to support these processes. 
We present our recommendations for the design of HIT by 
building  on  Harrison’s 
concept  of  organic 
sociotechnical  systems  and  applying  it  to  HIT.  The 
following  recommendations  describe  how  HIT  can  be 
organic  by  incorporating  flexible  and  adaptive  qualities. 

the  primary  difference  between 

that 

[11] 

Table 1. The contribution of this paper is a typology that provides two ends of a temporal spectrum, long-term and time-critical 
health services. We address a bias toward supporting time-critical care by discussing the rest of the spectrum: how HIT can also 

support long-term and unstructured aspects of health services.  

 

960

to 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

in 

the 

responsibility  of  maintaining  a 

Based  on  our  fieldwork,  we  recommend  these  approaches 
to organic HIT in order to support a range of health services 
across a spectrum of temporality. 
Roles  and  responsibilities  need  to  be  diffuse,  flexible 
and change through use 
We  observed  that  coordination  needed  to  be  flexible 
because 
safe 
environment  and  providing  all  of  the  children  the  support 
they  needed  was  dispersed  across  providers 
the 
organization.  
The records themselves were not effective for coordination. 
The paper-based records acted as a mechanistic system, and 
failed to match the need for an organic way of keeping all 
team  members  informed  and  adapting  to  each  situation. 
When  records  were  not  representative  or  informative 
enough,  providers  relied  on  past  experience  and  anecdotal 
evidence  they  gained  from  informal  communication  with 
other  providers.  Providers  were  able  to  ask  for  support 
through multiple informal communication channels such as 
gesturing to a team member, calling to any provider in the 
hallway,  or  phoning  their  assigned  supervisor,  who  was 
always  on  call  and  would  answer  a  mobile  phone  even 
during meetings. 
In  the  context  we  observed,  we  envision  organic  HIT  that 
increases awareness and coordination rather than enforcing 
roles that are dropped when an unpredictable incident must 
be  handled.  Because  team  members  share  tasks  and 
responsibilities,  the  conceptual  model  of  the  HIT  must 
center  on  a  high  level  of  information  flow  and  a  child’s 
individual needs. In addition, communication channels and 
mechanisms for maintaining awareness across a team could 
support the diffusion of responsibilities without wasted time 
or  duplicated  effort.  For  example,  during  a  behavioral 
incident,  the  most  proximal  provider  would  likely  be 
engaging with the student, so location-based features could 
both  predict  and  respond  to  an  incident  without  user 
intervention,  notifying  other  providers  or  automatically 
creating a record of an incident. Ultimately, the HIT should 
be  focused  not  on  specific  tasks  but  on  each  child’s 
progress,  and  each  team  members’  reflections  on  that 
progress – this type of HIT support would then organically 
lead  users  to  carry  out  appropriate  tasks  within  a  flexible 
system of coordination.  
Participative  forms  of  decision  making  and  reciprocal 
interdependencies among stakeholders 
Distributing  roles,  tasks,  and  responsibilities  more  evenly 
across  stakeholders  with  organic  HIT  could  not  save  time 
and  effort,  and  also  improve  coordination.  We  observed 
close collaboration across providers with different types of 
expertise and roles, in organizational cultures that were not 
hierarchical.  The  knowledge  and  experience  of  each 
provider created reciprocal interdependencies in the process 
of interpreting a child’s data and monitoring progress, a key 
aspect of collaborative reflection [23].  

961

to  be 

them  more  opportunities 

information  and  allowing 

However,  the  mechanistic  nature  of  existing  practices 
overburdened  some  providers  with  record  keeping  and 
made it difficult to keep everyone informed with a child’s 
most up-to-date data. As a result of adequate processes and 
tools,  we  observed  providers  relying  more  on  informal 
interactions and anecdotal evidence.  
As an example of how HIT can have aspects that are both 
mechanistic and organic: HIT could help record keepers be 
more  efficient  with  tasks  that  can  be  standardized—tasks 
which  make  them  feel  overburdened  and  undervalued—
while providing them with more opportunities to participate 
in  collaborative  reflection  and  decision  making.  Different 
stakeholders should have appropriate and flexible tools that 
allow 
involved  with 
interpretation, sharing, and discussion of data.  
Since roles and responsibilities are not clearly defined, HIT 
should  not  have  a  task-oriented  focus,  defining  a  user’s 
activities within the organization’s workflow. Instead, HIT 
should  encourage  collaborative  reflection  by  increasing 
access 
for  multiple 
perspectives  on  data  and  decisions.  Within  the  constraints 
of protecting private health data, HIT should give access to 
as many stakeholders as possible, even read-only, so as to 
keep  stakeholders  on  the  same  page  and  allow  them  to 
coordinate around the data. Protection of data and privacy 
could still be maintained through more sophisticated access 
control  than  passwords,  and  expiration  dates  for  informal 
notes that do not have to be made a part of a formal record, 
but can help teams in collaborative reflection. 
Decentralized,  lateral  coordination  allows  for  cross-
functional coordination and nonroutine tasks 
We  discovered  conflicting  coordination  needs  across 
decision  makers,  which  helped  to  explain  the  unrealistic 
expectations  for  recording  practices.  A  large  amount  of 
communication  and  coordination  was  required  within  an 
organization and to external agencies, and providers did not 
have  adequate  support  for  sharing  data  across  these 
complex  communication  channels.  Organic  HIT  should 
account  for  different 
types  of  stakeholder  contacts, 
communication channels, and information needs across this 
network—some of which need to be more standardized and 
streamlined, and some of which need to be more informal 
and  flexible.  Some  data  collection  and  sharing  can  be 
automated, while others require interpretation and reflection 
on the part of certain providers. 
One  potential  benefit  of  HIT  as  opposed  to  paper-based 
records is developing interfaces that can be flexible enough 
to meet the needs of different types of users (i.e., different 
expertise  levels  and  roles).  Reddy  and  colleagues  [38] 
describe  how  the  different  interfaces  of  a  clinical  HIT 
system  supported  the  needs  of  the  various  users  (nurses, 
physicians,  pharmacists)  but  at  the  same  time  allowed  the 
users to coordinate their activities. This type of mechanism 
is  an  example  of  how  HIT  can  be  designed  to  meet  more 

varied  needs  across  the  spectrum  of  temporality  we  have 
defined in this paper, by balancing structure with flexibility. 
Coordination  should  occur  through  flexible  plans, 
changing goals, and evaluation over time 
We observed a mismatch between the flexible coordination 
required in these organizations, and the rigidity of records 
and  data  management  practices.  Information  systems  tend 
to  enforce  a  structure  that  does  not  allow  for  the  iterative 
process  of  collaborative 
reflection.  The  design  of 
mechanistic  HIT  focuses  on  standardized  and  easy-to-
measure  data  such  as  blood  pressure,  cholesterol,  or 
menstrual  cycle.  Instead,  organic  HIT  could  support 
measures  of  health  status  and  progress  that  are  more 
complex to interpret.  
Health  data  could,  for  example,  be  represented  by  more 
dynamic representations that allow for reflection rather than 
static  representations  that  tend  to  be  used  for  quick 
information  transfer.  A  patient’s  chart  can  sometimes  be 
represented  by  a  table  of  numbers.  In  the  context  we 
studied, this type of static representation was not useful and 
was  often  supplemented  by  anecdotal  evidence  and 
opinions.  The  role  of  organic  HIT  could  be  to  provide 
dynamic visualizations that allow team members to explore 
and annotate the data in order to interpret it collaboratively.  
Likewise, measures themselves should be changeable over 
time. Some chronic conditions, like diabetes or cancer, can 
be  monitored  using  the  same  measures.  Behavioral  health 
requires  individualized  measures  that  could  change  over 
time.  Organic  HIT,  therefore,  should  allow  for  both  the 
creation of records and the review of records to account for 
these  types  of  changes.  Data  input  should  be  adaptable  to 
the 
time.  Dynamic 
visualizations of the data should help providers to interpret 
progress with the added complexity of varied and changing 
measures of health. 
CONCLUSION 
A focus on standardization has led to the design of HIT that 
tends to overemphasize structure, and not support informal 
documentation  and  communication  [12,  31,  44].  Informal 
practices  tend  to  be  overlooked  in  the  design  of  HIT.  In 
striving  for  standardized  and  perfect  accounts,  research 
shows  that  HIT  actually  undermines  accuracy  in  records 
[33]. In an increasingly complex health care system, there is 
an "unprecedented requirement for adaptability" [41, p. 15], 
which  HIT  is  not  currently  designed  for.  Studies  have 
that  HIT  misrepresents  communication  as 
revealed 
information 
collective, 
interactive work as linear, predictable workflow [12].  
According  to  Berg  [3],  “technology  development  still  all 
too  often  tends  to  be  considered  as  an  autonomous  or 
neutral process” (p. 38) – yet HIT is “thoroughly social” (p. 
37). A focus on standardization has resulted in what Diana 
Forsythe refers to as HIT that “delete the social” [10]. Her 
extensive  fieldwork 
that 
because HIT is “designed, built, and evaluated according to 

individual  and  malleable  over 

in  medical  settings  showed 

and  misrepresents 

transfer, 

SESSION: HOSPITAL WORK

tend 

to  require  sociotechnical  systems 

procedures  that  ‘delete  the  social’  and  mute  the  voice  of 
users,  most  of  these  systems  remain  ‘on  the  shelf,’  a  fact 
which  is  hardly  surprising”  [10,  p.  15].  The  design 
limitations  that  caused  the  low  adoption  rates  Forsythe 
observed  in  the  1990s  continue  to  cause  the  unintended 
consequences  reported  today.  Rates  of  adoption  have 
naturally  increased  given  the  prevalence  of  information 
technology,  yet  “despite  the  fact  that  similar  systems  had 
been  used  outside  healthcare  for  a  number  of  years, 
definitive  evidence  of  their  success  in  the  healthcare 
domain remains elusive” [17, p. 1].  
This paper describes an alternative to standardization in the 
design  of  HIT,  through  an  empirical  study  of  paper-based 
records  and  technology  non-use  within  behavioral  and 
mental  health  services.  We  used  temporality  as  a  lens  to 
show  that  these  organizations  tend  to  be  loosely  coupled 
and 
that  are 
organic—i.e.,  enabling  practices  that  are  unstructured, 
iterative,  unpredictable,  and  adaptive.  To  support  health 
services over time, we described the design of organic HIT.  
We  envision  organic  HIT  that  increases  awareness  and 
coordination  rather  than  enforcing  roles  that  are  dropped 
when  an  unpredictable  incident  must  be  handled.  Organic 
HIT should encourage collaborative reflection by increasing 
access 
for  multiple 
perspectives  on  data  and  decisions.  Organic  HIT  should 
account  for  different 
types  of  stakeholder  contacts, 
communication  channels,  and  information  needs  across  a 
network  of  providers—some  of  which  need  to  be  more 
standardized and streamlined, and some of which need to be 
more  informal  and  flexible.  Finally,  organic  HIT  should 
enable the creation and review of records that may need to 
change over time to account for new or adaptive measures 
for monitoring chronic conditions.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We are grateful to the teams and organizations we observed 
in  our  fieldwork.  This  research  was  supported  by  the 
National  Science  Foundation  under  Grant  No.  CCF-
1029549,  and  a  National  Science  Foundation  Graduate 
Research Fellowship to the first author. 
REFERENCES 
1. 

information  and  allowing 

Joanna Abraham and Madhu Reddy. 2008. Moving 
patients around: a field study of coordination between 
clinical and non-clinical staff in hospitals. In 
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer-
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’08), 225-228. 
Jakob E. Bardram and Claus Bossen. 2005. Mobility 
Work: The Spatial Dimension of Collaboration at a 
Hospital. CSCW 14, 2, 131-160. 

to 

2. 

3.  Marc Berg. 2003. Health Information Management. 

Routledge. 

4.  Hugh Beyer and Karen Holtzblatt. 1998. Contextual 

Design: Defining Customer-Centered Systems. 
Kaufmann. 

962

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

5.  Claus Bossen and Lotte G. Jensen. 2014. How 

physicians ‘achieve overview’: A case-based study in a 
hospital ward. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference 
on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW 
’14), 257–268. 

6.  Kathy Charmaz. 2006. Constructing Grounded Theory: 

A Practical Guide Through Qualitative Analysis. 
SAGE Publications. 

7.  Erik H. Erikson. 1985. The Nature of Clinical 

Evidence. Daedalus 87, 4, 65-87. 

8.  Kristin G. Esterberg. 2002. Qualitative Methods in 

Social Research. McGraw-Hill. 

9.  Geraldine Fitzpatrick and Gunnar Ellingsen. 2013. A 
review of 25 years of CSCW research in healthcare: 
contributions, challenges and future agendas. CSCW 
2013, 609-665. 

10.  Diana E. Forsythe. 1992. Blaming the user in medical 
informatics: The cultural nature of scientific practice. 
Knowledge and Society, 9, 95–111. 

11.  Michael I. Harrison. 1994. Diagnosing Organizations: 

Methods, Models, and Processes (2nd Ed). Sage, 
Thousand Oaks, CA. 

12.  Michael I. Harrison, Ross Koppel and Shirly Bar-Lev. 

2007. Unintended Consequences of Information 
Technologies in Health Care—An Interactive 
Sociotechnical Analysis. Journal of the American 
medical informatics Association 14, 5: 542-549. 

13.  Mark Hartswood, Rob Procter, Mark Rouncefield, and 
Roger Slack. 2003. Making a Case in Medical Work: 
Implications for the Electronic Medical Record. 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) 12, 3: 
241-266. 

14.  Bridget T. Kane and Saturnino Luz. 2009. Achieving 

Diagnosis by Consensus. Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work (CSCW) 18, 4: 357-392. 

15.  Bridget T. Kane, Pieter J. Toussaint, and Saturnino 

Luz. 2013. Shared decision making needs a 
communication record. In Proceedings of the ACM 
Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work 
(CSCW ’13), 79-90. 

16.  Julie A. Kientz, Gillian R. Hayes, Gregory D. Abowd, 
and Rebecca E. Grinter. (2006). From the War Room 
to the Living Room: Decision Support for Home-Based 
Therapy Teams. In Proceedings of the ACM 
Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work 
(CSCW ’06), 209-218. 

17.  Chris Kimble. 2014. Electronic Health Records: Cure-

All or Chronic Condition? Global Business and 
Organizational Excellence 33, 4: 63-74. 

18.  Gary Klein, Brian Moon, and Robert R. Hoffman. 

2006. Making Sense of Sensemaking: A 

Macrocognitive Model. IEEE Intelligent Systems 21, 5: 
88-92. 

19.  Diana S. Kusunoki and Aleksandra Sarcevic. 2015. 

Designing for Temporal Awareness: The Role of 
Temporality in Time-Critical Medical Teamwork. In 
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer-
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’15), 1465-1476. 

20.  David Lawrence. 2003. From Chaos To Care: The 
Promise Of Team-based Medicine. Da Capo Press. 

21.  Siân Lindley. 2015. Making Time. In Proceedings of 

the ACM Conference on Computer-Supported 
Cooperative Work (CSCW ’15), 442-1452. 

22.  John Lofland, David Snow, Leon Anderson, and Lyn 

H. Lofland. 2006. Analyzing social settings. 
Wadsworth Publishing Company. 

23.  Gabriela Marcu, Anind K. Dey, and Sara Kiesler. 2014. 
Designing for Collaborative Reflection. In Proceedings 
of the EAI International Conference on Pervasive 
Computing Technologies for Healthcare 
(PervasiveHealth ’14), 9-16. 

24.  Gabriela Marcu, Kevin Tassini, Quintin Carlson, Jillian 
Goodwyn, Gabrielle Rivkin, Kevin Schaefer, Anind K. 
Dey, and Sara Kiesler. 2013. Why Do They Still Use 
Paper? Understanding Data Collection and Use in 
Autism Education. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI ’13), 3177-3186. 

25.  Melissa Mazmanian, Ingrid Erickson, and Ellie 

Harmon. 2015. Circumscribed time and porous time: 
Logics as a way of studying temporality. In 
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer-
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’15), 1453-1464. 

26.  Helena M. Mentis. 2010. Emotion Awareness and 

Invisibility in an Emergency Room: A Socio-Technical 
Dilemma. Ph.D Dissertation. The Pennsylvania State 
University, University Park, PA.  

27.  Anne S. Miner, Paula Bassoff, and Christine Moorman. 

2001. Organizational improvisation and learning: A 
Field study. Administrative Science Quarterly 46, 2: 
304-337. 

28.  Zara Niazkhani, Habibollah Pirnejad, Marc Berg, and 
Jos Aarts. 2009. The Impact of Computerized Provider 
Order Entry Systems on Inpatient Clinical Workflow: 
A Literature Review. Journal of the American medical 
informatics Association 16, 539-549. 

29.  John O’Looney. 1993. Beyond Privatization and 

Service Integration: Organizational Models for Service 
Delivery. Social Service Review 67, 4: 501-534. 

30.  Wanda J. Orlikowski. 2002. Knowing in Practice: 

Enacting a Collective Capability in Distributed 
Organizing. Organization Science 13, 3: 249-273. 

963

SESSION: HOSPITAL WORK

European Conference on Computer-Supported 
Cooperative Work (CSCW ’01), 239-258. 

39.  Aleksandra Sarcevic, Ivan Marsic, and Randal R. Burd. 
2012. Teamwork Errors in Trauma Resuscitation. ACM 
Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 
(TOCHI) 19, 2: 13–30. 

40.  Aleksandra Sarcevic, Nadir Weibel, James D. Hollan, 
and Randal S. Burd. 2012. A paper-digital interface for 
information capture and display in time-critical 
medical work. In Proceedings of the EAI International 
Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for 
Healthcare (PervasiveHealth ’12), 17-24. 

41.  Donald A. Schön. 1983. The Reflective Practitioner: 

How Professionals Think In Action. Basic Books. 

42.  James K. Stoller. 2013. Electronic siloing: An 

unintended consequence of the electronic health record. 
Cleveland Clinic Journal of Medicine 80, 7: 406-409. 
43.  Stefan Timmermans and Marc Berg. 2010. The Gold 

Standard: The Challenges of Evidence-Based Medicine 
and Standardization in Health Care. Temple 
University Press. 

44.  Nadir Weibel, Colleen Emmenegger, Jennifer Lyons, 
Ram Dixit, Linda L. Hill, and James D. Hollan. 2013. 
Interpreter-mediated physician-patient communication: 
opportunities for multimodal healthcare interfaces. In 
Proceedings of the EAI International Conference on 
Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare 
(PervasiveHealth ’13), 113–120. 

45.  Karl E. Weick. 1976. Educational Organizations as 
Loosely Coupled Systems. Administrative Science 
Quarterly 21, 1: 1-19. 

46.  Karl E. Weick. 1993. The collapse of sensemaking in 

organizations: The Mann Gulch disaster. 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 38, 4: 628-652.  

47.  Brit Ross Winthereik and Signe Vikkelsø. 2005. ICT 

and Integrated Care: Some Dilemmas of Standardising 
Inter-Organisational Communication. Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) 14, 43-67.

31.  Sun Y. Park, Katie Pine, and Yunan Chen. 2013. 

Local-universality: designing EMR to support localized 
information documentation practice. In Proceedings of 
the ACM Conference on Computer-Supported 
Cooperative Work (CSCW ’13), 55-66. 

32.  Sharoda Paul and Madhu Reddy. 2010. Understanding 
Together: Sensemaking in Collaborative Information 
Seeking. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on 
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’10), 
321-330. 

33.  Kathleen Pine and Melissa Mazmanian. 2014. 

Institutional Logics of the EMR and the Problem of 
“Perfect” but Inaccurate Accounts. In Proceedings of 
the ACM Conference on Computer-Supported 
Cooperative Work (CSCW ’14), 283-294. 

34.  David Pinelle and Carl Gutwin. 2006. Loose Coupling 
and Healthcare Organizations: Deployment Strategies 
for Groupware. Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work (CSCW) 15, 5-6: 537-572. 

35.  Anne Marie Piper and James D. Hollan. 2008. 

Supporting medical conversations between deaf and 
hearing individuals with tabletop displays. In 
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer-
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’08), 147-156. 

36.  Anne Marie Piper, Sarah D’Angelo, and James D. 

Hollan. 2013. Going Digital: Understanding Paper and 
Photo Documentation Practices in Early Childhood 
Education. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on 
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’13), 
1319-1328. 

37.  Madhu Reddy and Paul Dourish. 2002. A finger on the 

pulse: temporal rhythms and information seeking in 
medical work. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference 
on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW 
’02), 344–353. 

38.  Madhu Reddy, Paul Dourish, and Wanda Pratt. 2001. 
Coordinating Heterogeneous Work: Information and 
Representation in Medical Care. In Proceedings of the 

 
 

964

