CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Accounting for the Invisible Work of Hospital Orderlies: 

Designing for Local and Global Coordination  

Allan Stisen, Nervo Verdezoto, Henrik Blunck, Mikkel Baun Kjærgaard, and Kaj Grønbæk 

Department of Computer Science, Aarhus University 

Aarhus, Denmark 

{allans, nervo, blunck, mikkelbk, kgronbak}@cs.au.dk 

ABSTRACT 
The  cooperative,  invisible  non-clinical  work  of  hospital 
orderlies  is  often  overlooked.  It  consists  foremost  of 
transferring  patients  between  hospital  departments.  As  the 
overall efficiency of the hospital is highly dependent on the 
coordination of the work of orderlies, this study investigates 
the  coordination  changes  in  orderlies’  work  practices  in 
connection to the implementation of a workflow application 
at  the  hospital.  By  applying  a  mixed  methods  approach 
(both  qualitative  and  quantitative  studies),  this  paper  calls 
for  attention  to  the  changes  in  orderlies’  coordination 
activities while moving from a manual and centralized form 
to  a  semi-automatic and decentralized  approach after  the 
introduction of the workflow application. We highlight a set 
of cross-boundary (spatial and organizational) information-
sharing  breakdowns  and  the  challenges  of  orderlies  in 
maintaining local and global coordination. We also present 
design  recommendations  for  future  design  of  coordination 
tools to support orderlies’ work practices. 
Author Keywords 
Orderlies; coordination; invisible work; non-clinical work.  
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous.  
INTRODUCTION 
The understanding and representation of work practices as a 
resource  to  inform  system  design  is  an  important  concern 
among  the  HCI  and  CSCW  communities.  Although  these 
communities have primarily focused on studying the formal 
work  practices  of
specialized  workplace 
environments (e.g., [6, 8, 46]), there is a growing concern 
and  interest  (e.g.,  [1,  12])  to  study  the  work  of  the  “less 
skilled or less powerful” [28] individuals, often relegated as 
invisible—yet  essential—work  [41]  to  “those  who  benefit 

the  more

Permission to  make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  the  author(s)  must  be 
honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or 
republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific  permission 
from 
Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
Copyright  is  held  by  the  owner/author(s).  Publication  rights  licensed  to 
ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820006 

fee.  Request  permissions 

and/or 

a 

(e.g., 

from  it”  [45,  p.  58].  Invisible  work  includes  situations 
where the result of the work is visible but the person doing 
the work is somehow invisible as in the case of design work 
[28],  domestic  work  (e.g.,  cleaning)  and  other  kinds  of 
service  work  [41].  There  are  also  situations  in  which  the 
person performing the work is quite visible but some of the
work  is  “functionally  invisible”  [41,  p.  20]  or  taken  for 
granted.  The  work 
registering  appointments, 
monitoring  patients,  taking  medication)  performed  by 
secretaries, nurses, patients, families, and “on-call” service 
workers,  are  examples  of  work  that  often  remains  in  the 
background  [28,  41,  48].  Making  this  work  more  visible
[45], through technology [37, 42], can support the practices 
of invisible workers and enforce its contribution.  
The hospital is a good example of a complex environment 
where  visible  and  invisible  work  practices  take  place  to 
sustain  a  transparent  hospital  workflow  and  the  continuity 
of  patient  care  [51].  At  the  hospital,  care  activities  are 
spatially  [6]  and  temporally  [35]  arranged,  performed, 
coordinated  and  negotiated  between  highly  heterogeneous 
elements and individuals including patients, clinicians, non-
clinical  personnel  and  their  resources  [2,  12,  21,  44].
Instead  of  focusing  on  the  more  stationary  work  of 
secretaries and registration assistants, which is often limited 
to specific hospital department work arrangements [12, 29], 
we  seek  to  understand  the  invisible  work  performed  by  a 
particular  group  of  non-clinical  personnel  such  as  the 
orderlies,  which  is  a  critical  component  of  hospital  work 
practices.  We  examine  the  dynamics  of  the  cooperative 
work practices of orderlies from a large university hospital, 
over a period of 18 months of study—before and after the 
introduction of a CSCW workflow application that require
intra-  and  inter-departmental  coordination  [2].  In  the 
following, we present the related work and our user studies. 
We then report on findings that extends earlier work [2, 42]
by highlighting a set of dynamic changes, workarounds and 
cross-boundary 
information  sharing  breakdowns  and 
contingencies  in  orderlies’  work  practices.  Based  on  our 
findings, we provide a set of recommendations to account 
for  the  orderlies’  work  practices  in  the  design  of  CSCW 
systems  to  enhance  their  coordination  and  the  overall 
organizational workflow. 

980

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

RELATED WORK 
In this section we describe the different forms of visible and 
invisible  work  that  take  place  at  the  hospital,  the  existing 
strategies  to  support  their  coordination  as  well  as  a  brief 
overview of technology that supports these work practices. 
On the Visibility and Invisibility of Hospital Work 
The  main  focus  of  clinical  work  relates  to  ensuring  the 
continuity of patient care [51] while managing the patient’s 
care  trajectories  [43]  often  aiming  for  a  more  stable  or 
improved  health  status.  At  the  hospital,  patients  receive 
medical  treatment  from  diverse  and  specialized  clinical 
personnel  (e.g.,  gynecologist,  cardiologists)  who  are 
organized  and  distributed  in  several  departments  often 
following  a  basic  division  of  labor  according  to  specific 
skill  sets,  professions,  resources  and  treatment  goals  [11]. 
While the work of the doctors is highly visible, as they are 
in  charge  of  performing  diagnosis  and  prescribing 
treatments  [5,  7,  11],  the  nurses’  work  is  often  taken  for 
granted [41] even though they are quite visible performing 
care-related activities (e.g., connecting monitoring devices, 
comforting or looking after patients) [11, 44, 49]. Similarly, 
patients themselves also play an important role in the care 
trajectory  while  receiving  and  following  treatments  [44], 
but their care activities are often relegated as invisible [48]. 
Patients perform self-care activities not only across multiple 
hospital departments [34, 44] but also beyond the hospital, 
moving into their everyday settings and routines [16].  
Besides  the  clinicians  and  the  patient,  hospital  work 
practices  also  include  all  the  operational  and  maintenance 
work  performed  by  non-clinical  personnel  such  as 
secretaries,  service  workers  (orderlies)  and  social  workers 
[2, 12, 29]. For instance, secretaries not only perform basic 
tasks  such  as  transcribing  the  doctor’s  progress  notes,  or 
communicating with patients [12, 49], but they also engage 
in more complex tasks that require more specialized skills 
and  knowledge 
from  coding  and  booking 
treatments  [12]  to  more  clinical-related  work  such  as 
examining the patient’s condition, and interpreting clinical 
information  [24].  In  addition,  Abraham  and  Reddy  [1,  2] 
describe the important role of orderlies in the coordination 
of  patient  transfers  between  different  clinical  departments. 
Orderlies  perform  diverse  service 
transporting 
patients,  delivering  goods)  and  emergency  (e.g.,  perform 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation) tasks that often require high 
mobility (on foot or vehicles) and ad-hoc coordination [42].  
Strategies to Support Hospital Cooperative Work 
The  cooperative  work  at  the  hospital  requires  a  proper 
configuration of  highly heterogeneous actors (e.g., clinical 
and  non-clinical  personnel,  patients),  resources  (e.g., 
supplies, medication, equipment), diverse knowledge, times 
and  places  to  perform  work  practices  within  and  across 
clinical  departments  [18].  To  accomplish  such  work 
requires  an  ongoing  alignment  of  actions  among  all  the 
different  elements  and  entities  that  are  necessary  to 
cooperate,  which  is  what  Strauss  [43]  has  described  as 
articulation  work  that  relates  to  all  the  planning  and 

ranging 

(e.g., 

981

information 

the  hospital 

coordination  of  who,  what,  when,  where,  and  how  to 
perform  care  practices.  One  particular  strategy  relies  on 
standards  and 
existing  hospital  plans,  procedures, 
classification  schemes  [6,  22,  47] 
that  are  used  as 
coordination  mechanisms  or  infrastructural  arrangements, 
necessary  to  support  the  negotiation  of  heterogeneous 
networks  [47].  Furthermore,  the  complex  interrelation  of 
heterogeneous  actors  and  networks  [7,  18]  constitute 
different hospital information infrastructures [17]. 
Because  work  needs  to  be  prioritized,  scheduled  and 
negotiated according to the spatial [6] and temporal [5, 35] 
dimensions  of 
infrastructure, 
another strategy relies on the use of cognitive artifacts (e.g., 
doctor’s  progress  notes  [3],  whiteboards  [50],  handover 
sheets  [40])  to  support  clinical  [36]  and  non-clinical  [12, 
24,  49]  work  practices.  Certain  cognitive  artifacts  such  as 
work  and  booking  schedules  or  whiteboards  act  as 
coordination  mechanisms  [39]  and  boundary  objects  [26], 
supporting  the  prioritization  of  tasks  while  also  providing 
an  overview  of  the  situation  at  hand.  For  instance, 
whiteboards  support  the  communication  and  coordination 
of  inter-  and  intra  clinical  personnel  by  providing  a  local 
overview  and  awareness  of  activities  (e.g.,  patient’s 
location,  procedures).  While  providing  an  overview  can 
promote a fair distribution of tasks and the anticipation of 
resource availability (e.g., personnel, time) [5, 31] and pre-
handling work [5],  these strategies might not be sufficient 
to  support  the  coordination  of  distributed  work  practices 
and  different  kind  of  additional  informal  and  more  formal 
agreements and activities (e.g., calling, booking)  take place 
across  departments 
to  accomplish 
inter-
departmental negotiations [5, 31, 44].  
Technology to Support Hospital Work 
Hospitals  have  shifted  away  from  paper-based  cognitive 
artifacts,  e.g.,  patient  records,  to  electronic  versions  to 
increase  and  support  the  coordination  of  the  clinical  work 
practices [32, 49] as well as the non-clinical work practices 
performed  by  secretaries  or  registration  assistants  [12,  24, 
29]. This shift has increased the visibility of work practices 
making  them  more  “inspectable  and  manageable”  [7,  p. 
90].  Besides  electronic  patient  records,  mobile  technology 
has  also  been  introduced  to  improve  both  the  information 
delivery  and  the  efficiency  of  healthcare  professionals’ 
work  practices  [38,  40].  Mobile  technology  has  also  been 
used  to  support  the  articulation  work  of  secretaries  and 
nurses  regarding,  e.g.,  booking 
tasks  [5]  or  patient 
responsibility  handover  [25].  Recently,  technology  for 
supporting  work  practices  of  orderlies  have  been 
investigated through a bed-board tracking system [2], and a 
mobile phone based task booking system [42].  
Although  recent  efforts  have  investigated  the  use  of 
technology  by  non-clinicians,  most  healthcare  IT  systems 
[19] have not accounted and overlooked the important role 
of orderlies as part of the whole information infrastructure. 
Any delays, errors or breakdowns of routines in orderlies’ 

intra-  and 

work  practices  not  only  affect 
the  overall  hospital 
organization  efficiency  (allocation  of  time  and  resources), 
but  can  also  result  in  detrimental  health  situations  for  the 
patient  and  cause  stress  and  frustration  among  the  clinical 
and non-clinical personnel [1, 2]. As such, there is a need to 
understand orderlies’ cooperative work practices with other 
members  of  the  information  infrastructure.  Based  on  an 
initial characterization of orderlies’ work [2, 42], we further 
describe the local (within) and global (across departments) 
work practices, beyond patient-transfers [4], and changes in 
orderlies workflow after the introduction of technology. 
USER STUDIES 
Our work integrates qualitative and quantitative studies as 
well  as  an  investigation  of  the  technological challenges in 
connection with a pilot implementation and deployment of 
a  mobile  workflow  application,  PLogistics  (PLog),  which 
supports orderlies’ work and the logistical hospital work.  
Research Setting: Major Regional University Hospital 
Our studies took place in a major university with ca. 3000 
employees  that  are  distributed  on  18  clinical  departments 
(e.g., X-ray, Emergency, Cardiology). The hospital receives 
roughly 300,000 outpatient visits yearly and has a capacity 
of 450 hospitalized patients. The hospital also has a service 
department with a total of 60 employees, of which 24 to 28 
of these are orderlies working during regular hours and 13 
to  4  working  during  the  evening  and  the  night  shifts, 
respectively.  The  clinical  departments  are  spatially 
distributed in many interconnected buildings with different 
layouts for surgical wards and laboratories, including three 
tall buildings with seven or more floors.  
Context: Implementation of a Workflow Application 
The two main functionalities of PLog are the provision of: 
an  overview  of  all  currently  unassigned  tasks  from  the 
different  hospital  departments,  and  an  overview  of  all 
orderlies’  current  location  together  with  the  specific  tasks 
they  have  been  assigned  to  or  currently  performing.  An 
additional  interface  was  implemented  to  complement  the 
departments’ EMR system to facilitate the task registration 
process  for  healthcare  professionals  across  the  different 
departments. Currently, PLog is developed and maintained 
by an external software consultancy company.  

in 

the  hospital.  For 

Study Design and Data Collection 
To get an in-depth understanding of the research setting, we 
adopted  a  mixed-methods  case  study  approach  [33].  We 
selected  the  case  of  examining  the  work  practice  of 
orderlies  due  to  the  availability  of  resources  and  facilities 
[33] 
individual 
organizational  setting  of  this  hospital  enables  us  to  get  an 
in-depth understanding of the local (intra-departmental) and 
global (inter-departmental) organization practices and of the 
changes  in  the  coordination  of  hospital  service  tasks.  In 
particular, the availability of PLog (as part of the ongoing 
evaluation  process)  enabled  us  to  better  understand  the 
influence of technology in practice and how it affected the 

instance, 

the 

SESSION: HOSPITAL WORK

 
 

Qualitative data  Quantitative data  

Interviews  Observation  Questionnaires 

Pre-intervention  23 orderlies 

20 hours 

Same 23 orderlies 

Pilot-study 

 

18 hours 

23 orderlies 
3 clinicians 
2 managers 
Interview  Observation 

Post-intervention  6 orderlies 

22 hours 

Same 23 orderlies 

36 clinicians 

 

System log 
146,664 tasks 

Table 1: An overview of the methods applied in this paper 

hospital’s  cooperative  work  arrangements.  Overall,  our 
study consisted of an initial exploratory phase followed by 
three  intervention-related  phases  combining  observations, 
semi-structured interviews and questionnaires (see Table 1). 
All  questionnaires  consisted  of  open  questions  and 
statements on a 5-point Likert-type. 
Initial Exploratory phase 
In  this  phase,  a  workshop  was  conducted  with  two 
designers,  three  software  developers,  five  orderlies,  two 
nurse  assistants,  one  orderly  manager  and  one  researcher. 
During  the  workshop,  the  software  company  in  charge  of 
implementing the application shared insights as part of their 
own empirical studies of hospital work practices1 (including 
orderlies’ practices). These insights concerned for example 
the  registration  process  for  two-man  tasks  and  how  to 
inform orderlies about their colleagues’ locations and tasks.  
Pre-Intervention: Existing Work Practices  
After  the  exploratory  phase,  a  total  of  20  hours  of 
observations  were  conducted  to  understand  the  orderlies’ 
work practices (prior the introduction of PLog) during the 
day-shift  period  (7  AM  to  4  PM).  The  focus  was  on 
tracking orderlies’ tasks (e.g., scheduling and assignation of 
tasks to orderlies by the coordinator), incidents within and 
across departments, the resources they used as well as the 
actors involved. We also gave questionnaires to 23 orderlies 
that touched upon aspects regarding the overview of tasks 
(e.g., “I have a good overview of the daily tasks”), and the 
coordination  of  tasks  (e.g.,  ”It  is  easy  to  handover  and 
redistribute  tasks”).  We  also  conducted  semi-structured 
interviews with the same participants to further investigate: 
a)  the  orderlies’  handover  tasks,  b)  the  overview  of  tasks, 
co-worker status, and how orderlies utilize such overviews, 
and c) the orderlies’ prioritization mechanisms. 
Pilot Study Phase 
The  pilot  study  focused  on:  a)  how  technology  supports 
existing  practices  and  orderlies’  task  coordination;  b)  the 
emergent  changes  of  these  practices,  and  c)  the  new 
practices and workarounds due to the introduction of PLog. 
                                                             
1 We were granted access to the software company’s internal notes 
on hospital work practices.  

982

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

A  month  after  deployment,  we  undertook  observations, 
applied questionnaires and semi-structured interviews to get 
insights  into  work  practices  changes.  Questions  touched 
upon  the same aspects  as  in  the previous phase, including 
the  challenges  of  using  PLog  and  how  it  supported  and 
affected  the  orderlies’  task  coordination.  Clinicians  that 
order  tasks  were  also  included  through  questionnaires  and 
semi-structured  interviews  to  explore  the  benefits  and 
issues  of  using  PLog,  answering  questions  regarding  the 
work practices such as  “It is easy to order an orderly?” or 
“It is easier than before to give correct information?” We 
also conducted semi-structured interviews with two orderly 
managers to discuss the prioritization of tasks. 
Post-Intervention: Work Practices After Deployment 
Last,  we  conducted  semi-structured 
interviews  and 
observations  of  orderlies’  work  during  a  post-intervention 
phase  (see  Table  1).  Observations  and  interviews  focused 
on the changes in work practices and both the new practices 
and issues that emerged after the introduction of PLog. We 
also conducted a workshop to get feedback from prototypes 
that  address  some  of  the  issues  that  emerged  after 
deployment.  We  also  collected  quantitative  data  from  the 
PLog application of all tasks registered over a time period 
of  248  days  including  relevant  task  information  (e.g., 
departments involved, task type, time). All task information 
was anonymized before the data was available for analysis.  
Most  interviews  from  all  phases  were  recorded  and  later 
transcribed  for  analysis.  We  were  requested  not  to  record 
interviews  with  orderlies  that  took  place  near  departments 
where patient sensitive information could be recorded. We 
collected extensive notes from these latter interviews. 
Data Analysis 
An  inductive  content  analysis  [14]  was  performed  to 
identify the most relevant themes from our diverse studies. 
We  performed  two  rounds  of  analysis  moving  back  and 
forth through our two different datasets: the empirical data 
collected  before  and  after  the  introduction  of  technology. 
These rounds were conducted by the first two authors with 
computer  science  and  Participatory  Design  backgrounds 
and 
[14]. 
Particularly  during  the  second  round  of  analysis,  we 
combined the qualitative data with quantitative data coming 
from  questionnaires  and  from  the  PLog  application  to 
triangulate  and  support  the  emerging  themes.  Themes 
emerged related to either a particular challenge or aspect of 
orderlies’  work  practices  coming  from  the  observations 
and/or  as  the  most  frequently  discussed  and  emphasized 
topics by the participants. In the next sections, we present 
the  emerging  themes  regarding  existing  work  practices  of 
orderlies before and after the introduction of the PLog. 
ORDERLIES’ WORK PRACTICES BEFORE PLOGISTICS 
The work of orderlies has often been taken for granted by 
healthcare  professionals  as  a  large  part  of  this  work  is 
invisible  and  thus  relegated  to  the  “background”  [41].  In 

thematic  analysis  guidelines 

follow 

the 

983

type  of  care 

tasks,  such  as 

require  additional 

this  section,  we  present  our  first  round  of  analysis  and 
describe the work of orderlies before introducing PLog.  
Action and Interactional Processes 
The  work  of  orderlies,  as  part  of  the  hospital  information 
infrastructure, can be characterized by a collection of action 
and  interactional  processes  (see  Figure  1)  among  several 
heterogeneous  actors  (clinical  personnel,  task  requester, 
task coordinator), and resources to get their work done. In 
the following, we describe the diverse elements and entities 
involved in orderlies’ work practices. 
Articulating Tasks – Clinicians 
As  part  of  the  patient  examination  process,  clinical 
personnel  might 
information  and 
elements  to  perform  their  work  such  as  obtaining  x-rays, 
blood  samples  or  any  additional  test.  For  such  work, 
clinicians require the assistance of orderlies (e.g., see (1) in 
Figure 1a), to continue with the care process. When needed, 
clinicians articulate and delegate these specific tasks to the 
orderlies. Examples of these service tasks from our studies 
are  delivering  food,  preparing  beds,  throwing  away  trash 
and  any  patient-related 
rounds  of 
mobilization of patients to prevent bedsores. After a task is 
articulated,  the  task  management  flow  starts  locating 
relevant resources and an available orderly to perform it.  
Booking Tasks – The Requester 
We have observed that the nurse assistants and nurses are 
usually the ones responsible for requesting specific tasks or 
booking  tasks  to  obtain  the  necessary  resources  to  enable 
the  continuity  of  work.  Occasionally  the  physicians  also 
book  tasks  depending  on  the  specific  department  and  the 
context  of  the  requested  task.  We  use  the  term  task 
requester  to  refer  to  the  clinical  personnel  that  request  or 
book  a  task  based  on  the  information  registered  when  the 
clinician  articulates  a  task.  In  particular,  our  studies  show 
two different ways in which a task is requested. In Figure 
1a, a more explicit way is shown in which the task requester 
calls  the  orderlies’  coordinator  to  request  a  specific  task 
with  the  following  information:  type  of  task  (e.g.,  patient 
transport, mobilization, collect blood tests), the name of the 
departments involved (e.g., Oncology, Cardiology), as well 
as  the  patient’s  name,  if  necessary.  In  this  particular 
moment,  a 
is  often 
overlooked, takes place between the clinical personnel and 
the  orderlies  (including  the  coordinator)  that  we  have 
termed clinicians-orderlies handoffs.  Our studies highlight 
the  reiterated  clinicians-orderlies  handoffs  as  illustrated  in 
Figure  1a,  characterized  by  information  moving  back  and 
forth  between  clinical  personnel  and  orderlies  when  new 
tasks  are  booked  that  go  beyond  transporting  patients. 
Furthermore, we have also observed situations in which the 
coordinator  is  not  contacted  by  the  task  requester,  and 
instead  the  requester  directly  approaches  a  particular 
orderly to request a specific task, e.g., when an orderly just 
walks  by  the  clinical  department.  This  case  shows  an 
example  of  a  verbal  clinicians-orderlies  handoff  where  a 
face-to-face request takes place between the task requester 

transition,  which 

and an orderly. All the needed information is verbally given 
to the orderly to perform the requested task. After the task 
is done, the orderly informs the coordinator about the task.  
In addition, we also observed that certain clinical personnel 
use  cognitive  artifacts  (e.g.,  department’s  schedules)  as 
coordination  mechanisms  to  support  resourcing  activities 
(e.g., booking task) and get a sense of local task awareness. 
For  instance,  the  task  requesters  associated  to  the  medical 
laboratories  and  Operation  Department  book  the  task 
mainly considering their own schedules. Although most of 
the  tasks  are  requested  when  needed  and  according  to  the 
situation  at  hand  (e.g.,  right  before  a  surgery)  due  to  the 
department’s  dynamic  schedules,  we  have  also  observed 
few  departments  anticipating  tasks  with  a  fixed  schedule, 
e.g.,  when  performing  surgery,  and  also  some  tasks  that 
could  be  pre-booked  following  the  department’s  plan  and 
pre-established  procedures.  In  this  case,  the  requester 
notifies the coordinator every time there is a change in the 
schedule regarding the pre-booked tasks. 
Coordinating Tasks – The Orderlies Coordinator
The  orderlies’  coordinator  plays  an  important  role  in  the 
coordination of work practices as he or she is the one who 
decides  and  prioritizes  what,  when,  and  where  the  tasks, 
received  from  all  the  department’s  requesters,  should  be 
performed. Our studies show how the coordinator centrally 
manages 
tasks,  with  consciously 
planning and prioritizing tasks, before assigning them to the 
orderlies.  While  assigning  the  priority  of  tasks  is  an 
important  aspect  of  the  coordinators’  work  to  ensure  the 
patient flow throughout the different hospital departments, 
we  have  observed 
the  decision-making  process 
regarding this prioritization is challenging, as not all tasks 
are  equally  critical.  The  orderlies’  coordinator  prioritizes 
tasks  according 
the 
departments  involved;  the  type  of  task;  and  the  different 
levels of interdependencies (e.g., information, role, artifacts 
[2]). For instance, patient transports to an operation receive 
high  priority  because  of  the  number  of  allocated  staff 
needed  for  the  surgery,  and  the  status  of  the  involved 
patient.  Furthermore,  we  observed  that  prioritizing  tasks 
exhibits  a  dual  nature  of  articulation  work  when  the 
coordinator  needs  to  perform  local  work  arrangements 

the  coordination  of 

including: 

factors, 

several 

that 

to 

Clinical department
Clinical
personnel

Requires 
assistance
Start patient 

1

care

Task requester

Schedule

1

Book task

2

8

9
Patient
Delivered

Orderly

7

Get patient at 
department

Coordinator
Prioritize task

3

Assign task 

4

Receive task

5

6

Initiate task

SESSION: HOSPITAL WORK

a 

tasks, 

influences 

layout  of 

the  hospital  also 

specific  department) 

(within 
and  global  work 
arrangements  (across  different  departments).  For  instance, 
the coordinator reported the need to be locally and globally 
aware of the different internal needs and requests from and 
across departments while assigning regular tasks (around 30 
during  weekdays  and  45  on  weekends)  to  the  orderlies 
before  they  show  up  in  the  morning.  Furthermore,  the 
physical 
the 
coordinator’s work as the coordinator is physically located
in the orderlies’ station next to the orderlies’ coffee room, 
to  be  aware  of  the  available  orderlies  in  case  a  task  is 
available and that no orderly is calling and asking for tasks. 
When  assigning 
the  coordinator  hands  over 
information verbally either face-to face in the coffee room 
or over a DECT phone (as part of the hospital information 
infrastructure)  if  the  coordinator  receives  a  call,  or  waits
until locating the next available orderly. 
To  get  a  sense  of  local  and  global  awareness  of  the 
orderlies’ location and the task status, the coordinator might 
call  each  orderly  to  check  on  the  progress  and  possibly
assign  a  new  task  if  there  is  a  new  high  priority  task  that 
needs  to  be  executed  right  away.  In  contrast  to  the 
centralized  coordination  during 
the  day  shift,  our 
participants reported that the coordination during the night 
shift is managed directly by the orderlies by calling a phone 
chain,  which  redirects  the  call  to  a  particular  orderly’s 
phone 
in  a  round-robin  scheduling.  This  assignment
requires an explicit communication with the orderlies, who 
might not always be able to answer the phone. 
Performing The Requested Tasks - Orderlies 
After  receiving 
the  necessary 
task  request  with 
information  (e.g.,  departments,  task  description,  patient’s 
name)  via  their  DECT  phone,  the  orderlies  are  the  ones 
performing  the  actual  tasks  moving  back  and  forth  within 
and across different departments. At the beginning of every 
task, the orderly might write down on paper the tasks and 
the related information such as the patient’s name and the 
department(s)  involved  to  keep  track  of  the  tasks  and 
support back tracking. When the task involves patients, the 
orderly double checks if the received information from the 
coordinator is correct upon arrival, and often asks for more 
information  if  necessary.  Then,  the  orderly  notifies  the 
Clinical department
Clinical
personnel

Task requester

the 

Sorted 
list of 
tasks

Requires 
assistance
Start patient 

care 

11

8

9
Patient
Delivered

Schedule

11

Book task

2

Orderly

7

Get patient at 
department

4

Prioritize 
tasks

Select task

3
5

6

Initiate task

Figure 1: The ordering task flow for non-emergency tasks during the daily shift (7am to 4pm): (a) before PLog;                               

(b) after the intervention. Red boxes highlight the changed practices. 

984

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

clinical  personnel  of  any  changes,  e.g.,  he  or  she  will 
verbally notify the staff every time he or she either leaves 
or  arrives  with  the  patient  for  a  patient  transport.  This 
notification is done to ensure that the clinical personnel is 
aware  of  the  current  status  and  location  of  the  patient.  At 
the  end  of  every  task,  the  orderly  calls  and  notifies  the 
coordinator, and probably acquires a new task. If there are 
no  available  tasks,  the  orderly  would  return  to  the  coffee 
room  and  wait  for  the  next  task.  This  is  an  example  of  a 
void  task  as  no  task  is  performed  during  this  period.  A 
second type of void task occurs when orderlies move from 
department A to B without any assigned tasks.  
Emergency tasks 
In the case of emergency tasks, we observed that about four 
orderlies are designated for these tasks as they also carry an 
additional  DECT-phone,  which  the  clinicians  can  contact 
directly. When receiving an emergency task, the designated 
orderlies would rush to the department if they are available 
or  they  hand  over  either  their  current  tasks  or  the  new 
emergency  task  to  an  available  orderly,  e.g.,  by  calling  to 
the coffee room or the coordinator.  
Cross-Boundary Information Sharing Breakdowns 
that 
We  observed  several  process 
interdependencies 
challenge the orderlies’ task workflow and thus the whole 
efficiency  of  the  patient-care  process.  For  instance,  we 
noticed  that  information  interdependencies  also  take  place 
during the clinicians-orderlies’ handoffs when, for example, 
the  clinical  personnel  forgets  to  specify  relevant  details 
while articulating the tasks. We found that orderlies’ tasks 
often  require  certain  equipment  such  as  a  lift  for  moving 
patients. However, it often happens that orderlies discover 
that  they  need  certain  equipment  when  arriving  at  the 
department,  which  was  not  specified  beforehand.  Another 
example  from  our  observations  is  related  to  the  specific 
characteristics of the patient’s conditions: when a patient is 
isolated  or  has  hip-related  issues,  the  task  might  require 
certain  protective  linen  or  more  than  one  orderly  to 
mobilize a patient. In addition, our studies show situations 
in  which  a  patient  has  been  discharged,  the  operation  has 
been  rescheduled,  or  the  clinical  personnel  already  have 
performed  the  task,  before  the  orderly  arrives  at  the 
department  without  informing  the  coordinator  or  the 
orderly. Although clinicians could call the coordinator and 
ask for the progress (e.g., the waiting time2) or for the name 
of the assigned orderly in order to contact him, there is no 
other mechanism for them to become aware of the progress. 
Furthermore, our studies show a task interdependency that 
takes  place  during  the  transfer  of  patients  across  different 
departments as illustrated by the following observation: 

When the orderly arrived at the X-ray department and started 
placing the patient into a position for the scan, the doctor from 

                                                             
2 Waiting time is the difference between the actual finish time of 
the task, and the requested time to finish. 

the  X-ray  Department  checked  the  EMR  system  to  get 
information  about  the  kind  of  scan  that  the  patient  required. 
After  retrieving  the  information  about  the  type  of  scan,  the 
doctor became aware of the fact that the requested scan was a 
CAT scan and required a contrast agent to be consumed two 
hours  prior  to  the  scan.  So  the  doctor  called  the  dispatching 
department  to  confirm  whether  the  patient  has  ingested  the 
agent,  which  was  not  the  case.  After  discussing  with  the 
dispatching  department  whether  another  scan  could  be  used, 
the  final  answer  was  no,  and  the  orderly  needed  to  transport 
the patient back to the dispatching department and two hours 
later to transport the patient back to the X-ray department. 

The orderly assigned to this patient transfer waited for the 
clinicians  to  discuss  and  solve  this  issue  caused  by  a  task 
that was not completed before the clinician-orderly handoff 
started. In the end, the scan was postponed and scheduled 
two  hours  after  the  patient  consumed  the  agent.  A  similar 
issue  often  takes  place  when  the  clinicians  have  not 
prepared the patient, e.g., where they will only initiate the 
preparation when the orderly arrives for a patient transport. 
In this case, the orderly needs to find a nurse first and then 
wait 
the  patient  preparation  and  patient-related 
instructions as shown by the following observation: 

for 

Early  in  the  morning  one  of  the  orderly’s  first  tasks  was  to 
transport a patient to the X-ray Department. When the orderly 
arrived at the specified room there was no nurse present. The 
orderly searched in the proximity of the room for a nurse, but 
was  unsuccessful  and  had  to  wait  for  the  nurse  to  show  up. 
Approximately eight minutes later, the nurse showed up, and it 
turned out that she had been at a morning meeting. 

that 

In  general,  we  observed 
the  clinician-orderly 
coordination  is  often  a  one-way  coordination,  i.e.,  the 
clinician  requests  a  task  for  the  orderly  to  perform. 
However,  we  also  observed  situations  in  which  the 
orderlies’ information has influenced the clinicians’ work: 

As an orderly just finished a task, a nurse passed by and asked: 
“Can you transport the patient in the next room to get an X-ray 
scan?” Another orderly overhears the handover and said: “I’ve 
just transported him out of the hospital—he wanted to smoke”. 
After this conversation, the nurse rescheduled her plan and 
requested for another patient transport to an x-ray scan. 
Resourcing Challenges 
Since  the  orderly  team  is  a  shared  resource  across  all 
departments,  they  are  constantly  prioritizing  which  task 
should be finished first by each orderly. An example of this 
issue  of  competing  resources  takes  place  when  the  nurses 
anticipate, that there is a long waiting time for the orderlies 
based on earlier tasks, and purposefully adjust the task time 
to an earlier time to ensure that there is less waiting time. 
Clinicians  usually  block  out  some  extra  time  in  case  of 
unexpected  situations  and  we  refer  to  this  time  as  buffer 
task time. The following excerpt shows an example of this: 
Orderly: So sometimes, when we are super busy and it feels 
like we are getting nowhere with our work, it happens that we 
arrive  at  a  department,  but  the  patient  is  not  ready  for  the 
transport  because  the  surgery  is  way  later,  but  the  nurse 

985

booked the task ahead because she was afraid of waiting for us 
for too long and that the operation could have been delayed. 

to  an  orderly  earlier 

The  buffer  task  time  given  by  the  clinicians  subsequently 
affects  the  orderlies’  task  coordination  by  giving  a  higher 
priority to such tasks than to others that have a correct but 
later time. The buffer task time will overrule other tasks and 
be  assigned 
than  expected. 
Furthermore,  the  clinicians  also  bypassed  the  coordinator 
and  the  associated  waiting  time,  when  they  verbally 
contacted  the  orderlies  passing  by  and  directly  requested 
them  to  perform  another  task  without  informing  the 
coordinator.  An  example  of  these  situations  is  when  the 
clinicians  are  busy  and  need  a  patient  to  get  transported 
right  away.  Waiting  time  also  occurs  when  the  orderly 
shows  up  before  the  actual  time  and  has  to  wait  for  the 
clinical staff to appear or return to the task later. We refer to 
this waiting time as inter-task time. 
WORK PRACTICES AFTER INTRODUCING PLOGISTICS 
In this section, we summarize our initial assessment of the 
impact  caused  by  PLog  on  the  coordination  of  orderlies’ 
work  practices  as  it  moved  from  a  centralized  (see  Figure 
1a)  to  a  more  decentralized  coordination  (Figure  1b).  In 
particular, our studies help us to get an understanding of the 
spatial  and  temporal  dimensions  as  well  as  the  emergent 
changes in the hospital information infrastructure. 
Insights into the Spatial and Temporal Dimensions 
Our  quantitative  data  collected  by  the  PLog  made  it 
possible to estimate the number of tasks that orderlies have 
performed  every  day.  At  the  hospital,  an  average  of  590 
tasks  per  day  took  place  across  all  departments  including 
transportation  (64%),  bed  delivery  (10.23%)  and  pickup 
(unclean)  beds  (9.25%),  mobilization  (9.56%)  and  other 
(7.96%) tasks.  Furthermore, the data from PLog shows that 
the  X-ray  Department  was  the  most  frequent  location  of 
tasks (µ=151.2 tasks), followed by the Emergency (µ=70.2 
tasks), Oncology  (µ=28.7 tasks), Recovery (µ=25.4 tasks), 
Service  (µ=32.3  task)  and  Cardiology  (µ=25.1  tasks) 
departments.  Apart  from  getting  insights  into  the  spatial 
nature  of  work,  PLog  also  enables  the  exploration  of  the 
temporality  of  orderlies’  work.  Figure  2  shows 
the 
distribution of tasks based on the data collected from PLog. 
In particular, it shows the tasks of six deparments with the 
highest workload and the time they are requested for. First, 
we see that the major load of tasks for the orderlies occurs 
from 10 a.m. to 11 a.m., and again from 1 p.m. to 2 p.m. 
We see that some of the departments, for instance the X-ray 
Department  (light  turquoise  color)  has  a  high  variance  of 
task  frequency,  i.e.  spikes  that  indicate  a  sudden  load  of 
requests.  Whereas  other  departments,  for  instance  the 
Oncology 
(light  blue) 
departments  show  more  stabile  rhythms,  i.e.  less  spikes. 
This  shows  the  highly  diverse  nature  of  the  departments’ 
rhythms, which directly impacts the orderlies’ work.  

red)  and  Cardiology 

(light 

SESSION: HOSPITAL WORK

the 

to  understand  how 

tasks  performed  by 

the  clinical  personnel 

infrastructure  arrangement  handle 

The Dynamic Changes in the Information Infrastructure 
Our  qualitative  studies  during 
the  pilot  and  post-
intervention  phases  help  us 
the 
introduction of the technology involved a complex change 
of  existing  work  practices  (described  in  the  previous 
section)  by  changing  or  creating  new  practices.  Figure  1b 
shows how the diverse elements and entities that constitute 
the  new 
task 
coordination  across  several  workgroups  through  different 
action and interactional processes. Because the articulation 
of 
is 
comparatively  unchanged  (see  Figure  1),  we  will  instead 
start by describing the additional processes. 
Consulting Task Status – Clinicians 
After  the  introduction  of  PLog,  it  is  now  possible  for  the 
clinical personnel to follow the progress of their articulated 
tasks  by  consulting  a  desktop  application  placed  in  each 
department. Through this application, the clinical personnel 
can  get  status  information  about  all  booked  tasks  for  the 
specific  department. This  information  includes  whether  an 
orderly has been assigned to the tasks, as well as status of 
the  task,  e.g.,  started  or  finished.  According  to  the 
questionnaires, the ability to track the progress of a task is 
appreciated  (µ=3.6)  by  the  clinicians.  Furthermore,  PLog 
creates a new work practice for clinicians that turned out to 
be beneficial as stated by a nurse: 

I use the overview of the orderlies a lot in my work. Before, 
we were used to often walking around and wondering: Is the 
orderly  on  his  way?  Have  they  [the  orderlies]  forgotten  my 
task? It [PLog’s task overview] is very useful because we can 
plan our work and don’t have to think about the tasks.  

Changes In Booking Tasks – The Requester 
In contrast to the previous action of calling to book a task, 
an immediate effect is that the task requester (nurse, nurse 
assistant  and  sometimes  a  doctor)  has  to  move  and  locate 
the  desktop  computer  in  each  department’s  administration 
room to book the task using PLog. In principle, our studies 
show that the task requester is now enabled to book tasks 
ahead  of  time  based  on  each  department’s  schedule.  In 
addition, we have observed how PLog assists in minimizing 
issues caused by incomplete information. For instance, the 
task  requester  has  to  explicitly  enter  the  information 
regarding the specific room where the patient is, as well as 
(e.g.,  any 
any  other 
equipment 
the 
task). 
According  to  the  responses  of  questionnaires,  the  task 
requesters agreed that the process of ordering a task is easy 
(µ=4.3),  and  that  it  is  easier  to  hand  over  correct 
information  than  before  (µ=3.4),  and  that  there  are  fewer 
misunderstandings  (µ=3.6).  Although  PLog  facilitates  the 
booking  task,  we  have  also  noticed  situations  in  which  a 
task  requester  would  contact  an  orderly  passing  by  the 
department  to  request  a  task,  rather  than  booking  through 
the system as shown by the following observation: 

required 
to  complete 

relevant 
that 

is  necessary 

information 

As an orderly is on his way with a patient, he walks by a nurse 
who  asks  him  whether  he  could,  on  the  way  back,  transport 

986

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

another  patient.  The  orderly  says:  “Sure,  what’s  the  task 
about?”  and  the  nurse  hands  over  the  information.  However, 
the  orderly  cannot  find  the  task  in  the  task  overview  and 
realizes that the nurse has yet not created the task. The orderly 
then  goes  back  and  asks  the  nurse  to  create  the  task  but  the 
nurse  responds:  “Is  that  really  necessary?”  Then  the  orderly 
explains  that  the  tasks  need  to  be  documented  so  in  case  he 
gets delayed and another co-worker can take over. 

Changes in Coordination: The Application Task List 
One immediate effect of the introduction of PLog was the 
movement  from  a  centralized  (see  Figure  1a)  to  a  more 
decentralized  (see  Figure  1b)  coordination  process.  While 
the coordinator played a key role in deciding who handles
which  task,  where  and  when,  the  role  of  the  coordinator 
almost  faded  away  after  the  introduction  of  PLog.  During 
the  pilot  study,  an  optional  coordinator  was  in  charge  of 
monitoring  the  task  flow  and  manually  overrode  tasks  in 
case of inefficient schedules. As PLog was deployed at one 
department at the time, the departments that were not part 
of the study were still calling the previous coordinator who 
would manually enter the task into the system.  
Instead of a coordinator explicitly handling the coordination 
of  tasks,  the  coordination  has  been  redistributed  between 
the application and the orderlies. Rather than receiving the 
task  from the coordinator  as illustrated  by Figure  1a, now
the orderlies are the ones that need to explicitly prioritize, 
decide and select a task available through the  PLog’s task 
overview, and then book it when they start to walk to the 
specific department (see Figure 1b). Furthermore, the sorted 
task list of PLog includes an implicit prioritization of tasks 
according  to  the  requesting  time.  The  task  appears  as 
booked until the orderly arrives at the specific department, 
patient or equipment related to the booked task. To start the 
task 
the  orderly  presses  ‘start’,  and  presses  ‘finish’ 
whenever they finish the task. If the task overview does not 
show any available tasks, the orderlies go back to the coffee 
room and wait before checking again for a task. In addition, 
a  large  display  has  been  placed  in  the  coffee  room  to 
provide  an  overview  of  all  the  tasks  that  are  not  finished 
and make the orderlies aware of the progress. However, the 
overview  provided  by  the  display  is  restricted  to  the  last 
hour and the next two hours ahead, in an attempt to focus 
on the current and relevant tasks. 
Although our studies show that the role of the coordinator 
became  more  optional,  and 
is  no  designated 

there 

coordinator  at  the  hospital  at  this  moment,  one  of  the 
orderlies’ managers during the interview described how he
may  step  in  and  starts  manually  coordinating  the  tasks  in 
case of a sudden surge in tasks. Furthermore, the orderlies 
report that they now have a good overview of which tasks 
are  important  (µ=4.4)  compared  to  before  PLog  (µ=3.7),
and they have a better overview of which task to start next
(µ=4.0), in contrast to before PLog (µ=2.7). 
Prioritizing Tasks 
Ensuring  a  more  efficient  prioritization  and  scheduling 
process requires an awareness of the overall flow and task 
distribution  to  assess  the  busiest  areas  at  the  hospital,  and 
enabling  an  ad-hoc  task  planning.  For  example,  orderlies’ 
planning  focuses  on  minimizing  the  distance  walked 
between tasks, referred to as inter-task time, as these empty 
tours also imply wasting time that could have been used on 
other  tasks.  We  observed  how  orderlies  consult  both  the 
task  overview  and  the  colleague  overview  from  PLog, 
almost in parallel when performing a task. This enables the 
orderlies to assess which parts of the hospital are the most 
active and best covered by the orderlies. By looking at the 
co-workers’ task progress, i.e., checking the route between 
the  involved  departments  and  the  current  position,  an 
orderly can infer the other orderlies’ task progress. The task 
progress  can  be  used  to  estimate  whether  a  colleague  will
be finished with a task soon, thus providing a better match 
for a task. The orderlies also reported in the questionnaires 
that  having  a  good  overview  of  their  colleagues  is  more 
important now (µ=3.7) than before introducing PLog (µ=3), 
while  they  also  agree  that  their  overview  of  their  nearest 
colleague is better now (µ=3.3) than before PLog (µ=1.6).  
In  addition 
the  PLog  application  running  on  a
smartphone,  the  orderlies  still  carry  up  to  two  DECT 
phones,  one  for  regular  communication  and  another  for 
emergency 
the 
the  current  DECT 
smartphone  does  not 
infrastructure.  Some  of 
(e.g. 
emergency transports) are handled and prioritized by PLog
by displaying the tasks in the top and highlighting them in 
the task overview. PLog also notifies the orderly of a new 
emergency task through a different sound from other tasks. 
Orderlies’ Workarounds After Introducing PLogistics
After the introduction of PLog into the hospital information 
infrastructure, our studies also identified a number of local 

support 
the  emergency 

tasks 

to 

situations 

(e.g.,  cardiac  arrest)  as 

Figure 2: Visualization of the temporality of all orderlies’ task flow for the six most work-loaded departments 

987

(cid:1)
(cid:2)
(cid:8)
(cid:3)
(cid:5)
(cid:7)
(cid:6)
(cid:7)
(cid:4)
(cid:9)
than 

less  efficient 

flow  became 

to  compensate  any 

adjustments,  and  workarounds 
misalignments in orderlies’ work practices.  
New Explicit Communication  
When the explicit coordination previously performed by the 
coordinator was delegated to PLog and the orderlies, a few 
issues emerged during the pilot study as the scheduling task 
and 
the  previous 
coordination process. To overcome these issues, PLog was 
modified to enable orderlies to book more than one task at a 
time  in  order  to  increase  the  task  flow  and  decrease  the 
number of void tasks. However, it was challenging for the 
orderlies to schedule ahead due to the dynamic nature of the 
task (e.g., ad-hoc changes may imply that the orderly might 
be  delayed  in  the  next  task).  As  this  information  is  not 
visible,  any  pre-booked  task  might  also  hinder  any  co-
worker from taking over the task if necessary. At the end, it 
was  beneficial  to  enable  orderlies  to  book  only  one  task, 
and to enable them to book the next one once they are close 
to  finishing  the  former,  so  orderlies  can  be  aware  of  the 
assigned tasks and the available tasks. 
We  observed  another  issue  when  the  same  task  required 
more than one orderly at approximately the same time. The 
coordinator previously handled this by calling the orderlies 
until  identifying  two  available  orderlies.  Requiring  two 
orderlies is challenging, as one orderly often has to wait for 
a second one to book the task and show up, before starting 
the task. To overcome this issue, we have observed how an 
orderly who has been waiting would often start calling his 
or her co-workers starting with the available or soon to be 
available  ones.  In  some  cases,  two  orderlies  would  agree 
while being at the coffee room or an orderly would stop by 
the coffee room to look for an available orderly to verbally 
agree  to  do  the  task  together.  If  a  co-worker  has  already 
booked that task but has not yet shown up, the other orderly 
will try to infer the arrival time by looking at the position 
displayed  in  PLog  or  explicitly  calling  the  co-worker  and 
ask for his or her estimated arrival time. 
Workarounds Preventing Non-Efficient Schedules 
Inferring co-worker’s task progress could be helpful when 
booking the next tasks. However, an orderly’s inference can 
be  wrong,  which  means  that  orderlies  are  less  efficient  in 
scheduling tasks, e.g., an orderly can book a task just before 
a co-worker who is closer to the department, as illustrated 
by the following: 

At the Emergency Department one of the nurses walks by and 
asks Orderly A whether he has time to do a task just created 
by  her.  As  Orderly  A  is  just  finishing  up  he  marks  his  task 
finished  in  PLog  and  scrolls  through  the  list  of  tasks  in  the 
PLog’s  task  overview.  When  Orderly  A  is  about  to  book  it, 
Orderly  B  books  the  task,  which  prevents  Orderly  A  from 
booking it also. Then Orderly A scrolls through the colleague 
overview, finds Orderly B who had booked the task before A, 
and  could  see  that  B  is  farther  away  from  the  task  than  A 
(since  he  is  already  at  the  Emergency  Department).  Then  A 
calls  B  and  asks  him  to  cancel  the  booking.  This  allows 

988

SESSION: HOSPITAL WORK

Orderly A to find the task in the overview again, and book it, 
this time without interference from colleagues. 

the 

the 

into 

existing  hospital 

By calling Orderly B and asking him to hand over the task, 
Orderly  A  prevents  Orderly  B  from  having  a  void  task 
(empty  tour),  and  Orderly  B  can  then  choose  a  more 
efficient task. In other cases, when an orderly has finished a 
task he or she might stay around the same department for a 
short time and wait for the creation of a new task (inter-task 
time).  Our  studies  highlight  that  this  often  happens  if  the 
orderly  anticipates  a  new  task,  e.g.,  when  transporting  a 
patient to an examination, as the patient or another one will 
often  need  a  transport  back  to  the  ward.  In  this  case  the 
orderly will check the task overview and as soon as possible 
book a task in order to prevent co-workers from booking it. 
DISCUSSION 
introduction  of  a  new 
The  findings  show  how 
technology 
information 
infrastructure  affected  different  elements,  entities  and 
practices  of  the  hospital.  Here,  we  discuss  three  tensions 
resulting  from  the  complex  workflow  and  dynamics  of 
orderlies’  work  practices: 
local  vs.  global  overview, 
centralized  vs.  decentralized  coordination,  and  local  vs. 
global  coordination.  We  also  discuss  the  implications  of 
how  supporting  local  and  global  coordination  of  work 
practices  of  orderlies  could  provide  opportunities  for  the 
development of future CSCW systems beyond the hospital. 
Maintaining Local and Global Overview 
The orderlies perform tasks across more than 30 operation 
centers (departments) [21], accessing and keeping track of a 
vast array of information to coordinate and complete their 
work,  and  avoid  cross-boundary  breakdowns.  Although 
PLog facilitated the coordination and registration of tasks, it 
added new work for the orderlies. To prioritize and select a 
task by themselves, orderlies not only need to be aware of 
each  department’s  rhythms  and  schedules  but  also  locally 
keep  an  eye  on  their  colleagues  and  the  progress  of  the 
assigned  tasks,  which  was  previously  handled  by  one 
person.  However,  the  task  schedules  and  the  spatial  and 
work arrangements of each department make it difficult for 
the orderlies to get a sense of the whole situation. Although 
some of the task information is available and visible in the 
task booking display, our studies show that the number of 
tasks can be quite high during the day shift and thus getting 
an overview gets complex. Orderlies should become aware 
that, e.g., most tasks need to be finished between 10 and 11 
am, and less tasks are performed from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. and 
increase again from 1 to 2 p.m. In Figure 2, one can see that 
the  Cardiology  Department  has  more  tasks  from  8-9  a.m., 
and  later  has  a  stabile  flow  of  around  1  task  every  10 
minutes  until  2.30  p.m.    as  it  closes  around  3  p.m.  In 
addition 
the 
anticipation  of  new  tasks  by  each  department  has  to  be 
considered when orderlies are close by. 
Our  findings  suggest  that  CSCW  systems  that  support 
orderlies’  work  practices  should  be  designed  to  not  only 

local  and  global  arrangements, 

to 

the 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

improve 

document  and  support  the  booking  of  a  specific  task,  but 
also  provide  and  visualize  a  local  and  global  overview  of 
the  distribution  and  status  of  tasks  to  sustain  the  task 
informational  order  across  departmental  boundaries.  The 
informational order [43, 44] refers to all the aspects of the 
task information flow across departments (e.g., who is the 
sender  and  the  receiver,  type  of  information  interchanged, 
such  as  instructions,  patient’s  name,  additional  equipment 
and  resources).  Sustaining  the  task  informational  order 
implies  an  automated  update  of  the  recently  articulated 
tasks,  the  assignation  of  tasks,  the  status  information  of 
every task across different departments and if possible the 
assigned  buffer  time.  Supporting  informational  order  is 
something often outspoken as a concern in the related work 
of this paper for the case of work practices of orderlies. For 
instance,  prior  work  has 
investigated  how  context-
awareness systems can be used as a priority mechanism to 
support  awareness 
in  hospital  contexts,  focusing  on 
clinicians  [4].  Similarly,  orderlies  need  to  be  socially, 
spatially and temporally aware [4] of previous, current and 
future  tasks  which  imposes  challenges  in  regards  to 
visualizing contextual clues for the orderlies. In particular, 
enabling the orderlies to become aware of the better places 
to  perform  a  task  according  to  the  collected  contextual 
information,  might 
the  dynamic  and  spatial 
distribution of tasks.  However, there should be a trade-off 
between providing both a local and global overview, as it is 
necessary to balance the amount of information displayed to 
avoid 
information  overload  and  sustain  a  seamless 
workflow  performance.  When  a  touch-based  interaction  is 
not possible due to the probability of causing interruptions 
to the practice at hand or the limited screen-size of a mobile 
phone, hands or eye free interaction could provide different 
channels to provide additional information to the orderlies. 
From Centralized to a more Decentralized Coordination 
Our  study  shows  how  certain  existing  work  practices 
changed and other emerged after the introduction of PLog 
removing  the  role  of  the  coordinator  by  delegating  the 
coordination  to  PLog  and  the  orderlies.  As  such  the 
coordination  of  orderlies’  work  practices  moved  from  a 
manual  and  centralized  process  to  a  semi-automatic  and 
more  decentralized  process  in  which  orderlies  act  as  a 
mobile  human  agent  [21].  In  the  more  decentralized 
coordination, the prioritization is shared implicitly by PLog 
through  the  sorted  list  task  interface  and  explicitly  by  the 
orderlies  while  proactively  selecting  a  specific  task  using 
the  different  overviews.  This  implies  that  orderlies  do  not 
only interact with PLog but also become a proactive actor 
in  the  information  infrastructure.  Here,  PLog  provides  a 
sorted  task  list  to  help  the  orderlies  to  get  sense  of  the 
articulated  tasks,  however,  the  list  is  only  sorted  by  due 
time  and  fails 
to  consider  other  spatial  and  social 
dimensions.  Here,  a  context-aware  prioritization  of  tasks 
could be advantageous to reduce the number of void tasks 
as well as to facilitate the orderlies’ anticipation of task and 
scheduling  work 
the  delegation  of 

[5].  Although 

coordination takes advantage of the proactivity of orderlies 
and, in principle, helps them with planning and scheduling, 
it  also  has  some  side  effects  as  the  orderlies  performed 
workarounds  [15]  and  bypassed  PLog  to  compensate 
situated  misalignments  (e.g.,  inefficient  booking)  in  the 
information  infrastructure  [23].  For  instance,  the  data 
collected  by  PLog  can  now  facilitate  the  identification  of 
opportunistic behavior when orderlies decide not to sign up 
for unpopular tasks, which in turn can provoke a delay on 
performing  those  tasks  and  thus  decrease  the  overall 
efficiency  of  the  hospital  work.  Indeed,  more  visibility  of 
the orderlies’ work might also increase the opportunities for 
surveillance [41]. At the organizational level, this might be 
beneficial as PLog makes the orderlies’ work more visible, 
manageable and ready for inspection similar to making the 
work of healthcare professional visible [7, p. 90].  This in 
turn might increase the identification of possible void tasks 
(e.g.,  empty  tours)  that  can  put  at  risk  the  efficiency  of 
orderlies.  However,  at  the  personnel  level,  this  might  be 
detrimental  for  the  wellbeing  of  the  orderlies  and  their 
personal  preferences  that  now  became  more  explicit  and 
visible as they are the ones who decide which task to book 
and perform, in contrast to the centralized coordination. 
Our  findings  suggest  that  CSCW  systems  that  support 
orderlies’  work  practices  should  be  designed  to  make 
orderlies  play  an  active  role  in  the  task  management 
routines by balancing the visibility of their work practices 
as well as providing them with local and global awareness 
thereby taking advantage of the local and global overviews. 
This  calls  attention  to  an  important  aspect  of  CSCW 
systems, the negotiation of visibility [41] which takes into 
account  the  orderlies’  work  practices  and  their  personal 
preferences.  As  suggested  by  Star  and  Strauss  [41],  the 
invisibility of work could also be positive as in the case of 
certain  workarounds.  For  instance,  the  inter-task  time  that 
takes place as part of the anticipation of tasks by an orderly 
(e.g.,  when 
transporting  a  patient  between  different 
departments)  could  be  considered  a  case  of  a  positive 
workaround  that  could  be  beneficial  for  the  overall 
information  infrastructure.  To  avoid  misalignments,  in  the 
new  infrastructure,  a,  particular  attention  should  be  given 
not only to reconcile inter-departmental differences but also 
intra-departmental differences due to the distributed nature 
of  the  orderlies’  work  practices.  This  might  promote 
coordination by avoidance [27] to prevent the interference 
of  other  colleagues  during  the  self-prioritization  and 
selection of tasks.  
Supporting Local and Global Coordination  
Our study shows how the clinicians-orderlies handoff takes 
place among different personnel, artifacts and departments. 
The  desktop  application  in  each  department  could  be  an 
example of a common information space [11] that facilitate 
information sharing, also providing clinicians with a sense 
of  local  and  global  awareness.  Besides  the  overview 
obtained  by  PLog, 
the  clinicians  across  different 
departments  do  not  get  to  participate  together  in  the 

989

task 

in 

different 

challenging  when 

introducing  contextual  clues, 

times,  but  a  more  active  role 

articulation  and  prioritization  of  tasks,  as  a  result  of  a 
reconfiguration of coordination. The coordination becomes 
even  more 
process 
interdependencies  take  place  due  to  the  departments’ 
competing  goals,  resources  and  clinical  and  non-clinical 
teams [2]. On the one hand, this might in some cases imply 
that  a  more  collaborative  resource  prioritization  process 
across departments is needed [2],  aiming for more efficient 
patient flows since the clinical and non-clinical staff could 
participate in taking their individual schedules into account. 
However, having the clinical personnel as an active actor in 
prioritizing tasks has been a concern throughout the whole 
implementation  of  PLog.  As  presented  earlier 
the 
opportunistic  behaviors  of  clinical  personnel  introduced 
buffer 
task 
prioritization could introduce over-assessments of their own 
tasks.  Moreover, 
like 
visualizing  the  overall  waiting  time,  could  provoke  new 
opportunistic  behaviors.  As  the  main  focus  of  the  clinical 
personnel is the patient care, it might be counterproductive 
to expect them to actively participate in the logistics of the 
service work. In this case, getting a global awareness of the 
hospital  service  work  in  addition  to  the  awareness  of 
clinical work may be too challenging for task requesters.  
Our  findings  suggest  that  CSCW  systems  that  support 
orderlies’ work practices should be designed to sustain the 
local  and  global  coordination, 
the  redistribution  of 
awareness,  and  the  negotiative  work  between  clinical 
personnel and orderlies supported by the local and global 
overviews.  The  negotiative  work  [44]  refers  to  all  the 
activities  including  informal  and  more  formal  agreements 
that  take  place  across  departments  between  clinical  and 
non-clinical  personnel 
successful 
negotiation.  Here  the  overviews  play  an  important  role  to 
provide  both  orderlies  and  clinical  personnel  with  a  local 
and  global  awareness  as  orderlies  move  back  and  forth 
across  several  departments.  While  the  desktop  application 
overview acted as an articulation space [10] supporting the 
intra- and inter- departmental coordination, PLog overviews 
served as a useful boundary object [26], providing a broader 
overview  of  tasks  and  resources  across  departments, 
enabling a local and global coordination between clinicians 
and  orderlies  and  facilitating  a  common  understanding  of 
the practices using the information infrastructure. 
Beyond Hospital Work Coordination 
Our findings come from a case study in a specific hospital, 
but they may be transferable to other complex environments 
and  scenarios,  where  prioritization,  scheduling  and 
anticipating work  are essential to support the coordination 
of  work  practices  such  as  software  companies,  print 
industry,  airport  and  metro  control  centers  [8,  9].  Indeed, 
the challenges and interdependences presented above relate 
to the third level of articulation of work [44] with planning, 
scheduling and execution of actual activities. Our findings 
not  only  show  how  orderlies’  work  practices  changed  but 
also how those of clinicians changed after the introduction 

to  accomplish  a 

SESSION: HOSPITAL WORK

of PLog. A particular strategy that could be found in other 
complex environment apart from the hospital is the creation 
of a buffer time in production lines to prevent unexpected 
situations  [30].  Buffer 
times  are  usually  created  by 
professional workers according to past experiences [20]. As 
presented  above,  buffer  time  was  allocated  according  to 
nurse’s  experiences  with  a  predefined  fixed-size.  A 
predefined fixed-size of buffer time imposes challenges in 
settings where the work is not prioritized according to the 
time or the order [13, 30]. For instance, prioritization in the 
print industry would consider the complexity of the activity 
and  how  much  time  is  required  to  perform  a  task  [13]. 
Although  making  the  buffer  time  more  visible  could 
support  the  coordination  of  work  practices,  future  work 
should  consider  discovering  the  specific  particularities  of 
each  domain.  Furthermore,  implementing  and  visualizing 
an  adjustable  buffer  time  could  be  beneficial  (e.g.,  when 
additional time is needed to complete a task) to support the 
performance and coordination of work practices. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper discusses the importance of the often-considered 
invisible  but  legitimate  work  performed  by  orderlies  as 
proactive  actors  in  hospital  information  infrastructures. 
While  few  studies  investigate  the  work  practices  of 
orderlies,  these  have  mostly  focused  on  providing  a 
description  of  work  practices  or  usability  tests  without 
exploring  the  dynamic  changes  in  practices  and  in  the 
overall  workflow  of  the  hospital.  In  contrast,  we  describe 
the  existing  work  practices  of  orderlies  and  the  involved 
actors  and  artifacts,  part  of  a 
large-scale  hospital 
information infrastructure, before and after the introduction 
of  a  new  technology  that  support  the  tasks  coordination 
across hospital departments. To our knowledge, this is the 
first  study  of  technology  in  use  that  further  investigates 
orderlies’  work  practices  and  their  dynamic  changes.  Our 
findings  suggest  that  it  is  necessary  to  generate  a  more 
complete  understanding  of  orderlies’  work  practices  and 
account  for  the  challenges,  tensions,  arrangements  and 
workarounds  discussed 
this  paper  as  fundamental 
knowledge to support CSCW system design. Based on our 
findings, we provide a set of design recommendations that 
include:  a)  supporting  the  local  and  global  overviews  to 
sustain  the  task  informational  order  across  departmental 
boundaries,  b)  sustaining  orderlies  proactive  role  while 
balancing  the  visibility  of  their  work  practices,  and  c) 
sustaining  the  redistribution  of  awareness  and  negotiative 
work 
These 
recommendations might help clinicians, orderlies as well as 
technology  designers  to  account  for  the  distributed  and 
invisible—yet essential—work of hospital orderlies. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This  work  has  been  supported  by 
the  Danish  Advanced 
Technology  Foundation  under  J.nr.  076-2011-  3.,  and  by  The 
Danish  Council  for  Strategic  Research  as  part  of  the  EcoSense 
project  (11-115331).  Furthermore,  we  would  like  to  thank  the 
reviewers  for  their  helpful  suggestions  and  comments  as  well  as 
Lone S. W. Christensen and Yuka Nagashima for their feedback.  

clinicians 

orderlies. 

between 

and 

in 

990

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

REFERENCES 
1. 

Joanna Abraham and Madhu C. Reddy.  2008. Moving 
patients around: a field study of coordination between 
clinical and non-clinical staff in hospitals. In Proc. 
CSCW, ACM, 225-228. 10.1145/1460563.1460598 
Joanna Abraham and Madhu C. Reddy. 2013. Re-
coordinating activities: an investigation of articulation 
work in patient transfers. In Proc. CSCW, ACM, 67-78. 
10.1145/2441776.2441787 
Jørgen Bansler, Erling Havn, Troels Mønsted, Kjeld 
Schmidt and JesperHastrup Svendsen.  2013. 
Physicians’ Progress Notes. In Proc. ECSCW, 
Springer, 123-142. 10.1007/978-1-4471-5346-7_7 
Jakob E Bardram and Thomas R Hansen.  2004. The 
AWARE architecture: supporting context-mediated 
social awareness in mobile cooperation. In Proc. 
CSCW, ACM, 192-201. 10.1145/1031607.1031639 
Jakob E. Bardram.  1997. "I love the system - I just 
don't use it!". In Proc. SIGGROUP, ACM, 251-260. 
10.1145/266838.266922 
JakobE Bardram and Claus Bossen. (2005) Mobility 
Work: The Spatial Dimension of Collaboration at a 
Hospital. Comput Supported Coop Work, 14 (2). 131-
160. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

8. 

7.  Marc Berg. (1999) Patient care information systems 

and health care work: a sociotechnical approach. Int J 
Med Inform, 55 (2). 87-101. 
Jeanette Blomberg and Helena Karasti. (2013) 
Reflections on 25 Years of Ethnography in CSCW. 
Comput Supported Coop Work, 22 (4-6). 373-423. 
9.  Alexander Boden, Frank Rosswog, Gunnar Stevens 

and Volker Wulf.  2014. Articulation spaces: bridging 
the gap between formal and informal coordination. In 
Proc. CSCW, ACM, 1120-1130. 
10.1145/2531602.2531621 

10.  Alexander Boden, Frank Rosswog, Gunnar Stevens 

and Volker Wulf.  2014. Articulation spaces: bridging 
the gap between formal and informal coordination. In 
CSCW, ACM, 1120-1130. 10.1145/2531602.2531621 

11.  Claus Bossen.  2002. The parameters of common 

information spaces:: the heterogeneity of cooperative 
work at a hospital ward. In Proc. CSCW, ACM, 176-
185. 10.1145/587078.587104 

12.  Claus Bossen, Lotte Groth Jensen and Flemming Witt 

Udsen. (2014) Boundary-Object Trimming: On the 
Invisibility of Medical Secretaries' Care of Records in 
Healthcare Infrastructures. Comput. Supported Coop. 
Work, 23 (1). 75-110. 

13.  John Bowers, Graham Button and Wes Sharrock.  

1995. Workflow From Within and Without: 
Technology and Cooperative Work on the Print 
Industry Shopfloor. In Proc. ECSCW, Springer, 51-66. 
10.1007/978-94-011-0349-7_4 

991

14.  Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. (2006) Using 

Thematic Analysis in Psychology Qualitative Research 
in Psychology, 3, 77-101. ISI. 

15.  Federico Cabitza and Carla Simone.  2013. “Drops 

Hollowing the Stone”: Workarounds as Resources for 
Better Task-Artifact Fit. In Proc. ECSCW, Springer, 
103-122. 10.1007/978-1-4471-5346-7_6 

16.  Yunan Chen, Charlotte Tang, Karen Cheng and Sun 
Young Park. 2012. Bridging clinical and non-clinical 
health practices: opportunities and challenges. In Proc. 
EA, ACM, 2723-2726. 10.1145/2212776.2212705 
17.  Gunnar Ellingsen and Kristoffer Røed. (2010) The 

Role of Integration in Health-Based Information 
Infrastructures. Comput Supported Coop Work, 19 (6). 
557-584. 

18.  Louise Færgemann, Teresa Schilder-Knudsen and 

Peter H Carstensen.  2005. The Duality of Articulation 
Work in Large Heterogeneous Settings — a Study in 
Health Care. In Proc. ECSCW, Springer, 163-183. 
10.1007/1-4020-4023-7_9 

19.  Geraldine Fitzpatrick and Gunnar Ellingsen. (2013) A 
Review of 25 Years of CSCW Research in Healthcare: 
Contributions, Challenges and Future Agendas. 
Comput Supported Coop Work, 22 (4-6). 609-665. 
20.  Nikolaos F. Giannelos and Michael C. Georgiadis. 

(2002) A Simple New Continuous-Time Formulation 
for Short-Term Scheduling of Multipurpose Batch 
Processes. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 41 (9). 2178-2184. 

21.  Víctor M. González, Mónica E. Tentori, Elisa B. 
Morán, Jesús Favela and Ana I. Martínez.  2005. 
Understanding mobile work in a distributed 
information space: implications for the design of 
ubicomp technology. In Proc. CLIHC, ACM, 52-63. 
10.1145/1111360.1111366 

22.  Jane Grimson, William Grimson and Wilhelm 

Hasselbring. (2000) The SI challenge in health care. 
Commun. ACM, 43 (6). 48-55. 

23.  Ole Hanseth. (2000) The economics of standards. From 
control to drift: The dynamics of corporate information 
infrastructures. 56-70. 

24.  Naja L Holten Møller and Signe Vikkelsø.  2012. The 

Clinical Work of Secretaries: Exploring the 
Intersection of Administrative and Clinical Work in the 
Diagnosing Process. In Proc. COOP, Springer, 33-47. 
10.1007/978-1-4471-4093-1_3 

25.  Joakim Klemets and Katrien De Moor. (2015) Patient 
responsibility reallocation: a user-centered approach to 
support nurses' handling of nurse calls. Personal 
Ubiquitous Comput., 19 (3-4). 601-621. 

26.  Susan Leigh Star. (2010) This is Not a Boundary 
Object: Reflections on the Origin of a Concept. 
Science, Technology & Human Values, 35 (5). 601-
617. 

27.  Naja Holten M and Paul Dourish.  2010. Coordination 

by avoidance: bringing things together and keeping 
them apart across hospital departments. In Proc. 
GROUP, ACM, 65-74. 10.1145/1880071.1880081 
28.  Randi Markussen. (1996) Politics of intervention in 

design: Feminist reflections on the Scandinavian 
tradition. AI & Soc, 10 (2). 127-141. 

29.  Alison R. Murphy, Madhu C. Reddy and Nathan J. 

McNeese.  2014. Exploring the perceptions and use of 
electronic medical record systems by non-clinicians. In 
Proc. DIS, ACM, 429-432. 10.1145/2598510.2600884 

30.  Ehsan Nazarian and Jeonghan Ko. (2013) Robust 

manufacturing line design with controlled moderate 
robustness in bottleneck buffer time to manage 
stochastic inter-task times. Journal of Manufacturing 
Systems, 32 (2). 382-391. 

31.  Christopher Nemeth, Michael O’Connor, P. Allan 

Klock and Richard Cook. (2006) Discovering 
Healthcare Cognition: The Use of Cognitive Artifacts 
to Reveal Cognitive Work. Organization Studies, 27 
(7). 1011-1035. 

32.  Sun Young Park, Katie Pine and Yunan Chen. 2013. 

Local-universality: designing EMR to support localized 
informal documentation practices. In Proc CSCW, 
ACM, 55-66. 10.1145/2441776.2441786 

33.  Michael Quinn Patton. (1990) Qualitative evaluation 
and research methods. SAGE Publications, Published. 

34.  Rebecca Randell, Stephanie Wilson and Peter 

Woodward. (2011) Variations and Commonalities in 
Processes of Collaboration: The Need for Multi-Site 
Workplace Studies. Comput Supported Coop Work, 20 
(1-2). 37-59. 

35.  Madhu Reddy and Paul Dourish.  2002. A finger on the 

pulse: temporal rhythms and information seeking in 
medical work. In Proc. CSCW, ACM, 344-353. 
10.1145/587078.587126 

36.  MadhuC Reddy, Paul Dourish and Wanda Pratt.  2001. 

Coordinating Heterogeneous Work: Information and 
Representation in Medical Care. In Proc. ECSCW, 
Springer, 239-258. 10.1007/0-306-48019-0_13 
37.  Wolfgang Reitberger, Martin Kastenmiller and 

Geraldine Fitzpatrick.  2013. Invisible Work: An 
Ambient System for Awareness and Reflection of 
Household Tasks. In Proc. Persuasive Technology, 
Springer, 180-191. 10.1007/978-3-642-37157-8_22 
38.  Joshua E. Richardson and Joan S. Ash.  2008. The 
Effects of Hands Free Communication Devices on 
Clinical Communication: Balancing Communication 
Access Needs with User Control. In Proc. AMIA Annu 
Symp, AMIA, 621-625.  

39.  Kjeld Schmidt and Carla Simonee. (1996) 

Coordination mechanisms: Towards a conceptual 

992

SESSION: HOSPITAL WORK

foundation of CSCW systems design. Comput 
Supported Coop Work, 5 (2-3). 155-200. 

40.  Roy G. Soto, Larry F. Chu, Julian M. Goldman, Ira J. 
Rampil and Keith J. Ruskin. (2006) Communication in 
Critical Care Environments: Mobile Telephones 
Improve Patient Care. Anesthesia & Analgesia, 102 
(2). 535-541. 

41.  Susan Leigh Star and Anselm Strauss. (1999) Layers of 

Silence, Arenas of Voice: The Ecology of Visible and 
Invisible Work. Comput Supported Coop Work, 8 (1-
2). 9-30. 

42.  Allan Stisen, Henrik Blunck, Mikkel Baun Kjærgaard 

and Kaj Grønbæk. 2014. Handheld versus wearable 
interaction design for professionals: a case study of 
hospital service work. In Proc. OzCHI, ACM, 260-269. 
10.1145/2686612.2686651 

43.  L Strauss Anselm.  1993. Continual permutations of 

action, New York: Aldine de Gruyter, Published. 
44.  Anselm Leonard Strauss, Shizuko Y Fagerhaugh, 

Suczek Barbara and Wiener Carolyn. (1997) Social 
organization of medical work. Transaction Publishers, 
Published. 

45.  Lucy Suchman. (1995) Making work visible. Commun. 

ACM, 38 (9). 56-64. 

46.  Charlotte Tang and Sheelagh Carpendale. 2008. 

Evaluating the deployment of a mobile technology in a 
hospital ward. In Proc. CSCW, ACM, 205-214. 
10.1145/1460563.1460596 

47.  Stqan Timinerrnans and Marc Berg Tenrple University 

Press. (2004) The Gold Standard-The Challenge of 
Evidence-Based Medicine and Standardization in 
Health Care. Journal for Healthcare Quality, 26 (4). 
60. 

48.  Kenton T. Unruh and Wanda Pratt.  2008. The 

Invisible Work of Being a Patient and Implications for 
Health Care: “[the doctor is] my business partner in the 
most important business in my life, staying alive.”. In 
Proc. Ethnogr Prax Ind Conf, Blackwell Publishing 
Ltd, 40-50. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1559-
8918.2008.tb00093.x 

49.  Signe Vikkelsø. (2005) Subtle redistribution of work, 

attention and risks: Electronic patient records and 
organisational consequences. Scandinavian Journal of 
Information Systems, 17 (1). 10. 

50.  Robert L Wears, Shawna J Perry, Stephanie Wilson, 

Julia Galliers and James Fone. (2007) Emergency 
department status boards: user-evolved artefacts for 
inter- and intra-group coordination. Cogn Tech Work, 9 
(3). 163-170. 

51.  Eviatar Zerubavel. (1979) Patterns of time in hospital 
life: A sociological perspective. University of Chicago 
Press, Published. 

