CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Standing Out from the Crowd: Emotional Labor, Body 

Labor, and Temporal Labor in Ridesharing 

Noopur Raval and Paul Dourish 

Department of Informatics, 

University of California, Irvine 
Irvine, CA 92637-3440, USA 

naraval@uci.edu, jpd@ics.uci.edu 

ABSTRACT 
CSCW researchers have become interested in crowd work 
as  a  new  form  of  collaborative  engagement,  that  is,  as  a 
new way in which people’s actions are coordinated in order 
to achieve collective effects. We address this area but from 
a different perspective – that of the labor practices involved 
in  taking  crowd  work  as  a  form  of  work.  Using  empirical 
materials from a study of ride-sharing, we draw inspiration 
from studies of the immaterial forms of labor and alternate 
analyses of political economy that can cast a new light on 
the  context  of  crowd  labor  that  might  matter  for  CSCW 
researchers. 
Author Keywords 
Crowd  labor;  affective  labor;  immaterial  labor;  work 
practice; sharing economy; ride sharing.  
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous. 
INTRODUCTION 
CSCW  has,  since  its  inception,  been  concerned  with  the 
ways  in  which  information  technologies  are  and  may  be 
deployed  in  order  to  support  the  coordinated  actions  of 
groups and collectives. Accordingly, recent commercial and 
cultural interest in forms of what we might call crowd-work 
have been of interest to CSCW researchers, be it studying 
collective forms of content production as in Wikipedia [3, 
21,  27]  or  platforms  for  incorporating  distributed  human 
activities 
information  services  such  as  Amazon 
Mechanical Turk [19, 21, 31]. Most recently, a related form 
of  distributed  crowd-based  service  delivery  has  sustained 
research  attention,  which 
information 
technologies  to  make  physical  services  in  the  world 
available to subscribers, in the way that, for instance, ride-

the  use  of 

into 

is 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work owned by  others  than ACM must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit  is  permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 2, 2016, San Francisco, California, USA
Copyright  is  held  by  the  owner/author(s).  Publication  rights licensed 
to ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-2922-4/15/03...$15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820026 

97

sharing  services  like  Uber  and  Lyft  can  help  people  get 
where they’re going, and space-sharing services like Airbnb 
can  mediate  between  renters  and  tenants  for  short-term 
accommodation.  Services  of  this  sort  are  often  glossed 
under terms such as the sharing economy, given the ways in 
which they focus on a mediated access to resources; for our 
purposes, we frame them as a form of crowd labor for the 
way in which algorithmic processes insert themselves into a 
labor relation. 
In  this  paper,  we  examine  crowd  labor  and  in  particular 
sharing economy services in order to understand aspects of 
the human experience of algorithmically mediated work. In 
particular,  drawing  on  a  number  of  recent  studies  in  and 
around HCI and CSCW [e.g. 2, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 35], we 
want to examine in particular the kinds of human practices 
that make up this emerging labor relationship. Key features 
of  this  relationship  include  the  rhetoric  of  “casual”  or 
“secondary”  employment,  which  often  vacates  traditional 
labor  concerns;  voluntarism,  personal  engagement,  and 
granularity  are  fundamental  features  of  crowd  labor, 
alongside the obvious concern with algorithmic mediation. 
We 
investigate  how  human  and  social  practices  sit 
alongside  apps  and  algorithms  in  this  new  form  of 
technologically-mediated work, using empirical data drawn 
from a survey and interviews with Uber and Lyft drivers in 
the  United  States,  and  concepts  from  feminist  political 
economy to contextualize and understand our findings.  
In this work, then, we focus on labor considerations beyond 
simply  its  physical  resources.  Specifically  in  the  range  of 
studies  that  we  broadly  label  as  emotional  labor,  from  the 
early and influential work of Chicago School sociology and 
of specific individuals such a Arlie Hochschild [15] to more 
recent  accounts  of  affect  theory  coming  largely  from 
cultural studies [11, 17], a substantive body of research has 
addressed  the  way  that  emotional  performance  plays  a 
significant role in one’s engagement in labor and economic 
life.  From providing “service with a smile” to liking one’s 
workplace  on  Facebook, 
that 
employment relations draw not only on a workers physical 
and  intellectual  but  also  emotional  and  affective  resources 
has been broadly examined, and turns out to be of particular 
concern,  if  to  date  largely  underexamined,  within  the 
context  of  ridesharing  practice.  The  second,  related 
component is Sarah Sharma’s studies of the cultural politics 

range  of  ways 

the 

of  temporality  and  work  [34].  Sharma  uses  studies  of  a 
wide range of groups, from taxi drivers to yoga instructors, 
to  examine  how  we  think  about  and  mobilize  notions  of 
time  as  a  feature  of  contemporary  life.  For  ridesharers, 
questions  of  working  on  one’s  own  time  arise  in  a 
complicated  relationship  with  the  temporal  demands  of 
riders. 
We use these lenses to reframe crowd-work as crowd labor 
through  an  intimate  engagement  with  ridesharing  drivers, 
the  humans  located  at  the  center  of  and  performing  the 
claims that ridesharing services make.  Important questions 
have been asked about how labor relations are imagined to 
operate  in  crowd-work  environments,  including  problems 
of  representation,  presence,  and  labor  protection.  Our 
analysis specifically focuses on the double life of social and 
economic value generation in the work of ridesharing. 
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 
Our research here spans a number of areas of related work, 
some within CSCW and some from outside. We will begin 
by outlining some CSCW work in the area to examine the 
current  state  of  the  dialogue  within  the  field,  and  then 
introduce  some  material  from  other  areas  that  we  would 
like to bring into conversation with this work to date. 
Crowd Work in CSCW 
CSCW and more broadly HCI have two engagements with 
crowd labor, engagements that live in a potentially awkward 
tension.  We study crowd work, both in order to understand 
the nature of that as a human encounter with technology and 
in  order  to  identify  opportunities  for  productive  design 
intervention; but we are also users of crowd work.  Indeed, 
it  has  become  common  for  HCI  researchers  to  rely  upon 
crowd  labor  systems  for  usability  evaluation  [2,  21,  35] 
including  using  crowd  labor  systems  to  investigate  and 
transform  aspects  of  crowd  labor  itself  [29],  forms  and 
motivations for participation [20, 26] and the mediating role 
of algorithms [6, 22]. One particularly significant aspect of 
what we are here labeling as  crowd  labor  is  the  mediating 
role of algorithms and algorithmic processing.  Crowd labor 
typically involves a digital mediation between the parties to 
an  interaction  (rider  and  driver,  requester  and  Turker, 
vacationer and landlord, or others as appropriate.)   
The critical role of algorithms as mediating artifacts here is 
not unique to crowd work by any means, as Gillespie [11] 
has  thoughtfully  demonstrated,  but  algorithms  play  a 
particularly  important  role  here  because  in  various  forms 
particularly search, matching, prioritization, and scheduling 
they are central to the very viability of crowd services.  As 
Gillespie notes, one of the critical features of algorithms is 
that they operate largely in the background.  This leaves all 
parties  to  the  crowd  labor  interaction  attempting  to  figure 
out what the algorithm did and why.  Lee et al. [25] discuss 
the problems that algorithmic mediation poses for drivers in 
ridesharing services, who need to be able to determine how 
the  algorithm  makes  decisions  about  ride  allocation, 
attempting  to  account  for  the  decision  processes  that  lie 
behind  the  observable  actions  in  order  to  adjust  their  own 

98

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

behavior accordingly, to maximize gain, to minimize hassle, 
to  try  to  control  their  ratings,  or  simply  to  understand  the 
system. 
Ekbia  and  Nardi  [8]  coined  the  term  heteromation  to 
describe  “technical  systems  that  function  through  the 
actions  of  heterogenous  actors”.  For  them,  heteromated 
systems  are  built  through  an  interspersion  of  human  and 
machine  actors.  Another  concept  they  advance  is  that  of 
‘inverse  instrumentality’  where  “certain  large,  complex 
technologies  ...  move  to  strategically  insert  human  beings 
within technological systems in order to allow the systems 
to  operate  and  function  in  intended  ways”  [8].  Sharing 
economy  enterprises  are  a  prime  example  of  such 
heteromated  systems  where  the  human  actor  (and  by 
extension  human  labor)  is  not  replaced  but  reconfigured. 
This  question  of  intermediation  has  also  been  a  topic  of 
concern  for  another  set  of  researchers  who  focus  on  the 
relationship between workers and employers in crowd labor 
contexts  such  as  Turkopticon  [17,  19],  Dynamo  [29]  and 
others. For these researchers, one of the primary concerns is 
the way in which the digital barrier between the two groups 
tends  to  reinforce  traditional  hierarchies,  providing  more 
control  and  more  visibility  to  employers  than  to  workers. 
This  has  led  to  efforts  to  create  technologies  that  allow 
crowd  workers 
to  connect,  communicate,  and  act 
collectively so as to begin to level the playing field. One of 
the  important  pieces  of  context  here  is  the  way  in  which 
crowd labor in online systems like Mechanical Turk but also 
in  ridesharing  systems  and  the  like  frame  workers  as 
independent  agents  engaged  in  work  for  hire,  and  indeed 
often  eliminating  the  crowd  service  itself  from  the  labor 
relationship altogether.  
Feminist Political Economy 
A  range  of  approaches  can  be  employed  to  historicize  the 
phenomena of HCI and CSW, including perspectives from 
information  systems  and  user  experience  design.  We  find 
political economy to be a useful framework that focuses on 
legal,  economic  and  social  conditions  surrounding  and 
informing  the  interaction  between  humans  and  machines. 
While  Karl  Marx’s  critique  of  the  division  of  labor  and 
formation  of  the  precariat  within  capitalist  systems  is 
pivotal to understanding modern day work, his analysis did 
not  address  “value-producing”  work  or  reproductive  labor 
and  care  labor  dominantly  performed  by  women  globally. 
Prominent activists and theorists such as Silvia Federici [9], 
Dalla Costa and Selma James[4] contested this invisibility 
of  unpaid  domestic  labor,  giving  rise  to  feminist  political 
economy,  a  field  of  analysis  that  widens  the  economic 
sphere 
that  remain 
unintelligible to dominant economic discourse.  
Building  on  this,  feminist  scholars  J-K  Gibson-Graham’s 
“The  End  of  Capitalism  (As  We  Knew  It)”  [10]  asks  a 
provocative question. Why, after so many years of critical 
analysis and resistance to the operation of global capitalism, 
does  it  seemingly  remain  so  difficult  to  disrupt  it?  Their 
answer  is  perhaps  even  more  provocative.  Echoing  the 

include  such  forms  of  work 

to 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

thoughts  of  Federici  and  others,  they1  suggest,  the  reason 
that it has turned out to be so difficult to displace capitalist 
economic relations is that they actually aren’t as common, 
extensive, or central to everyday life as we think. Whether 
pro-capitalism  or  anti-capitalist, 
they  argue,  political 
economists  frame  their  debates  in  the  same  terms  – 
monetary  exchange,  capital  accumulation,  wage  labor, 
employment relations, financial investment and speculation, 
productive  capacity,  and  so  forth  –  all  marked  by  what  is 
visible  and  obvious  as  remunerated.  However,  this  leaves 
much  of  everyday  life  outside  the  frame  of  political 
economic analysis. It’s not simply that it misses what Keith 
Hart  [14]  called  “the  informal  economy”  –  forms  of 
economic  exchange  conducted  “off  the  books”  but  also 
domestic labor, emotional labor, care labor, acts of mutual 
support, everyday community engagement, the landscape of 
communal  life,  the  natural  everyday  process  of  getting-
along,  and  informal  systems  of  collective  action,  none  of 
which  are  within  the  frame  of  either  capitalist  or  anti-
capitalist analysis. In fact, we might argue that this missing 
domain  constitutes  the  majority  of  life.  If  the  topics  and 
objects  to  which  traditional  political  economy  attends 
constitute  only  a  small  sphere  of  daily  existence,  then 
perhaps it’s not surprising that anti-capitalist action hasn’t 
made much of a dent in the world. 
What they all call for, then, as a feminist political economy, 
is a widening, or a diversification, in the kinds of things that 
we  imagine  constitute  economic  life.  Some  of  these  of 
course  are  traditionally  gendered  considerations  such  as 
child-rearing  and  the  maintenance  of  the  domestic  sphere, 
but the deeper point is that the hegemony to be resisted is 
not  simply  that  of  capitalist  economic  relations  but  of  the 
narrow 
considerations  of  what 
constitutes the objects of economic analysis.  
Such  a  framework  compels  us  to  think  of  the  relationship 
between  work  and  labor,  demanding  not  only  for  a 
diversification  and  expansion  of  the  sphere  of  value 
generating  activities  dubbed  as  work  but  also  asking 
whether  all  kinds  of  work  is  monetized  labor  and  which 
forms  of  labor  (and  thereby  laborers),  then,  are  better 
compensated for the entirety of the work they do.  Not only 
this, feminist political economy also exposes the gendering 
of work in professions that are traditionally attributed to the 
domain  of  the  feminine  and  personal  and  hence  either 
unpaid  or  vastly  underpaid  as  compared  to  work  that 
qualifies as actual labor. 
The utility of this perspective for our analysis here is that it 
allows us to understand ridesharing especially but also other 
permutations in the Sharing Economy where the investment 
of 
terms  of  one’s  body,  personal 
possessions such as car, house or belongings) is central to 
worker’s participation in them. The immaterial and material 
                                                             
1  Gibson-Graham  is  the  name  assumed  for  publication  by  a 
writing collective of two political economists. 

and  homogeneous 

the  personal  (in 

99

labor,  and 

the 

to  analyze 

immaterial 

labor 

is  glossed  under 

personal  as  we  illustrate  later  is  indispensable  and  at  the 
same time uncompensated for.   
Under the broad umbrella of feminist political economy, we 
draw  attention  in  particular  to  three  concerns:  immaterial 
labor,  affective 
the  cultural  politics  of 
temporality. 
Theories of Immaterial Labor 
Much  relevant  work 
label  of 
“immaterial  labor”  –  that  is,  all  those  aspects  of  labor 
relations  that  go  beyond  the  material  aspects  of  work  and 
production.  The  term  “immaterial  labor”  as  used  in  the 
context of this paper dominantly draws from two historical 
formulations.  The  first  is  that  of  Maurizio  Lazzaratto  [24] 
who further classifies immaterial labor into the production 
and  management  of  informational  content  and  cultural 
content.  For  Lazzaratto, 
includes 
adjustment to higher level work related changes, company 
policies,  negotiating  obsolescence  as  well  as  activities  to 
define  normative  work  standards,  fashion,  tastes  etc.  in 
order  to  produce  what  he  terms  as  mass  intellectuality. 
These  activities,  as  he  explains,  are  considered  outside  of 
actual  work.  In  the  context  of  digital  economies,  Tiziana 
Terranova, 
for  example,  has  employed  Lazzarato’s 
conception  to  discuss  the  invisible  cultural  and  technical 
labor that “animates” digital media production [36]. 
The  second  formulation  is  that  of  Hardt  and  Negri,  also 
leading  voices  of  the  Italian  ‘Workerism’ movement,  who 
dubbed 
[which]  creates 
immaterial  products,  such  as  knowledge,  information, 
communication, a  relationship,  or  an  emotional  response” 
[13]. Media theorists Mark Coté and Jennifer Pybus extend 
this  definition 
role  of 
communicative  acts  in  subjectivity  building  on  the  social 
media  platform  MySpace  [5].  Their  argument  is  useful  in 
highlighting  communicative  acts  as  both  immaterial  labor 
and  value-laden  objects  in  networked  societies  where 
digitally mediated bodies perform the dual role of workers 
and  citizens.  In  the  context  of  ridesharing  services,  all 
immaterial labor (including the management of time, verbal 
and  non-verbal  communication,  emotions  as  well  as  the 
appearance  of  drivers  and  cars  –  i.e.  not  the  fact  of  the 
rideshare  but  the  way  it  is  conducted)  are  central  to 
understanding  how  the  much  celebrated  social  experience 
of Uber and Lyft is created and maintained.  
Body Work and Affective Labor 
Affect  theory  [12,  17]  turns  the  attention  of  cultural 
theorists  to  questions  of  affect  and  emotion  as  sites  of 
cultural  practice,  including  most  especially  the  way  in 
which  affect  is  incorporated  into  labor  relations.  The 
maintenance and management of emotion – from the fixed 
smile  of  the  airline  cabin  attendant  to  the  enthusiastic 
engagement of the office manager at a corporate retreat, the 
construction of a “playful” office environment at a startup, 
the  separation  of  political  or  personal  thoughts  from 
“professional”  settings,  or  even  the  orientation  towards 

the  productive 

immaterial 

labor  as  “that 

time, 

“morale” as a central strategic concern for organizations, all 
speak  to  the  way  that  emotion  arises  as  part  of  a  labor 
relation – it is a resource that the worker offers as part of 
the corporate endeavor. 
The  idea  that  emotions  must  be  managed  as  a  part  of  the 
service  experience  is  not  a  novel  observation,  and  indeed 
even classic studies of taxi drivers [7] discuss the way that a 
taxi driver’s personality and emotional deportment is part of 
the client encounter and hence part of the work of being a 
taxi  driver.  As  we  will  see,  however,  this  takes  on  new 
resonances within the frame of evaluation and ratings that 
are  at  the  heart  of  algorithmically-managed  ride-sharing 
[22]. 
The Cultural Politics of Temporality 
Questions  of 
time-management,  efficiency,  and 
control  feature  prominently  in  discussions  about  ride-
sharing  (and  indeed  other  forms  of  crowd  labor).  Sarah 
Sharma [34] has usefully addressed this phenomenon. Her 
work focuses on the cultural politics of temporality – how 
time comes to be seen as a resource, and what cultural work 
is done in thinking about the management and articulation 
of  time,  such  as,  for  instance,  the  way  that  people  might 
make  claims  of  status  and  achievement  by 
their 
explanations of how busy they are. She explores a number 
of  cases,  such  as  that  of  corporate yoga  instructors  whose 
practice  emphasizes  mindfulness  and  disconnection  from 
the  pressures  of  the  day  even  as  it  is  conducted  in  office 
break-rooms  and  during  lunch  hours  so  as  to  minimally 
impact  organizational  efficiency.  A  second  particularly 
relevant  study  she  presents  focuses  on  traditional  taxi 
drivers. 
On  one  hand,  the  taxi  drivers  whom  Sharma  interviewed 
talk  about  the  way  that  driving  is  something  that  allows 
them  to  work  on  their  own  time.  For  those  who  work 
multiple jobs, for example, driving a cab is something that 
can be fitted in amongst other activities and provides a form 
of  supplemental  income  in  time  that  might  otherwise  be 
unproductive. And yet they also articulate the way that the 
actual experience of driving a cab is not in any way one of 
control over time. One spends a lot of time waiting, for a 
start,  or  being  buoyed  along  on  the  temporal  rhythms  of 
others’ days. The temporal pressures to which one responds 
are those of the riders who need a cab or who need to get to 
a  particular  place  by  a  particular  time.  The  essence  of 
driving  a  cab  then,  is  to  prioritize  between  these  two 
notions  of  work  temporality  –  “having  flexible  work 
schedules” versus “having a never-ending job”  
With these perspectives in mind – the broad perspectives of 
immaterial  labor  and  feminist  critiques  of  economic  life, 
and  the  more  specific  identifications  of  body,  affect,  and 
temporality as sites of labor relations, we now turn to look 
at the practices of ride-sharing in detail. 
THE WORK OF RIDESHARING 
Ridesharing,  a  subset  of  the  larger  “sharing  economy” 
boom has been a topic of daily discussion and reportage for 

100

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

‘Uber,  Lyft  Sidecar:R3Z  Solutions’, 

novel  stories  of  crime,  sociality,  regulation,  labor  disputes 
but  also  most  importantly,  the  phenomenal  growth  of 
ridesharing pioneer Uber, valued at $50 billion at the time 
of writing this paper. Uber, along with its biggest rival Lyft 
along with services such as Sidecar, Wingz, HopSkipDrive 
and  others  form 
the  ridesharing  economy  or  TNC 
(Transportation Network Companies) that essentially use an 
“online enabled platform to connect passengers with drivers 
using  their  personal,  non-commercial  vehicles.”2  Uber’s 
financial  valuation  and  global  reach  as  a  service  provider 
far outweigh Lyft and others and all drivers interviewed for 
this study reported to have driven for Uber along with other 
companies,  and  so  the  terms  Uber  and  ridesharing  are 
sometimes used interchangeably. 
For the purpose of this study, the first author conducted 18 
semi-structured  interviews  with  drivers  from  across  the 
United  States  and  observed  multiple  Facebook  groups 
namely 
‘Uber 
Disgruntled Rideshare Drivers’ and ‘Uber Nation Drivers’ 
with consent from their founders. These interviewees were 
recruited  from  social  media  groups  where  ridesharing 
drivers communicate with each other on a daily basis about 
numerous  things  including  best  practices,  incidents  with 
passengers, car maintenance and company policies. Further, 
the first author also administered a survey to similar social 
media groups focusing on ratings as a reputation system to 
investigate trust mechanisms in ridesharing platforms. The 
survey  received  121  responses  from  drivers  across  the 
country.  Both  the  interviews  and  survey  responses  were 
coded and analyzed to understand the concerns of the driver 
community.  
Survey Results 
The  first  author  administered  a  survey  comprising  7 
questions  paraphrased  from 
the  FTC  (Federal  Trade 
Commission) workshop on ridesharing. All questions were 
geared  towards  understanding  drivers’  perception  of  the 
trust mechanisms instituted within ridesharing applications 
and to solicit recommendations on improving them. While a 
detailed  discussion  of 
and 
recommendations  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  paper,  from 
the  121  respondents  47.1%  drivers  rated  ratings  as  1 
(signifying extremely poor on the scale), 18.5% rated them 
as 2 (poor), 19.3% as 3 (average) and the rest 15.1% rated 
them as efficient and very efficient.  
After  coding  the  qualitative  responses,  we  found  “lack  of 
awareness”  (among  passengers  regarding  what  ratings 
mean)  as 
ridesharing 
transactions.  Drivers  also  expressed  that  TNC  companies 
are  not  building  upon  existing  understandings  of  ratings 

responses 

the  biggest 

factor  affecting 

the 

survey 

                                                             
2  See  “Decision  adopting  rules  and  regulations  to  protect  public 
safety while allowing new entrants to the transportation industry”, 
California  Public  Utilities  Commission. 
http://www.taxi-
library.org/cpuc-2013/cpuc-decision-sept-2013.pdf  Retrieved  26 
Nov 2013. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

that  driver  or 

(from  other  platforms  such  as  Yelp),  safety  and  public 
behavior in taxis. 
The  primary  purpose  of  our  survey  was  to  provide  a 
backdrop for more detailed interviews, which amplify these 
themes.  For  the  purposes  of  this  paper  and  the  results 
presented below, we will focus primarily on the interview 
data. 
Laboring for Ratings 
“Pleasing  the  passenger”  is  clearly  an  aspect  of  any 
ridesharing system, including traditional taxis, but it plays a 
much  bigger  role  in  crowd  labor  due  to  the  specific 
intermediation  of  quantitative  scores.  Both  Uber  and  Lyft 
employ a 5 star rating system that is available to passengers 
and drivers once the ride is completed. Both passengers and 
drivers  have  an  option  of  rating  the  other  party  based  on 
their experience in order to improve the quality of service 
of 
report  exceptionally  problematic 
passengers  who  you  never  want  to  be  paired  with  again. 
The  rating  scale  is  also  accompanied  by  a  small  text  box 
where  you  can  leave  comments  about  the  driver  or 
passenger. As we understood from the survey responses, the 
biggest  complaint  that  drivers  have  against  ridesharing 
systems  is  that  passengers  do  not  understand  how  ratings 
work and what the implications of good or bad ratings are. 
(We  might  similarly  observe  that  ridesharing  users  have 
very little idea of how their scores are used, although that 
has not been part of our study.) 
To  elaborate,  since  ridesharing  companies  themselves  do 
not  have  a  walk-through,  tutorial  or  a  short  guide  to  the 
features in their apps, passengers use their prior knowledge 
of  how  5-star  rating  scales  work.  As  a  driver  mentioned, 
“Most  passengers  don’t  understand  Uber  rating  system. 
They  are  led  to  believe  Yelp  style  rating.  With  Uber 
anything less than 5 stars is a failure.” As has been widely 
reported  from  the  data  released  by  Uber,  4.6  is  the  lower 
limit  below  which  drivers  are  given  a  warning  and  a 
stipulated  time  period  to  improve  their  ratings,  failing 
which  they  get  deactivated.  For  Lyft  it  is  even  higher  at 
4.79. While Uber’s report mentions the top five complaints 
associated  with  low  ratings,  it  does  not  comment  on 
whether  passengers  are  aware  that  within  their  rating 
system,  unlike  other  known  reputation  systems,  the  rating 
threshold  is  much  higher.  To  aggravate  this,  both  Uber’s 
code  of  conduct  and  best  practices  listed  by  Uber  trainers 
explicitly advise drivers “not to ask for 5 stars but to earn 
them”. As Rez LaBoy3, the owner and co-founder of R3Z 
Solutions,  the  biggest  driver  training  company  in  the  U.S. 
explains,  

                                                             
3 See the interview with Rez LaBoy here: ‘Meet the trainers 
helping Uber drivers boost ratings.’ NetworkerMedia. 11 May, 
2015. http://networkermedia.com/2015/05/11/meet-the-trainers-
helping-uber-drivers-boost-ratings/ 

We focus mostly on the behavioral factors that contribute 
to  ratings.  It’s  similar  to  a  five-star  restaurant.  The 
restaurant isn’t asking for a five-star rating, but instead 
provides service that compels the customer to give them 
the  ratings.  We  also  tell  the  drivers  to  earn  five  stars 
rather than asking for five stars. 

When asked to rate the effectiveness of the rating system as 
a  means  to  promote  trust  between  passengers  and  drivers, 
45% drivers rated it as 1, indicating very poor, 18% rated it 
as  2  and  another  18%  rated  it  as  3,  indicating  poor  and 
average  respectively.  Responding  to  how  well  passengers 
understood the rating system, most drivers said “not well”. 
As one response explained: 

The whole rating system sucks! It frustrates drivers to no 
end because there’s no clear feedback about why riders 
down-rated  you,  when,  or  who.  Some  riders  down-rate 
you because you “talk too much” while others down-rate 
you because you “seemed to ignore them”. In one day, I 
can  get  a  whole  bunch  of  happy  riders  who  talk  up  a 
storm and seem to love the ride, and a couple who just sit 
there  staring  out  the  window;  all  I  know  is  several  of 
them  gave  me  less  than  5  stars  for  totally  unknown 
reasons, and one gave me a 2-star rating. Either change 
to  a  simple  “would  you  ride  with  this  driver  again?” 
question, or require them to say WHY they gave less than 
5 stars and give that feedback to the drivers. 

As  this  quote  illustrates,  since  there  is  a  differential 
understanding  of  how  ratings  work  and  as  inferred  from 
survey responses, drivers  don’t proactively ask for five star 
ratings  from  passengers  for  various  reasons.  While  some 
said that it seems too desperate, some others such as driver 
trainer Rez LaBoy said that one has to earn ratings and not 
ask  for  them.  Activities  that  come  under  the  ambit  of 
constructing  a  positive  experience  included  providing 
complimentary water bottles, mints, playing the music that 
passengers  like,  tolerating  rude  behavior,  racial  slurs, 
offensive  remarks  or  even  refraining  from  any  discussion 
that  might  lead  to  disagreement  including  movies,  music 
tastes, preferred sports players and so on.  
In order to understand how communication is indispensable 
to  the  actual  work  of  driving  let  us  consider  another 
instance.  Again,  according  to  the  data  published  by  Uber, 
the  biggest  reason  for 
is  drivers  not 
demonstrating an adequate knowledge of city routes despite 
most  drivers  actively  using  Google  Maps  or  other  GPS 
services. LaBoy, in his interview, also admitted to conflicts 
over  choice  of  routes  being  a  common  complaint.  One  of 
the interviewees said that while they always used GPS for 
personal navigation, when driving for Uber and Lyft, even 
if they know a route better than the suggested one (which 
often includes using the freeway), they ask the passenger’s 
preference  before  taking  the  shorter  route.  What  Don,  a 
trainer with R3Z Solutions explained in his training strategy 
to  drivers  is  that  it  is  not  enough  to  drive  correctly  but  to 

lower  ratings 

101

to 

“communicate  the  confidence  that  you  know  the  route 
without probing passengers”.  
Thus, while doing the daily driving work, both verbal and 
bodily communicative acts are intrinsic to performing one’s 
identity as a driver who deserves to be rated a 5. Not only 
this,  as  discussed  earlier,  in  the  absence  of  any  formal 
communication  and  training  programs  offered  by  the 
companies  themselves  (keeping  in  line  with  their  original 
claim that “anybody can drive”), drivers have to assume all 
responsibility  of  preparing  themselves  as  independent 
contractors to maintain their reputation while the number of 
drivers in a given city increase. In one interview, a driver 
who was one of the first drivers with Lyft recalled how the 
company started city wise Facebook groups that were called 
“Lyft  Lounge” 
to  encourage  and  offload  mentoring 
responsibilities  onto  drivers  who  would  eventually  guide 
the  new  members  in  the  group.  Eventually,  he  said,  the 
company’s  official  representatives  exited  but  the  groups 
continue 
thrive  and  serve  multiple  functions  as 
knowledge  making,  sharing  and  venting  spaces.  All  the 
interviewees  reported  that  these  social  media  groups  had 
been  useful  in  supporting  and  informing  their  driving 
practices.  
A  factor  that  makes  this  entanglement  of  ratings  and 
affective  performance  more  complicated  is  the  number  of 
concerns that may affect the affective relationship between 
driver  and  passenger  that  are  outside  the  driver’s  control. 
Drivers  are  not  in  control  of  the  traffic  or  the  incoming 
customer’s mood and context at the moment of encounter, 
so while their body and emotions become two major assets 
to rely upon, they must do so in contexts that they cannot 
entirely manage. As was evidenced from our observation of 
Facebook groups over a period of 3 months where drivers 
were communicating on a daily basis, it wasn’t as simple as 
just  “always  being  nice”.  John4,  a  relatively  “new”  driver 
(as self-described in the post) posted on the group about his 
low  ratings  although  he  was  being  “real  friendly  and 
offering  mints  and  everything”, 
to  which  a  more 
experienced driver, Rahman responded, “…don’t overdo it. 
Customers  don’t  care  about  the  mints  and  always  being 
cheerful  looks  fake.  Just  drive  them  safely  and  follow  the 
map.”  Similarly,  as  reported  by  Gina,  another  driver  who 
had barely clocked four months at the time of the interview, 
although  she  kept  mints,  perfume,  wipes,  lipstick  and 
anything  that  people  might  need  on  a  weekend  before 
entering  the  club,  she  had  to  actively  offer  it  to  people 
because  they  wouldn’t  touch  them  on  their  own.  It’s  not 
only  the  management  of  positive  but  also  negative  affect 
that  drivers  actively  deploy  to  create  emotional  bonds  as 
well  as  to  distinguish  themselves  from  the  ridesharing 
company  in  the  ride  duration.  Beth,  a  driver  from  Florida 
State  explained  that  while  making  conversation  about  her 
life,  she  told  customers  how  she  got  laid  off  from  her 

                                                             
4 Informant names are pseudonyms. 

102

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

government  job  and  was  using  this  as  means  to  pay  her 
bills. Similarly, Facebook groups that are a popular avenue 
for drivers to communicate, are also named to characterize 
the conversations within. Groups like ‘Happy Uber Drivers’ 
and  ‘Happy  Rideshare  Drivers’  explicitly  discourage 
venting or complaining about fares, rides etc. while groups 
like ‘Uber Disgruntled Rideshare Drivers’ become obvious 
spaces for unhappy ridesharing conversations.  
Sam, one of the first drivers in the areas between Nashville 
(TN)  and  Jackson  (MS)  told  us  that  while  newer  drivers 
often  faced  hostilities  from  taxi  drivers  because  of  the 
increasing  number  of  ridesharing  drivers  in  the  area, 
because of the social capital he has accumulated in over two 
years  of  driving,  he  is  well  known  among  customers  and 
other  drivers  as  a  reliable  and  friendly  driver.  Elaborating 
on  the  social  capital  generation,  drivers  also  participate, 
comment  on  posts  and  build  a  reputation  in  the  Facebook 
groups  we  have  observed.  One  driver  who  declined  to  be 
interviewed because he hadn’t disclosed his driving job to 
his  full-time  employers  regularly  posts  his  earnings  and  a 
screenshot  of  his  ride  summary.  These  adjustments  that 
drivers  make  are  not  limited  to  verbal  communication. 
Bernie,  a  recent  retiree  in  Orange  County  (CA)  who  has 
been  driving  for  Lyft  to  keep  himself  busy  recalled  that 
since  TNC  drivers  were  banned  from  entering  the  local 
airport at the time of the interview, after receiving a ride, he 
would  immediately  call  the  passenger  to  coordinate  a 
pickup  location  outside.  “Once”,  he  said,  “I  was  about  to 
drop  a  lady  at  the  airport  and  the  cops  stopped  us.  They 
asked me if I was an Uber driver and I said no. I told him I 
was  just  dropping  my  aunt  off.  When  they  asked  the 
passenger,  she  already  knew  what  she  had  to  say.  So  we 
were saved a fine!” A female interviewee reported that she 
restricted her driving hours to daytime although driving at 
night pays much better. Another interviewee driving in the 
Bay  Area  narrated  how  he  almost  got  assaulted  while 
dropping a ride off at 2 am in the morning. These incidents 
add to the increasing corpus of news reports about Uber and 
Lyft  drivers  getting  physically  harmed  that  drivers  also 
share on the Facebook groups.5 
In  that  sense,  as  we  signal  through  the  instances  listed 
above, each driver is constantly contextually performing for 
their customer as well as for the surrounding environment 
to  execute  every  ride.  This  performance  requires  a 
combination  and  alternation  of  positive  and  negative 
emotional  display,  empathy  generation,  building  one’s 
social capital as well as taking bodily risks. 

                                                             
5 See: http://7online.com/news/search-for-teens-who-beat-uber-
driver-in-brooklyn/808123/and 
http://www.ctvnews.ca/canada/passengers-charged-after-ottawa-
uber-driver-assaulted-1.2438300 (These are just representative of 
several other cases of driver assaults.) 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Transforming Space and Self 
In  the  first  author’s  interview  with  Don,  the  driver  who 
drove  through  the  city  of  Baltimore  during  riots  in  May 
2015, Don extensively discussed the importance of creating 
a memorable experience for those who ride with him. Don 
was one of the first drivers in Baltimore and said that it was 
because of the “extraordinary experience” that he provided, 
his  passengers  often  remembered  him,  bolstering  his  own 
image  as  an  entrepreneur.  Don  later  said  that  once  a  ride 
gets  over,  he  sends  a  text  message  to  the  passenger  that 
contains  his  name  and  a  link  to  his  other  business  as  an 
energy consultant. When asked why creating his own brand 
mattered, he explained,  

The trust that you build in this system can carry over to 
other systems...a driver in San Francisco uses his car as 
a  mobile  shop  to  sell  jewelry  and  he  is  making  up  to 
$200,000  a  year.  It’s  an  advantage  for  me  to  brand 
myself. Did I get paid for the article on Baltimore? No. 
But, that kind of moved me into other opportunities based 
on the reputation I built through Uber. 

An  interviewee  said  that  she  carried  flyers  for  her  salsa-
dancing class inside her car and when passengers asked her 
what  she  does  apart  from  ridesharing,  she  casually  told 
them  she  practiced  salsa  and  gave  them  a  flyer.  The  flyer 
also contained her name and number as a referee implying, 
that  if  passengers  wanted  to  pursue  dance  lessons,  they 
could  contact  her  directly  and  request  a  ride  with  her.  On 
the  other  hand,  drivers  often  remind  each  other  in  group 
discussions that bad behavior, incidents of violence and any 
negative publicity could hurt Uber or Lyft as a brand, thus 
affecting customer demand for their rides.  
The  issue  of  micro-branding,  then,  produces  a  curious 
situation where due to driver-passenger communication, the 
combination  of  the  social  and  financial  implications  are 
unequally  transferred.  While  drivers  represent  Uber  and 
Lyft  in  the  work  they  do,  as  independent  contractors  they 
not only bear all the repercussions of their own interactions 
but  also  suffer  if  the  company  at  large  receives  negative 
publicity.  On  the  other  hand,  because  of  the  surplus 
availability  of  drivers  and  the  pervasive  potentiality  of 
anyone  to  become  a  driver,  existing  drivers  have  to  self-
discipline  and  produce  community  knowledge  in  order  to 
mitigate immediate damage to their own profitability.  
Not  only  this,  the  taxi  as  a  space  and  the  driver  as 
controlling actions within it are constantly skirting legality 
as  they  try  to  balance  ratings/popularity/likeability  with 
legal compliance. We illustrate this through two complaints 
widely  reported  by  numerous  participants  in  the  survey. 
The first is what is commonly referred in driver discussions 
as  “squeeze”  or  when  passengers  insist  on  allowing  more 
people  in  the  backseat  of  the  car  than  legally  possible, 
implying that they can “squeeze in”. If the driver refuses to 
comply with passenger demands, they risk being rated low 
and  if  they  allow  it,  they  risk  being  fined  heavily  if 
apprehended by the police. The second issue highlighted by 

legislated  against 

ridesharing  operations 

several  drivers,  concerns  open  alcohol  containers.  As 
mentioned earlier, drivers work longer and late hours on the 
weekends,  especially  to  and  from  bars  and  restaurants 
transporting  drunken  people  who  prefer  ridesharing  rather 
than driving because they are drunk. Communicating with 
drunken  passengers,  especially  those  who  bring  open  beer 
cans  or  other  kinds  of  alcohol  poses  a  big  challenge  for 
drivers again because they risk losing ratings if they play by 
the rules. Besides these two major issues, drivers often risk 
car  impounding  because  many  cities  in  the  United  States 
have 
inside 
airports.  Not  only  this,  five  interviewees  reported  having 
driven minors around because at the time of ordering a ride, 
passengers do not state who is going to actually ride in the 
car.  Thus  drivers  assume  different  kinds  of  risks  either 
while complying with regulation or going against it in a bid 
to maintain their ratings and passenger safety 
In  terms  of  the  perception  of  the  owners  towards  their 
vehicles,  when  asked  if  they  felt  differently  towards  their 
vehicles after they started driving for ridesharing, 16 of the 
18  interviewees  said  no.  This  is  an  important  insight 
because  it  marks  a  break  from  the  leasing  model  within 
traditional taxi businesses to a model where opting for Uber 
or  Lyft’s  financing  programs  is  perceived  to  be  risky  by 
ridesharing  drivers.  While  for  Sharma  and  for  traditional 
taxi  drivers,  the  taxi  is  a  non-space  [1],  a  liminal  waiting 
space  between  two  other  places,  as  witnessed  in  several 
conversations  on  related  Facebook  groups  and  confirmed 
with  our  interviewees,  drivers  reported  that  they  still  felt 
that  their  car  was  their  personal  space  which  they  shared 
time and again with passengers. Not only this, before Lyft 
decided  to  rebrand  itself  and  get  rid  of  the  furry  pink 
mustache on its cars, personalization was a huge aspect of 
riding  with  Lyft  drivers.  As  reported  by  CNN  in  20136, 
themed cars such as DiscoLyft, Cookie Wars Lyft, a driver 
who  dressed  like  Batman  and  another  driver  who  took 
selfies  with  his  passengers  were  among  the  many  creative 
strategies  employed  by  ridesharing  drivers  to  create  a 
personalized experience through the creative transformation 
of vehicle space. Even beyond the extravagance of themed 
cars,  four  of  our  interviewees  described  the  attention  to 
upholstery  and  interiors  in  their  cars  which  in  turn  led 
customers  to  compliment  them,  hopefully  contributing  to 
their ratings.  
The final way that the self must be aligned to the needs of 
ridesharing concerns temporality and flexibility. The ability 
to work flexibly is often touted as a key feature of crowd 
labor, the flexibility here coming both from a freedom from 
regulation  –  a  major  source  of  revenue  for  corporations 
operating  in  this  area  –  and  a  flexibility  of  participation, 
particularly with respect to time invested. 

                                                             
6 See: ‘Lyft cars get creative -- and a little weird’ 
http://edition.cnn.com/2013/07/29/tech/mobile/lyft-cars/ 

103

However, in common with taxi work (as discussed earlier in 
our  discussion  of  Sharma’s  analysis),  ridesharing  work  is 
also thoroughly dictated by time management starting from 
the  reorganization  of  work  time  as  on-demand  to  working 
the longest hours on weekends to understanding paid work 
time by minutes and miles. As respective city markets start 
getting  saturated  and  drivers  have  to  take  shorter  rides,  a 
common complaint is that since drivers don’t always know 
the  drop-off  destination,  sometimes  they  drove  more  to 
reach  the  passenger  than  the  actual  distance  of  the  ride. 
Two  interviewees  reported  that  they  immediately  call  the 
passenger  to  determine  the  ride’s  viability.  A  driver  who 
posted  a  picture  of  vomit  in  his  car  lamented  that  being 
refunded  for  the  clean-up  doesn’t  cover  the  amount  of 
driving time lost (especially if it’s a weekend night) in the 
process. Don, a veteran and the driver who drove through 
Baltimore  city  when  riots  occurred  in  2015  explained  that 
his main motivation for switching to Uber fulltime was that 
he could drive at nights when his children were asleep and 
attend  their  soccer  matches  during  the  daytime.  Lucrative 
driving  time,  in  that  sense,  clashes  not  only  with  rating 
troubles (as discussed later in the paper) but also with safety 
concerns  because  rideshare  driving 
is  gendered  and 
racialized  work  (who  is  driving,  or  which  neighborhoods 
you must avoid). 
DISCUSSION 
As discussed above, ridesharing drivers and the ridesharing 
services themselves emphasize the importance of building a 
connection  with  riders  and  creating  an  experience  that  is 
not  just  efficient  and  effective  but  also  pleasurable.  
Drivers  do  this  in  the  context  of  a  particular  bodily 
intimacy,  sharing  a  small  space,  sitting  just  a  few  feet 
from  their  clients,  placing themselves in bodily proximity, 
and  inviting  clients  into  a  space  the  personal  automobile 
that is strongly identified with the driver.   
Infrastructures of Disruption 
Drawing on the discussion on immaterial labor, preparatory 
knowledge  work  and  the  conscious  fashioning  of  self  and 
space  that  ridesharing  drivers  constantly  undertake,  we 
suggest a critical unpacking of disruption as a phenomenon 
in  the  context  of  sharing  economies.  While  technology 
driven real-time aggregation of work does a more efficient 
and  instantaneous  job  at  matching  demand  and  supply  in 
various service industries, the entire phenomenon cannot be 
entirely accounted for without acknowledging the material 
infrastructures  –  actual  bodies, 
threats,  care 
routines  of  the  self  and  vehicles,  the  availability  of  a 
“reserve army”7 of transient immigrant laborers, that realize 
innovative  technological  enterprise  coming  out  of  the 
Silicon  Valley.  The  similarity  between  work  and  sociality 
among yellow cab drivers and their ridesharing counterparts 
                                                             
7 Marx uses the term “reserve army” or “industrial reserve army” 
to  describe  the  mass  of  those  seeking  work,  whose  presence 
creates competition for jobs that can be exploited in order to keep 
wages low or avoid other labor demands. 

tangible 

104

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

remind  us  that  bringing  something  into  the  realm  of  the 
‘digital’ does not necessarily “disrupt” or produce entirely 
unprecedented work conditions and labor relations because 
ridesharing  drivers  continue  to  occupy  other  positions  of 
race,  class,  gender  and  nationality  that  inform  their 
ridesharing  work.  In  our  future  work,  we  hope  to  nuance 
this finding by locating the specific communities that lend 
themselves to a host of sharing economies. 
Disrupting Work, Ignoring Labor 
From  the  discussion  on  feminist  political  economy’s 
critique of the narrow spheres of waged work and from the 
responses we received in our conversations with drivers and 
trainers,  we  also  propose  that  the  Sharing  Economy  is 
feminist  political  economy’s  evil  twin  in  the  sense  that, 
while Gibson-Graham propose to extend our understanding 
of  economic  life  to  include  those  aspects  that  are  not 
governed  by  monetary  exchange,  the  sharing  economy 
seeks to bring many aspects of non-monetized engagement 
– engagements between friends, family members, citizens, 
and members of society, engagements typically not marked 
by labor relations or financial exchange – within the sphere 
of  monetary 
transactions.  So,  where  Gibson-Graham 
attempt  to  expand  our  view  of  “economic”  life  to  include 
non-monetary  transactions,  many  ventures  in  the  sharing 
economy attempt to capture everyday relations in the sphere 
of the monetary. 
Whether  ride-sharing  or  staying  in  a  spare  room,  sharing 
economy  websites  not  only  provide  a  platform  for 
understanding casual interactions through an economic lens 
but  they  also  produce  a  new  normative  understanding  of 
monetized  work.  While  the  feminist  political  economists, 
though,  wanted  to  disrupt  and  redefine  the  nature  of 
economic 
everyday 
engagements,  the  sharing  economy  seeks  to  disrupt  and 
redefine the nature of everyday social engagements in order 
to incorporate them into economic life in the terms already 
given.  Rather 
in  an  expansion  or 
diversification of how we think about economy, they seek 
to  bring  those  other  areas  of  everyday  life  under  the 
umbrella of traditional economic analysis. In that sense, we 
suggest 
that  while  sharing  economy  enterprises  are 
disrupting,  highlighting  and  thereby  extending  what  we 
recognize  as  a  part  of  daily  work,  they  also  conflate  care 
labor as a natural, inherent component of work, thereby by 
again erasing the distinction driving work and related work, 
making  it  impossible  to  ask  what  the  passenger  is  really 
paying for. Uber does this in more explicit ways than other 
competing  services  since,  as  a  driver  mentioned,  “Uber 
would  just  inform  passengers  that  there  is  no  need  to  tip 
because  it  is  included  in  the  fare.”  Its  interface  does  not 
even have a tipping feature unlike Lyft.  
Given  this  situation,  especially  in  ridesharing  but  also 
possibly  in  other  forms  of  sharing  economies  then,  we 
observe  that  there  is  a  negative  relationship  between 
sociality and its associated economic functions. While tips 

than  engaging 

incorporate 

life 

in  order 

to 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

are  optional  and  there  is  no  monetary  framework  to 
recognize  human  investment,  the  fact  that  care  labor  has 
been monetized allows for passengers and the companies to 
deprive drivers of monetary incentives, pay and often even 
the opportunity to drive if they fail to demonstrate adequate 
friendliness.  
Simultaneously, the “1099” predicament also compels us to 
rethink  work  expectations.  When  Boston  based  lawyer 
Shannon Liss-Riordan filed a class action suit against Uber 
independent  contractors8 
for  classifying  drivers  as 
(characterized  by  the  US  “1099”  tax  filing  form),  a  driver 
posted  this  on  one  of  the  Facebook  groups  we  observed. 
Comments  from  over  ten  drivers  denounced  Riordan’s 
move  reasoning  that  along  with  employee  benefits,  one 
would also have to sign up for fixed time schedules and a 
single  full-time  job  –  implying  they  would  lose  the 
flexibility  that  the  current  model  provides  of  earning  “as 
much as you drive”  (as described by a driver) along with 
their day jobs. In this light, we might have cause to reflect 
upon  the  evolving  nature  of  employment,  the  advantages 
and  risks  of  alternate  models  that  are  emerging  before 
regulation  frameworks  catch  up  and  finally  how  we  can 
aspire for more equitable arrangements in such a scenario. 
Further,  if  the  fundamental  move  in  sharing  economy 
platforms is not so much to create a new way of doing an 
old job, but rather to bring within the domain of everyday 
labor the activities that might previously have constituted a 
domain of economic-but-not-waged exchange, then what is 
really going on is perhaps a redefinition of  the boundaries 
of waged labor, also implying that rather than disappearing 
and becoming obsolete, the functions of human bodies and 
selves  are  being  reconstituted  vis-à-vis 
in 
economic production.  
CONCLUSIONS 
The  question  “what’s  the  W  in  CSCW”  has  generated  a 
considerable  amount  of  debate  over  the  years,  as  the 
attention of researchers has shifted beyond CSCW’s initial 
concern  with  technologies  in  the  workplace  [e.g.  6,  33]. 
Although these debates have often generated more heat than 
light, and although we have no interest in revisiting them, 
they do set an interesting context here in at least two ways. 
One is that new services arising online might prompt us to 
recognize that even the styles of collaborative activity that 
have  long  been  associated  with  social  media  and  informal 
collaboration can themselves fall quite distinctly within the 
domain of traditional notions of “work” when monetized by 
platform  providers  in  crowd  services  and  the  sharing 
economy. The second is that in digitally mediated settings, 
the  particular  set  of  concerns  that  we  might  want  to  draw 
from studies of labor relations may vary. That is, we might 
find  that  we  need  to  look  towards  areas  of  labor  relations 
and labor concerns that reach beyond traditional questions 
                                                             
8See:  ‘The  Lawyer  fighting  Uber  and  Lyft  is  taking  the  fight  to 
four more companies’ (http://www.businessinsider.in/The-lawyer-
fighting-for-Uber-and-Lyft-employees-is-taking-the-fight-to-four-
more-companies/articleshow/47903934.cms) 

their  role 

105

in  regimes 

they  are  only  heightened 

of  workplace  rights  and  democratic  processes,  and  turn 
towards other questions of labor that we have seen at work 
here. 
So, in the case of ridesharing that we have been examining, 
we  have  seen  how  questions  of  emotional  performance, 
bodily presence, and temporal alignment come to matter in 
the enactment of this particular form of crowd labor.  While 
labor theorists have long observed the ways that these cast 
important light on traditional workplace activities, we find 
that 
in  which 
individuals, in the forms of their own bodies and their own 
possessions,  become  the  sites  of  engagement  between 
clients  and  corporations.  In  many  ways,  this  echoes  a 
concern  expressed  by  those  who  have  studied  digital 
economy  settings  that  even  in  regular  workplaces  in  the 
digital  sector  new  aspects  of  the  self,  become  enrolled  in 
the  labor  relation  [31,  33].  Here,  though,  we  find  this 
extending  into  work  that  is  mediated  by  digital  services  – 
computer-supported in a very direct sense. This suggests an 
opportunity to reframe the debate around “work” in CSCW 
and  allied  areas.  It  gives  new  prominence  to  research  on 
labor theory and its application to the digital economy. 
We  have  found  the  broad  umbrella  of  feminist  political 
economy 
to  be  particularly  useful  here.  This  work 
encourages  us  to  think  differently  about  the  nature  of 
economic  life  and  the  relationship  between  monetary 
exchange and other forms of social transaction. It provides 
a  framework  for  resisting,  intellectually  as  well  as  in 
practice, aspects of the rhetoric of the sharing economy by 
asking, in whose economy does sharing emerge as way of 
thinking  about  how  we 
interact,  and  with  what 
consequences? 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We would like to thank our participants for their time and 
energies,  Bonnie  Nardi  for  her  guidance  on  the  IRB  and 
Sanna  Ali  for  her  collaboration  during  the  data  collection 
phases of this work. Harry Campbell’s help was invaluable 
in  reaching  out  to  the  driver  community.  Morgan  Ames, 
Katherine  Lo,  Katie  Pine,  and  Christine  Wolf  provided 
valuable feedback on earlier drafts. This research has been 
supported  in  part  by  the  Intel  Science  and  Technology 
Center for Social Computing. 
REFERENCES 
1.  Marc Augé. 1995. Non-Places: Introduction to an 

Anthropology of Supermodernity. Verso, London, UK. 

2.  Michael S. Bernstein, Greg Little, Robert C. Miller, 

Björn Hartmann, Mark S. Ackerman, David R. Karger, 
David Crowell, and Katrina Panovich. 2010. Soylent: a 
word processor with a crowd inside. In Proceedings of 
the 23nd annual ACM symposium on User interface 
software and technology (UIST '10). ACM, New York, 
NY, USA, 313-322. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1866029.1866078 

3.  Susan L. Bryant, Andrea Forte, and Amy Bruckman. 

2005. Becoming Wikipedian: transformation of 
participation in a collaborative online encyclopedia. In 
Proceedings of the 2005 international ACM 
SIGGROUP conference on Supporting group work 
(GROUP '05). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1-10. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1099203.1099205 

4.  Marisoa Dalla Costa, and Selma James. 1972. Women 

and the Subversion of the Community. Falling Wall 
Press. 

5.  Mark Coté and Jennifer Pybus. 2007. Learning to 

immaterial labour 2.0: MySpace and social networks. 
Ephemera: Theory and politics in organization 7, 1: 88-
106. 

6.  Andy Crabtree, Thomas A. Rodden and Steven D. 

Benford. 2005. Moving with the Times: IT Research 
and the Boundaries of CSCW. Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work 14, 3:217-251.  

7.  Fred  Davis.  1959.  The  cabdriver  and  his  customer: 
facets  of  a  fleeting  relationship.  American  Journal  of 
Sociology, 65, 2:158-165.  

8.  Hamid Ekbia and Bonnie Nardi. 2014.  Heteromation 

and its (dis)contents: The invisible division of labor 
between humans and machines. First Monday 19:6. 

9.  Silvia Federici. Caliban and the Witch. Autonomedia, 

2004.  

10.  J.K. Gibson-Graham. 1996. The End of Capitalism (As 

We Knew It): A Feminist Critique of Political 
Economy. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, 
MN, USA.  

11.  Tarleton Gillespie. 2014. The Relevance of 

Algorithms. In Media Technologies: Essays on 
Communication, Materiality, and Society, Tarleton 
Gillespie, Pablo Boczkowski and Kirsten Foot (eds), 
MIT Press, Cambridge, CA, USA, 167-194. 

12.  Melissa Gregg and Greg Seigworth (eds). 2010. The 

Affect Theory Reader. Duke University Press, Durham, 
NC, USA. 

13.  Michael Hardt, and Antonio Negri. 2000. Empire. 
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, USA.  

14.  Keith Hart. 1973. Informal Income Opportunities and 

Urban Employment in Ghana. Journal of Modern 
African Studies 11, 1:61-89. 

15.  Arlie Russell Hochschild. 1979. The managed heart: 
Commercialization of human feeling. University of 
California Press, Berkeley, CA, USA.  

16.  Julie S. Hui, Michael D. Greenberg, and Elizabeth M. 
Gerber. 2014. Understanding the role of community in 
crowdfunding work. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM 
conference on Computer supported cooperative work 
& social computing (CSCW '14). ACM, New York, 

106

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

NY, USA, 62-74. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2531602.2531715 

17.  Eva Illouz. 2007. Cold Intimacies: The Making of 

Emotional Capitalism. Polity, Cambridge, UK.  

18.  Lilly Irani. 2015. The Cultural Work of Microwork. 

New Media and Society 17:5, 720-739.  

19.  Lilly C. Irani and M. Six Silberman. 2013. 

Turkopticon: interrupting worker invisibility in amazon 
mechanical turk. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI '13). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 611-620. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2470654.2470742 

20.  Lilly Irani and M. Six Silberman. 2014. From critical 

design to critical infrastructure: lessons from 
turkopticon. Interactions 21, 4 (July 2014), 32-35. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2627392 

21.  Aniket Kittur, Bongwon Suh, Bryan A. Pendleton, and 

Ed H. Chi. 2007. He says, she says: conflict and 
coordination in Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI '07). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 453-
462. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1240624.1240698 

22.  Aniket Kittur, Jeffrey V. Nickerson, Michael 

Bernstein, Elizabeth Gerber, Aaron Shaw, John 
Zimmerman, Matt Lease, and John Horton. 2013. The 
future of crowd work. In Proceedings of the 2013 
conference on Computer supported cooperative work 
(CSCW '13). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1301-1318. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2441776.2441923 

23.  Airi Lampinen, Victoria Bellotti, Andrés Monroy-

Hernández, Coye Cheshire, and Alexandra Samuel. 
2015. Studying the "Sharing Economy": Perspectives 
to Peer-to-Peer Exchange. In Proceedings of the 18th 
ACM Conference Companion on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work & Social Computing (CSCW'15 
Companion). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 117-121. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2685553.2699339 

24.  Maurizio Lazzaratto. 1996. Immaterial Labour. In 
Marxism Beyond Marxism, Sari Makdisi, Cesare 
Casarino, and Rebecca Karl (eds.).  

25.  Min Kyung Lee, Daniel Kusbit, Evan Metsky, and 
Laura Dabbish. 2015. Working with Machines: The 
Impact of Algorithmic and Data-Driven Management 
on Human Workers. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual 
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI '15). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1603-
1612. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2702123.2702548 
26.  David Martin, Benjamin V. Hanrahan, Jacki O'Neill, 
and Neha Gupta. 2014. Being a turker. In Proceedings 
of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported 
cooperative work & social computing (CSCW '14). 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 224-235. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2531602.2531663 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

27.  Amanda Menking and Ingrid Erickson. 2015. The 

Heart Work of Wikipedia: Gendered, Emotional Labor 
in the World's Largest Online Encyclopedia. In 
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '15). 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 207-210. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2702123.2702514 

28.  Gina Neff. 2012. Venture Labor: Work and the Burden 

of Risk in Innovative Industries. MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.  

29.  Tyler Pace. 2012. Creative self-expression in socio-
technical systems. In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 
conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
Companion (CSCW '12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
359-362. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2141512.2141620 

30.  Andrew Ross. 2009. Nice Work If You Can Get It: 

Life and Labor in Precarious Times. NYU Press, New 
York, NY, USA.  

31.  Joel Ross, Lilly Irani, M. Six Silberman, Andrew 
Zaldivar, and Bill Tomlinson. 2010. Who are the 
crowdworkers? : shifting demographics in mechanical 
turk. In CHI '10 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems (CHI EA '10). ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 2863-2872 

 
 
 
 

32.  Niloufar Salehi, Lilly C. Irani, Michael S. Bernstein, 

Ali Alkhatib, Eva Ogbe, Kristy Milland, and 
Clickhappier. 2015. We Are Dynamo: Overcoming 
Stalling and Friction in Collective Action for Crowd 
Workers. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI '15). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1621-1630. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2702123.2702508 

33.  Kjeld Schmidt. 2011. The Concept of ‘Work’ in 

CSCW. Computer Supported Cooperative Work 20, 4-
5:341-401.  

34.  Sarah Sharma. 2014. In the meantime: Temporality and 
cultural politics. Duke University Press, Durham, NC, 
USA.  

35.  M. Six Silberman, Lilly Irani, and Joel Ross. 2010. 

Ethics and tactics of professional crowdwork. XRDS 
17, 2 (December 2010), 39-43. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1869086.1869100 

36.  Tiziana Terranova. 2004. Network Culture: Politics for 

the Information Age. Pluto Press, London, UK.  

 

107

