CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Scaffolding the Scaffolding: Supporting 

Children’s Social-emotional Learning at Home

Petr Slov´ak1, Kael Rowan2, Chris Frauenberger1, Ran Gilad-Bachrach2, Mia Doces 3

Brian Smith 3, Rachel Kamb3, Geraldine Fitzpatrick1

1Human Computer Interaction Group, Vienna University of Technology, Austria

2VIBE, Microsoft Research Redmond, US

3Committee for Children, Seattle, US

ABSTRACT
The development of strong social and emotional skills is cen-
tral to personal wellbeing. Increasingly, these skills are be-
ing taught in schools through well researched curricula. Such
social-emotional learning (SEL) curricula are most effective
if reinforced by parents, thus transferring the skills into every-
day contexts. Traditional SEL programs have however had
limited success in engaging parents, and we argue that tech-
nology might be able to help bridge this school-home divide.
Through interviews with SEL experts we identiﬁed central
design considerations for technology and SEL content: the
reliance on experiential learning and the need to scaffold the
parents in scaffolding the interaction for their children. This
informed the design of a technology probe comprising a mag-
net card and online SEL activities, deployed in a school and
via Mturk. The results provide a nuanced understanding of
how technology-based interventions could bridge the school-
home gap in real-world settings and support at-home rein-
forcement of children’s social-emotional skills.

AUTHOR KEYWORDS
Social-emotional skills; SEL; Education; Children; Home.

ACM CLASSIFICATION KEYWORDS
H.5.m. [Information interfaces and presentation]: Miscella-
neous.

INTRODUCTION
Social-emotional skills—such as the ability to be aware of
own emotions, self-regulate or be empathic to others—are es-
sential to personal wellbeing as well as interpersonal relation-
ships [26, 47]. These skills are increasingly taught in schools
across the US and many other countries as part of formal pro-
grams [19], drawing on experiential learning methods such as
in-class role-plays or coaching (see [43] for a review). Such
social-emotional learning (SEL) curricula have been shown
to produce positive effects on children’s academic and per-
sonal accomplishments in the classroom (cf. [12,47]) and are

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full 
citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others 
than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02...$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820007

already deployed at scale: for example, 44% of US teachers
have indicated that their school uses a school-wide SEL pro-
gram in a representative US survey [6].
Developing social-emotional skills requires a collaboration
between the school and home as two of the key social contexts
within which SE skills are developed. However, the SEL pro-
grams report limited success with engaging parents through
traditional means such as face-to-face workshops and sending
documents home. A key challenge is then how to support the
reinforcement of SEL learning beyond the classroom and in
the homes of the learners [34]. Recent work has strongly sug-
gested the potential of digital technology to play a key role in
addressing this issue [43, 44], but to date there has been very
little research in CSCW, HCI, and related ﬁelds that explores
the use of technology to link the school and home to support
the development or reinforcement of social-emotional skills
learning.
To start addressing this gap, the main aim of this work is to
explore how technology-based interventions could bridge the
school-home barrier in the context of SEL programs; and,
once in the home, how technology might support the parents
in reinforcing the social-emotional learning of their children.
In what follows, we report on a sequence of three studies.
The ﬁrst study aimed to better understand the difﬁculties in
connecting the classroom and the home and the key aspects
that need to be supported for the SEL reinforcement process
to take place. We interviewed SEL experts and trainers repre-
senting nine major SEL curricula in the US, whose programs
together reach more than 35% of all US schools. We identi-
ﬁed three key principles that any technology-based interven-
tion would need to support, from the SEL experts’ perspec-
tive. These are centred around: (i) the need for experiential
engagement with SE concepts for parents and children; (ii)
the need for scaffolding the scaffolding for parents: i.e., that
children learn through parent-scaffolded activities, but sup-
port for parents on how such scaffolding can be done should
be designed into the activity; and (iii) the lack of effective de-
livery channels that bridge the home-school gap. These prin-
ciples then guided the design of a technology probe (cf., [22])
with the aim to further explore and deepen our understanding
of the design space and promising directions.
In the second and third study, we deployed the probe in
two different contexts: an in-the-wild study with 4 class-
rooms (∼100 families) at a US school; and a more con-

1751

trolled deployment with 25 parent-child pairs,
recruited
through MTurk, whose interactions with the probe were
recorded.
These varied contexts allowed us to collect
multi-faceted data, developing an in-depth understanding of
how technology-based interventions might bridge the school-
home gap in real-world settings; as well as the detailed con-
siderations of how to design interactive content that might
support experiential learning and the scaffolding role of the
parent.
This paper makes two important contributions. First, we pro-
vide insights into the challenges in bridging classroom and
home in the context of SEL programs (as seen by the SEL
experts) as well the key learning principles that need to be
supported for SEL reinforcement to take place in the home.
Second, we present a case study of the design and deployment
of a technology probe, instantiating these principles, and thus
providing empirically grounded design suggestions for tech-
nologies supporting parent-child interactions that could re-
inforce social-emotional skills learning at home.
In doing
so, this paper contributes to an important but so far under-
researched area in CSCW and HCI, with the potential for a
large scale, real-world impact.

BACKGROUND
Social and emotional learning in education is a mature ﬁeld,
with 25+ years’ history of peer-reviewed curricula that have
already been deployed to millions of pupils [12, 19, 35]. SEL
curricula teach a broad range of skills, commonly grouped
into a set of 5 core competencies:
self-awareness, self-
regulation, social awareness, relationship skills, and respon-
sible decision making. The core of most curricula is a set
of structured classroom lessons [23], usually 25-40 minutes
long and delivered once a week throughout the whole school
year (and over multiple years).

Experiential learning as core principle for SEL
Teaching of social-emotional skills is predominantly based on
active experiential learning [2,13,49], with process similar to
the Kolb’s [28] experiential learning cycle. This reﬂects the
understanding that both conscious and non-conscious compo-
nents are fundamental for any social-emotional behaviour [3].
There are two underlying psychological mechanisms at play
(cf., [51]): First is the difference between declarative and pro-
cedural memory systems [45]. The declarative system stores
what a person consciously knows, such as the names of cap-
ital cities, or a memorised sequence of steps to start a com-
puter game. In contrast, procedural memory stores the be-
haviours as they become progressively automatised and thus
not necessarily consciously known; such as ‘knowing’ how
to ride a bike, or drive a car (cf., Sch¨on [41] for experts’ re-
liance on procedural knowledge). The second psychological
mechanism describes the changes within our cognitive pro-
cesses in ‘hot’ moments, i.e., situations with high emotional
activation, such as when one is in the middle of a heated ar-
gument. These cognitive changes reduce the availability of
declarative knowledge and strengthen the use of procedural
knowledge. As social-emotional skills are tightly interwoven
with emotional activation, this mechanism explains why pro-
cedural knowledge is fundamental in SE skills learning.

1752

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Developing procedural skills requires repeated practice and
students’ own experiential learning within ‘hot’ situations. It
is for this reason that all social-emotional learning heavily re-
lies on a progression of carefully structured social situations:
starting from ‘cold’ moments, such as introducing a series
of ‘calming down steps’ that are practised out of context; to
‘warm’ situations such as role-plays or stories enacted with
puppets, where the learner is experiencing a low-intensity but
still emotional situation; and ﬁnally ‘hot’ moments when the
learner is coached through a real issue they are experiencing
at that moment. In each of these, it is the scaffolded subjec-
tive experience with emotional content that makes the social-
emotional learning effective; in addition to the cognitive un-
derstanding of ‘what one should do’.
The main challenge compared to other experiential learning
situations (e.g., physical skills such as riding a bike) is the
difﬁculty in creating situations where meaningful practice or
reinforcement can occur. To do so, one needs to facilitate
‘appropriately hot’ experiences for learner as well as scaf-
fold their involvement, as otherwise little is learned. In addi-
tion, a crucial pragmatic issue is also that many of the such
‘appropriately hot’ situations require an inherent involvement
of others: for example, when learning to self-regulate during
conﬂicts, the learner needs to experience a conﬂict situation;
and thus would normally require other people to role-play (or
actually have) a conﬂict with.

Current SEL challenges – areas in need of design
The requirement of scaffolded experiential learning leads to
a number of challenges common across all SEL curricula,
which technology support might be particularly well suited
to address. However, to date, little or no technology is used
as part of SEL curricula. See review by Slovak & Fitzpatrick
[43] for more details.
The key identiﬁed challenge for SEL is in embedding the
learning and reinforcement processes into everyday life, com-
plementing the in-class settings that the SEL curricula are de-
veloped for [43]. This points to the potential of technology-
based support to help learners: (i) identify teachable moments
within everyday interactions; (ii) scaffold reinforcement and
learning in these situations, for example in similar ways to
how teachers coach children in class; (iii) ‘stop & learn’ from
such experiences by promoting reﬂective skills (e.g., mak-
ing the interpersonal/emotional situations more tangible and
available for post-hoc reﬂection); and (iv) further support the
transfer of skills by providing novel spaces for practice that
offer a combination of eliciting relevant and strong experi-
ences, but in a safe space where failure is possible and scaf-
folding is designed into the activity itself.
These aspects are relevant for all contexts the child is in-
teracting with: e.g., the school, peer interactions, and the
home. As will be argued in the next section, embedding the
learning within the at-home context was the main immedi-
ate challenge perceived by the SEL experts during the inter-
views (cf., the next section and [44]); and is also mirrored in
the SEL literature as one of the crucial issues SEL domains
faces [13, 23, 34].

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Digitally supported parent-child interaction
Although an emerging body of work shows how digital tech-
nologies can scaffold parent-child learning activities (e.g.,
[29, 30]), these are so far associated with the classical school
content such as math or literature, and are thus building
mostly on declarative rather than procedural learning pro-
cesses. In another related area, a number of projects provide
basic social skills training for people with autism, mostly as
part of the therapeutic treatment (see [26,39] for reviews); in-
cluding work looking at involving the patient’s family in the
process (e.g., [20]).
More generally, CSCW and HCI have an extended his-
tory with supporting parent-child communication, especially
when the parent and the child are at remote locations. Exist-
ing work has explored how video systems can support parent-
child relationships over long distances (e.g., [1, 53]); exam-
ined the opportunities of video-based technology to support
remote play between children and parents [21] or peers (e.g.,
[54]); and provided a technology-based support for scaf-
folded reading of books over distance (e.g., [15,38]). A num-
ber of other projects have explored the potential of technology
in co-located contexts: using tabletops to drive engagement
and parent-child interaction (see [52] for a review); dialogic
reading experiences for children and their parents on tablet
based ebooks [27]; sensor-based cooperative games [40]; and
enhancing shared play or creative storytelling among chil-
dren [7].
However, no work so far has explored if and how digital tech-
nology can support social-emotional skills reinforcement at
home for neuro-typical children.

FORMATIVE STUDY: SEL EXPERTS INTERVIEWS
Building on the theoretical background, we conducted a se-
ries of interviews with SEL program experts and trainers from
a wide range of nine established SEL curricula; altogether
reaching more than 35% US schools. Each of the interviewed
experts has been instrumental in developing their respective
curricula and brought many years of experience with real-
world deployment and evaluation of social-emotional learn-
ing curricula. Our aim was to build on this knowledge to iden-
tify the immediate key challenges and opportunities where
technology could be of use within SEL ﬁeld.
The issue of supporting parental engagement with SE skills
learning and reinforcement at home—as a fundamental op-
portunity for out-of-classroom practice of children—emerged
as one of the core themes from the preliminary analysis (cf.
[44]).
In what follows, we ﬁrst describe the broader study
design and then focus speciﬁcally on the part of the data cor-
pus that unpacks the methods SEL curricula currently use to
engage parents; to facilitate situations in which experiential
learning can take place; and scaffold the progressive learning
in increasingly ‘hot’ situations.

Participants and methods
We recruited 14 SEL experts: 9 curricula developers, and
5 key trainers, representing nine of the major SEL curricula
providers to US schools. The experts had a median of 18 and

an average of 20.8 years of SEL experience, and were re-
imbursed $100 for their time. The semi-structured interviews
with each expert were conducted in person or over phone (53-
75 min long). Each interview was audio recorded, annotated
in the software package InqScribe, partially transcribed, and
thematically analyzed as per the 6 step process outlined in [5].
The themes covered in the interview included:
the partici-
pants’ understanding of the challenges the learners, parents,
teachers and curricula developers currently face; what they
perceive as the key components of their program; what as-
pects are most difﬁcult to learn or teach; and what are the
actual methods they use to teach these. The following discus-
sion focuses on the key challenges identiﬁed around bridging
from the classroom to the home context and the key aspects
of the SEL learning process that need to be supported in the
home setting.

Current approaches and challenges
All of our participants’ curricula include a family component,
in the form of in-person workshops or materials sent home,
which were designed for a wide range of target populations:
from all neuro-typical children to at-risk families. The key
challenge, as perceived by the SEL experts, was about ways
to effectively reach parents and then facilitate the needed ex-
periential engagement with either one of these two methods.
For those parents who choose to engage with the training,
workshops were described as an effective way of helping par-
ents support the children’s learning, and a substantial major-
ity of parents were seen as strongly motivated to support their
child’s social-emotional development. However, the work-
shop turn-out rates were reported as often very low. While
these improve if child-care is provided and parents’ travel is
reimbursed, they are still sub-optimal even under such cir-
cumstances. The developers were also pessimistic about the
effects of printed materials sent home without the workshop
component. Even when the paper homework is actually sent
home by the teachers, then “these just do not get read (E1)”
by the parents; and also lose the social and interactive quality
of the workshops, “becoming more like schoolwork (E11)”.
The SEL experts acknowledged the complex, multifaceted
situation around why parents might or might not choose to
engage with social-emotional skills learning, such as the pos-
sibly difﬁcult relationship or the lack of trust between the
school and parents, especially in lower socio-economic areas.
However, they believed that a key difﬁculty for majority of the
parents rests in the general ‘busy-ness’ of their lives: the ever-
present lack of time; too many materials coming from school
to keep track of; and, for the case of workshops, the pragmatic
issues around a scheduled ﬁxed time, need to travel, and other
commitments.
Overall, the interviews suggested a need for another method
that would combine the beneﬁts both of the workshops (fa-
cilitate active, experiential learning) and materials sent home
(low barriers to involvement).

Supporting experiential learning in workshops
This section outlines the aspects that the participants see as
fundamental in making the workshop training effective; and

1753

the lack of which limits the beneﬁts of existing materials sent
home. These are useful to identify the core aspects that would
need to be supported by the technology.
According to the SEL experts, one of the key roles for par-
ents in supporting their child’s SE development is to either
facilitate the appropriate experiential learning context for the
child; or to skillfully take advantage of naturally occurring
‘teachable moments’, such as the child having to deal with
the frustration of doing the dishes, not understanding home-
work, or having to go to bed. Such moments are plentiful
in everyday settings and can provide the best reinforcement
for children’s skills. However, the SEL experts were con-
cerned that many parents might lack the ability to provide the
needed coaching and scaffolding effectively; and that these
are also the families that might beneﬁt from SEL most (cf.,
also [17,25,49,50]). As E6 pointed, “the greatest challenge is
that adults [often] do not understand social-emotional learn-
ing; they cannot break it down for their kids”. In particular,
although the parents “think they are helping the child solve
the [social-emotional] problem, they are actually giving them
the answer (E3)”, creating a dependency rather than coach-
ing the child to develop a new skill. Moreover, many social-
emotional skills bring up topics that some parents might not
be used to discussing directly and might not know how to ad-
dress.
In response to these concerns, the workshops strive to help
parents to learn how to scaffold learning for their children.
Parents are provided with example questions they can ask (as
part of the paper-homework), practise such situations through
role-plays, and are encouraged to use on-going reinforce-
ment techniques such as a stable vocabulary for speciﬁc sit-
uations (e.g., calming down steps). The resulting scaffolding
of parent-child interaction is then closely aligned with Emo-
tion Coaching framework by Gottman and colleagues (e.g.,
[16, 17, 25]). Important aspects include inquiring about and
validating emotional experiences of the child, helping him or
her label what they are feeling, providing empathic support
when needed (e.g., through the progression of questions), and
promoting the child’s agency.

DESIGNING TO SUPPORT PARENTAL ENGAGEMENT
The background literature and the expert interviews provide
a theoretical basis to design technology in support of parental
engagement and at-home reinforcement. Social-emotional
learning fundamentally relies on experiential learning to de-
velop procedural knowledge. Supporting such learning thus
must elicit the ‘right’ social-emotional experiences for the
learner, and offer the required scaffolding to learn from the
experience. Moreover, the closer such learning is to real-
world situations, emotions, and experiences (i.e., actual ‘hot’
moments), the higher the chance that the learning will suc-
cessfully generalise to everyday settings. For example, learn-
ing how to help characters in a game to calm down is not go-
ing to be successful unless the child is additionally supported
in experiencing or recalling an angry state (e.g., through role-
play), and then helped in applying the techniques herself
when she genuinely feels mad.

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

In the case of supporting parental involvement, this theory
(and the best-practices shared by the SEL experts) translates
to three key concerns and corresponding research questions
for technology support in this space:

RQ1 How can technology provide a suitable delivery channel
to effectively bridge classroom learning and at-home rein-
forcement by parents?

RQ2 Assuming it reaches the parents, how can technology expe-
rientially engage parents and children with the SEL con-
cepts (as the workshops do) rather than just presenting
them with ‘dead’, non-interactive information (as per the
paper homeworks)?

RQ3 Finally, how can technology provide the scaffolding for
the scaffolding role of the parent, who needs to carefully
balance the nature and ‘hotness’ of the experience for the
child, while offering direct support only when necessary?
Moreover, the underlying aim of the SEL technology should
be similar to that of the workshops: to ‘teach and disappear’.
That is, technology should help scaffold the learning and re-
inforcement of skills during a limited period of time, so that
the newly learned skills will persist also after the technology
is taken away or just not used anymore (i.e., are not dependent
on such technology support being continuously present).

TECHNOLOGY PROBE DESIGN
To start exploring design solutions to the research questions
outlined above, we developed a ‘technology probe’ (cf., [22]).
A technology probe is simple technology that is deployed in
real-world settings with the aim to collect information about
use and appropriation, and to inspire further design ideas.
Such a methodology is well-suited to the research questions
at hand, where the in-situ appropriation of the technology by
parents, children, and teachers, forms a fundamental part of
the challenge.
Our aim was thus to create a probe that could be also de-
ployed in ecologically valid, real-world settings of a public
K8 school1, helping us identify promising mechanisms to
promote parental involvement. We developed the probe in
close collaboration with the SEL developers and researchers
at Committee for Children—the developers of Second Step,
the most widely used SEL curriculum in USA—who pro-
vided the team with key SEL expertise. This included ac-
cess to all Second Step curricula materials and weekly design
meetings.
The resulting probe comprises a 8.5 x 3.5 inch magnetic sheet
(see Figure 1), that links the users to a series of online activi-
ties (more information below), accessed through a web-page
interface. We chose a simple web-based solution to easily
cater to all operating systems across desktop, mobile phones
and tablets. The magnets were designed to be distributed to
children by their class teachers, together with a simple story
(‘Harrdy needs your help to ﬁnd the treasure’) to pique the
children’s interest.

1K8 school is a school that includes Kindergarten and Grades 1 to
8, i.e., approximately ages 5-13.

1754

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Figure 1. The probe – a magnet serving as a portal to digital content

Instantiating the design considerations
In what follows, we outline the design rationale in three sec-
tions: discussing our initial decisions on the scope of the
probe, methods to support the two core principles for the in-
tervention’s content (RQ2 + RQ3), and the delivery channel
considerations (RQ1).

Scoping decisions
We made several key decisions early on, drawing on the lit-
erature review, interviews, and the best-practices recommen-
dations of the on-team SEL experts. First, we chose to focus
on early elementary school children and their parents—i.e.,
Kindergarten through to 3rd Grade—as the target group. This
choice was motivated by research consistently showing that
SEL interventions are more effective in the early years (e.g.,
[47–49]). Second, we decided to focus the probe content on
facilitating use of consistent vocabulary across school and
home context. Such consistent verbal labelling is a crucial
aspect of many SEL curricula (cf., [4,43]), and can serve as a
natural reminder in everyday situations, reinforcing the learn-
ing (e.g., [24]). However, the SEL literature suggests that
parents are often unaware about the verbal labelling strate-
gies that their children are learning at school [34]. Finally,
we chose self-regulation (calming-down) as the speciﬁc topic
to focus on. Self-regulation is a crucial-but-challenging issue
within SEL (cf. [18,44]). Moreover we expected that helping
young children deal with frustration and anger could tap into
the existing motivation that many parents might have around
these issues.

Designing the content
The SEL theory highlights the need to scaffold ‘appropriately
hot’ emotional experiences for the learners to provide mate-
rial for experiential learning. To do so, we drew on the power
of games and stories to engage young children with emotional
content [48], and help them to re-live their own feelings from
similar situations. In our case, we re-cut and re-purposed a
Creative-Commons video to show a simple story of a grumpy
Pirate Harrdy searching for his treasure, who has his map
stolen by a monkey and gets very angry as a result. As many
children have likely experienced the ‘something was taken
from me’ scenario many times at home, on the playground,
or at school, we expected the story could likely resurface suf-
ﬁciently strong emotions for them to relate to.
To promote the parental involvement and support, the story
also created a shared experience and set the scene for a more
direct parent-child interaction. To scaffold this, we interjected

1755

the story with questions to help the parent facilitate the learn-
ing for their child. Such a progression of questions was di-
rectly drawing on the coaching approaches used in SEL (and
taught to parents in the workshops), in this case helping the
child remember how they felt in similar situations ﬁrst and
then take the perspective of the other person. For example,
when the map is snatched away by the monkey, the video
is stopped with the question: “Have you ever had anything
grabbed from you? How did that make you feel? Tell your
adult!” This is then followed by “How do you think Har-
rdy feels now?” To further facilitate parental scaffolding, we
chose to have the questions addressed to the child and to be
read aloud by the adult. The aim was to create a sense of in-
terdependency between the child and adult, as many children
are not likely to read ﬂuently at this age. As such, the written
text nudges the parent to take the narrator role and to probe
into the emotional states of the character; he or she is also
scaffolded in helping their child do so through the carefully
selected questions.
Moreover, as the story progresses, the prompts are increas-
ingly taking the parent-child interaction from the story to real-
world activities between parent and child: they are asked to
ﬁrst explain the Calming Steps that the child learned at school
to Harrdy (and, implicitly, the parent), help Harrdy practice
one or more calming down strategies (deep breathing, count-
ing down, and positive self-talk), and eventually to role-play
the situation themselves (“Harrdy needs to see another ex-
ample ... how about your adult plays out what happened to
Harrdy and you help them calm down?”).
Finally,
repeated practice—using the associated calming
down steps vocabulary serving as triggers—is crucial for re-
inforcement of self-regulation. To explore if and how the
probe could support such repeated engagement, we designed
the story as a sequence of related sub-stories, with the initial
activity ending on a cliff-hanger: the monkey runs away with
pieces of the map and Harrdy sets out to ﬁnd it. The child
is then asked to return to the activity the next day to help
him. Over three follow-up encounters, each practising one of
the three calming down strategies, the child is helping Harrdy
ﬁnd the map pieces and, eventually, the treasure.

Designing the delivery channel
The delivery channel design accounts for the three key stake-
holders in this context: the teacher (who distributes the ac-
tivity); the parents; and the children. Appreciating the inter-
view and literature ﬁndings about both parents’ and teachers’
busy life schedules, the distribution needs to (i) be simple and
quick to distribute in class and engage with at home; (ii) stand
out from the stream of other school-home messages the par-
ents are already over-burdened by; and (iii) be pragmatically
easy to build and deploy so that it can serve the data collec-
tion role on the scale of multiple classrooms (26-28 children
each).
The design of the probe drew on a ‘portal’ metaphor:
the
probe was designed as a simple physical object—a magnetic
card—that is sent home with the child together with other
school-home documents. When engaged with, however, it
then serves as a virtual portal to the online activities. Mag-

nets were selected as a ‘known’ object tapping into the com-
mon family practices around putting things on a fridge in the
US; aiming to hopefully serve as an ongoing reminder and a
stable link to the dynamically changing activities over time.
Using a magnetic card, rather than a standard sheet of paper,
also provided us with the option of sending home something
possibly of ‘perceived value’ that might not be thrown away
immediately after ﬁrst use.
The probe was designed to utilise the child’s motivation to
play the activity as the key method of also engaging the par-
ents. To this end, we framed the activity as a ‘treasure hunt’,
hidden within the card, that they need to discover together
with their parents. Our design rests on the assumption that
the combination of the mystique of a magnet ‘hiding a story’
together with a likeable design would make the child an ac-
tive participant in persuading the parent to engage with the
activity; as opposed to a math homework, or the usual paper
SEL homework exercise.
Finally, we needed to design for the conﬂicting needs of pri-
vacy considerations on the one side and the data collection
functionality of the technology probe on the other. Each card
has a unique ‘secret code’ that allows us to track interactions
from each card. The secret codes also came in ‘packs’, one
per each class, allowing us to track usage on the class level as
well. However, as the system collected no personal informa-
tion and the teachers were asked to randomly distribute cards
to children in class, neither us nor the teacher were able to
ascertain which secret code belongs to which family.

STUDIES WITH THE PROBE - OVERVIEW
The probe deployments aimed to answer multiple questions:
First, test the delivery channel aspect, where the interest is
in natural uptake of the probe and understanding if and how
this (and similar) technology can ﬁt into teachers’ and par-
ents’ existing practices (RQ1). Second, analyse if and how
the designed content experientially engages parents and chil-
dren (RQ2), and whether it provides sufﬁcient scaffolding for
the scaffolding role of the parent (RQ3).
To explore these issues, we deployed the probe in two dif-
ferent contexts: First, we recruited four classrooms in a K8
school in a major US city, in which the magnets were sent
home with kids in four classrooms. This allowed us to un-
derstand the in-situ uptake within the everyday settings of
teachers, parents, and children (RQ1). The ecological va-
lidity of such in-the-wild deployment came at the expense
of limited opportunities to observe the parent-child interac-
tions directly (as that would affect the natural uptake). Sec-
ond, we thus complemented the ﬁrst study by recruiting 25
parent-child pairs on MTurk, who have consented to screen-
recording their interactions with the activity. This provided
us with detailed information about the parent-child interac-
tions around the activity that were needed to analyse RQ2
and RQ3. We report on each of the deployments individually
and combine what we have learned in the Discussion section.

STUDY 1: IN-THE-WILD DEPLOYMENT
The aim of the ﬁrst probe deployment was to study the uptake
within real-world classes and families. We aimed to under-

1756

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

stand if and how similar technology could serve as an engag-
ing delivery channel, and how to design for a best ﬁt with (or
positive change of) teachers’ and parents’ existing practices.

Methodology
Participants
We recruited a school counsellor and 4 classroom teachers in
a K8 school who had taught Second Step over multiple years
already. To explore the effect of age, each of the recruited
teachers taught at a different grade level: Kindergarten, Grade
1, Grade 2, and Grade 3. As part of our recruitment, we of-
fered a $50 reimbursement each for the teachers and the coun-
sellor to compensate the organisational overhead and the time
spent with us on a (post-deployment) interview. Every child
in each of the four classes received their own magnet card to
take home to their family.

Methods and data collected
The packets of magnets (one pack per class) were sent to
the school counsellor, who distributed them to teachers. The
packets included a simple Parent Letter to be sent home with
the magnet, and an information sheet for the teachers outlin-
ing the distribution of cards: they should hand out the cards
to the class and tell a simple scripted story.
Importantly,
the magnet was not framed as homework, but as an optional
extra-curricular activity.
Our server logged all interactions with the activity from any
of the cards individually, using the ‘secret code’ on each card
as the identifying information. This allowed us to collect de-
personalised information about the usage, separated into the
individual classrooms. In addition, we asked teachers and the
counsellor for a 30 minute interview, several days after the
cards were sent home (5 interviews, overall 131 minutes of
recordings); and also had the opportunity to interview some
of the children (post-deployment) about their experiences, for
40-45 minutes per class. Depending on the age range, we
interviewed groups of 3-6 children, with one or two groups
per class (27 children altogether).
The nature of the deployment made it impossible to directly
recruit parents or offer rewards for participation before the de-
ployment as this would alter the natural uptake. We however
attempted to elicit feedback from parents in three alternative
ways: At the end of the activity—i.e., the parents must have
engaged with it already—the parents were asked to rate the
activity via two sliders, namely ‘perceived usefulness’ and
‘child enjoyment’. At this point, we also invited the parents
to take part in a 10-15 min phone or Skype call, offering a
$10 Amazon voucher in appreciation of their participation.
Finally, the teachers invited the parents (through email) to
participate in a 5 min online survey two to three weeks af-
ter deployment, connected to a $40 rafﬂe prize.

Deployment results
Activity logs – at-home engagement
The lack of delivery channels to effectively engage parents
with SEL content is one of key issue we identiﬁed in the lit-
erature and interviews (RQ1). A fundamental question of the
ﬁrst deployment was whether the activity will reach parents

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Used

Finished

at least once
16
14
15
12

62% 15
54%
11
58% 13
46%
11

first activity
58%
42%
50%
42%

Returned

at least once
23%
23%
35%
27%

6
6
9
7

Returned

all three times
19%
19%
15%
12%

5
5
4
3

Class 1
Class 2
Class 3
Class 4

Table 1. Activity usage across classes

at all; or “just not get read” as seems to the case for paper
materials. We focus on two key aspects in our analysis.
First, we explored the activity usage aiming to understand the
extent of involvement for individual cards. The main indi-
cators of interest were whether the family logged-on at least
once, if they ﬁnished the ﬁrst activity, and if they repeatedly
returned to the card to continue the story. An overview of the
results is in Table 1. Overall, our data shows that between
46% to 62% of distributed cards have been used in individ-
ual classes, and a large percentage of those who started have
ﬁnished at least the ﬁrst activity (78% to 93%). Putting this
in context, the teacher’s interviews (cf., next section) suggest
that reaching initial engagement levels of ∼50% can be con-
sidered a success. A much smaller proportion of families re-
turned to the activity for follow-up stories; the teachers’ in-
terviews indicate that one possible contributing factor is that
the option to continue the story was not clear to some partici-
pants. Note that the logged data does not contain information
about whether the cards were used with a parent, sibling, or
alone. The interviews with children and the school counsellor
however suggest that a large proportion of parents did know
about and engaged with the card (see below).
Second, we looked at the ratings data submitted by families
immediately after ﬁnishing the ﬁrst activity. Out of the fam-
ilies that reached this point, 59.6% submitted a rating. Both
‘perceived usefulness’ (mean 86.9, SD 18.0) and ‘child en-
gagement’ (mean 76.4, SD 22.4) were rated relatively high
on the scale from 0 of 100. Only 4 people indicated a rating
lower than the neutral point (50/100) on either of the scales.
Overall, this suggests that, at least those who rated, have both
enjoyed the activity as well as found it relatively useful.

Fitting into teacher’s practices
Teachers play an important role in any delivery channel try-
ing to bridge school and at-home learning. To better under-
stand how the probe (and similar technologies) could ﬁt into
the school context, we inquired about the methods the teach-
ers use to connect and engage with parents at the moment,
their opinions on the activity as a learning tool, and what they
would consider as success in terms of parental engagement
with the probe2.
All teachers valued thinking about ways of engaging the par-
ents with SEL (as well as other subjects), especially as a pre-
ventive measure: “Ideally we would involve parents more.
It is so far with the parents of kids who have [behavioural]

2At the time of the interview, the teachers have just sent the cards
home, but did not know if and how many parents might engage with
the activity.

1757

problems and then we have these conversations [...] but ide-
ally, you would give these strategies pre-emptively (T2).” In
particular, involving the parents with at-home learning was
seen as a general problem: when sending anything home, “we
get around 50% for anything that requires an adult (T1)”.
Getting to higher engagement ratios then seemed to require
substantial ‘bugging work’ on the part of the teachers, such
as sending the information repeatedly through multiple chan-
nels (such as emails, newsletter and printouts) or requiring
the child to collect a signature from the parents. The teachers
were also particularly pessimistic about the ratio of parents
who would already know about the Calming Down strate-
gies (or other SEL content) as “they probably read it in the
newsletter [a few months back], and forgot about it. (T3)”.
In terms of engagement rates for the probe activity, all teach-
ers mentioned that 50% parents engaging with the probe
would be something they consider a success, especially as
it is framed as a voluntary activity. The biggest concern for
most teachers was keeping a level ﬁeld for all the students:
a common worry was that through the use of technology we
might be “cutting away a bunch of kids who do not have ac-
cess to internet (T1)”. However, the teachers were willing
to work on accessibility issues—for example, by giving such
students the option to ﬁnish such activities in the library—due
to their strong motivation to better connect to as many parents
as possible.
When asked to tell us how they handed out the cards, it be-
came apparent that all teachers went beyond the deployment
instructions. Instead of just reading the scripted story as sug-
gested, they all used their card to show children a part of
the activity; aiming to get the children more engaged and ex-
cited. Three teachers showed at least a ﬁrst few minutes of the
video; while the kindergarten teacher went through the whole
ﬁrst activity, utilising it as a teaching resource to reinforce the
calming down steps. In all classes, the teachers reported that
children were mostly enthusiastic about the cards and were
looking forward to taking them home.
We asked the teachers to go through the ﬁrst activity as part of
the interview with us, watching their reactions and comments.
In spite of explicit request for critical comments, the activity
elicited mostly positive responses, with the critique focussing
on localised aspects (such as a speciﬁc wording, or a typo in
the text) and pointing out that the mechanism for the follow-
up stories has not been clear enough. The interactive nature of
the parent-child interaction with the story, and the scaffolding
of the experience for both child and the parent were points
that teachers repeatedly mentioned as particularly important.

Children’s experiences
Two of the authors facilitated the child interviews together.
We structured the child groups around watching the activity
on a tablet, using it as a reminder to elicit stories about their
experiences at home. We were particularly interested in who
they played it with, which parts they liked/disliked, and what
they would suggest as improvements. We were not permit-
ted to record the conversations so one of the researchers kept
notes.

Most of the children, regardless of the age, talked about the
enjoyment of receiving something physical that was linked to
a digital game. The need for parental involvement was also
often seen as positive: for example, one child explained how
she “[liked the activity] because you get alone time with your
parents (C8)”. When watching the activity with us, we of-
ten observed that the children huddled together around the
tablet, enjoyed the ‘goofy’ animation, and repeated some of
the characteristic sounds of individual characters (e.g., the Pi-
rate’s ”Arrrgh”). They particularly enjoyed ‘helping Harrdy’
by doing the calming strategies (many recalled trying all three
strategies when doing the activity at home).
When talking about their at-home experiences, most of the
children said they did the activity with another person and
that they enjoyed playing it. Surprisingly, the other person
was not necessarily a parent: approximately a third of the
children shared they played the activity with their sibling in-
stead (either older or younger), often because their parents
were away or too busy. Some of the older kids even took
over the ‘parental’ role during such occasions: For example,
C11 explained how she “ﬁrst played it with her mum [...] but
then also pretended to be an adult for her younger sister”.
Others started alone but then included their siblings or par-
ent when the social interaction was required. In contrast, two
children from the younger end of the age range told us they
went through the activity alone. They were often interested
mainly in the Pirate story and did not partake in any of the off-
screen activities; leading to disappointment with the game.
For example, one of the kindergarten children told us that al-
though his nanny was in the room, he has “played through it
myself just clicking through all the buttons as I didn’t need to
read that. A boring game (C2)”. Some of the children also
mentioned technical issues they experienced that prevented
them, at least initially, from playing. These were often re-
solved with the help from their parents or siblings.

Parental qualitative feedback
While the system indicates that 56 cards were used at least
once, only very few parents volunteered to take part in the
interview or submit a survey: Only one mother signed up for
the phone interview and we received only 13 responses to the
survey.
Initially, we assumed that perhaps the reason for such low
turn-out was that many parents might not know about the
cards at all. To test this, the school counsellor offered to inter-
cept parents in-person when they came to pick up their chil-
dren after school, over a period of 3 days. She was however
able to give out only 4 cards, with most of the other parents
saying they have seen the card and often already played it
with their child; suggesting the probe indeed reached many
parents. However, these efforts did not lead to any increase in
interview volunteers or survey responses. This suggests that
while many parents did engage with the probe itself at home,
we did not manage to incentivise them to provide additional
feedback to the research team.
The one mother who volunteered was very positive about her
experience of the probe; although this is likely affected by the
self-selection bias. Her son, who has impulsivity and other

1758

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

behaviour issues, brought the card home and initiated the use.
She was surprised he was patient with the story, and had liked
the activity. She herself felt that the activity was a good re-
minder to her to reinforce the calming down skills; she also
referred to the pirate story in the following days, saying things
like “What would the pirate do now to calm down?”. She par-
ticularly liked having a concrete reference for her young son
that was tied to a shared story. She did not realise that she
could return to the activity over the following days.
The majority of the available survey responses came from
parents of the kindergarten class (10 out of 13), with the re-
maining responses being two G1 parents and one G2 parent.
Eleven of the thirteen parents said they played the activity
with their child; one did not know about the activity at all;
and one did not have time. Apart from a single family3, all
children were perceived by the parents as liking the activity
and enthusiastic to try it out. Six of the parents told us the
magnet is still visible in their home, mostly on their fridge;
others either did not know or had thrown it away already.

STUDY 2: MTURK DEPLOYMENT
The second probe deployment aimed to address the remain-
ing two research questions, unpacking if and how the probe
would facilitate emotional experiences (RQ2) and help par-
ents scaffold the appropriate experiential learning context for
the children (RQ3).
We used MTurk to recruit 25 parent-child pairs who would
be willing to have their interaction with the activity recorded
(thus providing the detailed data needed for analysis), and
also were more likely to report their experiences in a post-hoc
survey. In doing so, we draw on the growing body of work
showing the possible insights gained from MTurk collected
data, both at CSCW [31, 32] as well as in other disciplines
such as psychology (e.g., [33]). An additional advantage
of MTurk recruitment was the possibility to also reach low-
income parents and those living outside of principal cities,
who are the key at-risk populations for many SEL curricula,
but are often hard to reach through other methods.

Methods and data collected
To promote a wide uptake, we offered $5 for the 20 minute
long Human Intelligence Task (HIT), placing the HIT among
the higher paid end of MTurk jobs. We thus hoped to attract
also parents who are not personally interested in the topic of
calming down/SEL skills or parenting as such. To improve
chances of high quality results, we required that turkers have
at least 95% prior approval history, live in the US, and have
at least 50 prior accepted HITs [36].
The HIT description asked the participants to ‘play an edu-
cation activity with your child and tell us what you thought
about it.’ We made it clear from the start that the study was
to be completed with their child, aged 5-9. Turkers were also
informed that they would need to download a third party ap-
plication (UserZoom) onto their smart-phone to record their

3The parent told us that “although initially very excited to it, my
child thought it was not very interesting”.

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

phone screen, what they say, and the camera image. For tech-
nical reasons, we required that participants had access to an
Android phone.
During the HIT, participants went through the ﬁrst Harrdy ac-
tivity together with their child (task 1), and then were asked
to answer questions about their experience such as what they
liked or disliked; what other SE skills they consider impor-
tant, and how are they working on these with their child
(task 2). After we reviewed the HIT, all accepted participants
were invited to take part in a follow-up survey (8min), re-
using the open-ended questions sent to in-school parents. The
survey completion was compensated by a further $2 bonus.

Participants
The MTurk recruitment resulted in a diverse set of 25 partici-
pants, living across 14 different US states. They reported rel-
atively low-income: nearly half (47%) reported yearly house-
hold income as 30k to 50k; and nearly an additional ﬁfth
(17%) reported yearly income under 30k. The participants
lived mostly often in rural areas (42%), or in metropolitan ar-
eas but outside of principal cities (33%). We saw a quite con-
sistent split of grades between Kindergarten and Grade 3, and
a single Grade 4 participant. Approximately 80% of parents
were mothers. Most of our participants were Caucasian par-
ents; this strong under-representation of Afro-American and
Spanish population in the US mirrors results of [33].

Data quality
Overall, we found the data quality very good, with no ob-
vious cheating (e.g., only clicking through or faking the in-
teraction). Due to technical issues with participants’ phones
or internet connection, only 17 videos of the pirate activity
have been uploaded to the server. These recordings were 8:01
minutes long on average (min 5:06, max 9:56 minutes4). For
additional 3 parent-child pairs, we had at least the uploaded
video of the task 2; leaving 5 parent-child pairs with no video.
In these cases, we initially rejected the work, but left the op-
portunity for the parent to contact us if they thought the re-
jection ”was in error”. All but one got back in touch and their
HIT was subsequently accepted. These participants were then
asked to at least ﬁll out the follow-up survey. From the full
sample of 25 accepted participants, 19 ﬁlled out the follow-up
survey.

Data analysis
Our key focus was on the parent-child interactions elicited
by the probe. We drew on Gottman et al. [16, 17] Emo-
tion Coaching framework to theoretically ground the key in-
dicators of parental scaffolding. These included, for exam-
ple:
if and how the parent scaffolds the child to become
aware and verbalise their emotion during parent-child inter-
actions around the prompts offered by the activity; whether
they follow-up on such prompts to validate (and further probe
into) child’s feelings; and if and how the parent attempted to
scaffold the learning experience for the child more broadly,
e.g., subtly helping the child if the child seems lost or helping
to rekindle interest if the child loses focus.
4For technical reasons, the UserZoom application stops recording
after 9:56 min. This happened in 3 parent-child pairs, whose inter-
actions thus were, in reality, approximately 2-3 minutes longer.

We also looked at indicators of the engagement of the child
(and parent) with the activity, such as whether they kept focus
on the screen or reacted to the story in non-verbal ways (e.g.,
giggling or mimicking sounds or activities on screen). We an-
notated the collected videos within the UserZoom interface,
both through marking important moments and sub-clips di-
rectly within the video. The resulting observation notes were
then thematically analysed (methodology as per Study 1) to-
gether with the follow-up survey data.

Results
Most children and adults seemed focussed and engaged when
watching the initial video and working with prompts. In par-
ticular, we saw children sitting still or pointing out things to
parents such as ‘look, there’s Harrdy!’ or ‘O-oh!’ when the
monkey snatched the map. We also saw a lot of giggling at
the animation (mirroring the child interviews in schools), and
quick glimpses at the parent to see if they were also enjoy-
ing the story. Children’s and parents’ behaviour towards the
prompts differed across families, but mostly with respect to
age. Many of the older children took pride in trying to read
the text out loud by themselves, with subtle support from the
parent if they got stuck on a word or read something incor-
rectly. The younger children were more reliant on the parent
reading and scaffolding the interaction with prompts.
We saw clear differences between parents around how they
scaffolded the engagement with activity for their child
through their reading style. For example, some parents im-
mediately started using a ‘story voice’ to narrate the story to
the child, facilitating the child’s interest and involvement in
the activity. In contrast, another group of parents started off
reading the text in a ﬂat way. These parents left pauses for
children’s responses, but only rarely followed-up with addi-
tional questions, leading to interactions that appeared much
less engaged, and more like homework. Pragmatically, the
reading style also seemed to depend on the adult comfort with
reading-out-loud – if they struggled with the words them-
selves, it was harder for them to present the content in an
engaging way immediately.
Most of the relevant scaffolding behaviours however ap-
peared when parents and children shifted the attention from
the screen to each other, transforming the activity into a joint
discussion around the prompt. For example, we often saw
the parents read the prompt out-loud (as if making sense of it
for themselves), but then immediately turn to the child and re-
peat the question again in a more direct way. For example, the
adult (M14) was reading out loud “Did you ever have some-
thing taken away from you? How did that make you feel?
Tell your adult. <turning to the child> So tell me, how did
that make you feel when someone took something from you?”.
Many parents seemed to do this naturally from the start; oth-
ers took longer to switch from storytelling mode of reading
out prompts to directly scaffolding the discussion with their
child; but a few never made the switch and read throughout
the activity.
What seemed to particularly help parents turn from story-
reading to scaffolding their child’s thinking about emotions
were the prompts asking for the child’s own experiences

1759

(”how would you feel in this situation?”); especially if these
were then connected back to the story (”so how do you think
Harrdy feels now?”). Such questions also seemed to provoke
the child’s reﬂection and often also the deepest responses
from children. For example, when a child was asked by his
mum whether he had anything grabbed from him, he said
“<calm voice> ”Not really ... but if I did, I would be re-
ally really mad. <thinking for 3s, then becoming excited>
Oh yes, Lulu! [...] she took away my bike and it’s mine and I
really really really want to ride it! [Mum: how did that make
you feel?] Really really mad! (M9)”.
Another source of experiential engagement for the children
was enacting the calming down strategies themselves to help
Harrdy (or their adult) to calm down. Approximately half of
the families went through more than one strategy, often all
three. Part of the enjoyment seemed to arise from the funny
pirate voice accompanying the strategies, but also from using
their own body in response to the game. The adult calm-
ing prompt seemed as an enjoyable experience (when adults
played along, as the majority of them did); and a number of
parents skillfully supported their child in going through all
the activities again: e.g., “”I breathe and breathe, but I’m
still angry; what else can I do?” (M3)”.
Some parents also repeatedly took advantage and creatively
built on the prompts to further strengthen the connections
between the story and life.
For example, when M18
and her daughter ﬁnished the calming down strategy she
said: “<turning to face her daughter> So when he’s really
angry—or when you’re really angry—you can breathe, right,
to calm yourself down. Or you can count from ten...”. Simi-
larly, one of the questions in task 2 asked parents ‘what other
skills would they like their child to develop’. Interestingly,
this question was also appropriated by a number of parents as
a teaching moment: they often started answering the question
as if talking to the camera (”I would like my child to become
better at ...”), but then quickly turned towards their child ad-
dressed the request directly to him or her (”you see, I’d really
like you to ...”). It seemed that, again, the indirectness and
connection to the story seemed to create a context in which
such requests could be made.
Finally, we saw in the MTurk videos that it was often the
parents who were driving the participation of the child; un-
derstandably so, as the child had not heard about Harrdy
or the activity before. Sometimes, they had obviously ini-
tially struggled to get to child to come and watch the activity;
although, once the video started, children were often capti-
vated.

Follow-up survey data
The follow-up survey included open-ended questions around
the experience with the activity (e.g., ”What particularly
stood out for you about the activity, if anything?”), as well as
explicit prompts to identify what they did not like or would
like to change. There were two problem areas that some par-
ents pointed to: ﬁrst were technical issues such as the slow
loading speed of videos or the recording software for parents
on slow network connections (4 parents); second, some par-
ents felt disappointed they haven’t seen the full story as the

1760

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

three follow-up stories were not included in the MTurk de-
ployment (5 parents).
Overall, the choice of the topic — calming down strategies —
spoke positively to many parents. Importantly, many parents
highlighted how the cartoon story kept the child engaged, but
also how it presented an example situation they could well
relate to. For example, M5 wrote “What stood out for me was
the way the activity engaged my child and got her to think
about why the character was feeling certain emotions, and
apply that to herself in certain situations.”
Surprisingly, three parents also mentioned in the time be-
tween ﬁnishing the activity and answering the survey (∼1 or
2 days) either they or their child had already used the strate-
gies in other situations: one parent wrote how she “suggested
to breathe like the pirate” when her daughter was upset about
her bedtime, helping her calm down; another remarked how
her son reminded her to stay calm and breathe when she was
going through an unsettling experience; and ﬁnally the third
shared a story of her younger son, B, instructing his brother to
stay calm (“[...] B walked over there and in a calm, therapist
like voice said ‘You know E, you can take big deep breaths
and count to ten and that will help you to not be mad’.” The
majority of our MTurk child participants did not know the
strategies in advance; however, two children did, which came
as a positive surprise for their parents — supporting the as-
sumptions that many parents are not aware whether and which
SE strategies their child is learning at school.
While such positive responses to the survey corroborate the
observations from the videos, it should be kept in mind that
both are likely affected by self-selection bias (as parents vol-
untarily chose to be part of the study); thus providing a rel-
evant, but likely overly positive sample of how the activity
would be perceived by broader population.

DISCUSSION
The results of the probe deployments provide the ﬁrst steps
towards addressing a key challenge for social-emotional
learning (SEL) curricula: bridging the gap between class-
room learning and at-home reinforcement of skills. True to
the nature of technology probes, this work serves more to
highlight the potential of technology in a novel design space
(and avenues for future work) rather than to present a full
solution. For example, the methodology of current deploy-
ments focussed on understanding the uptake of the probe and
how the parent-child experiential interaction processes could
be scaffolded; rather than evaluation of learning outcomes
achieved by this speciﬁc prototype per se.
In what follows, we unpack what we learned about design
approaches to address the three key constraints: providing
an effective delivery channel (RQ1), facilitating experiential
engagement with the activity (RQ2), and scaffolding of the
parental supporting role (RQ3). We then take a step back and
reﬂect on limitations of this study in the broader context of
using technology in support of SEL.

Suitability of delivery channel (RQ1)
The literature review and expert interviews show that SEL
curricula lack ways to actively engage parents (and children)

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

with experiential learning at home. The logged data from
the in-the-wild probe deployment suggests that the probe was
reasonably successful in getting into the homes; engaging
46% to 60% of learners. However, the low parent feedback
rate within this deployment complicates our understanding
of how exactly the card was used by parents (and the child)
in the home setting. Still, the interviews with children and
the school-counsellor would suggest that a large proportion
of parents have seen and played the magnet (∼ two thirds
of children from our sample); and that only a few children
played the activity alone (two children from our sample).
Moreover, the MTurk data suggests that at least the MTurk
parents engaged with, and scaffolded the learning for their
children (see also below) while playing the activity.
Overall, this would suggest that the two main design concepts
used by the probe point to promising avenues for future work.
First, drawing on the ‘portal’ metaphor, i.e., combining a
physical object that is sent home and linked to digital content,
seems to ﬁt well existing practices around home-school com-
munication; is easy to distribute for teachers; and was under-
standable to teachers, children, and (we assume) also parents.
At the same time, such portals could plausibly deliver a wide
range of interactive interventions that build on digital devices
already available in homes of the families. Second, relying
on the child’s motivation to try the activity—while requiring
parental support to do so—seems a plausible method of driv-
ing initial parental involvement (e.g., that the parents make
a conscious decision whether to engage or not). In particu-
lar, giving children a game ‘hidden’ in a physical object that
they can try only when they are back at home, seems to have
elicited engagement and motivation across the age ranges we
looked at (K-G3).
Interviews with children have shown that approximately a
third of the learners in the in-the-wild study played the game
with their sibling (as the parent was either away or busy).
This points to an alternative option of engaging the learners at
home: by involving siblings or other family members—rather
than just the parents—into the activity as active participants.
One opportunity for future work might be designing activities
where children work with their (older) sibling to create some-
thing, e.g., a story, which is then shown and explained to the
parent (still as part of the activity).
The probe was also designed to serve as an ambient reminder
that stays visible in the family environment over time, as a
magnetic card on the fridge or other places. The SEL theory
suggests that providing such on-going reminders is crucial for
reinforcement processes. However, we have only limited data
on whether this has been successful in this trial. From the 13
completed survey responses, just under half of the cards were
still posted on the fridge two to three weeks after the deploy-
ment. Though these numbers are somewhat promising, it is
unclear what happened with the magnet in the families who
did not respond to the survey. An important open question is
then to understand how one might design for such long-term
ambient reminders in the context of SEL and families (cf.,
also [37] or [9, p.287] for examples of related CSCW and
HCI work in this space).

Experiential learning (RQ2)
The theory of social-emotional learning is clear that experien-
tial learning situations are needed for meaningful practice and
reinforcement to occur. The results of the probe deployments
suggest the combination of a video and embedded prompts
can create experiential situations similar to the role plays or
puppet stories in class, in spite the lack of trained guidance
normally provided by the teacher. In particular, we used a
common SEL progression to present a story relevant to the
reinforced SEL concept (’get angry when something is taken
away from you’), utilise prompting questions to support the
child’s recall of a related personal experience (’how would
you feel’) and help them imagine the character’s feelings, and
then looping it back into to the story progress with the strate-
gies taught as part of SEL training. This is a promising ﬁrst
step which suggests that a wider range of SEL learning ac-
tivities could be delivered in a similar manner. However, the
child’s experience has been still limited to the tight coupling
with the presented story itself, rather than a real-life ‘hot’ sit-
uation he or she is experiencing; the fundamental goal of SEL
reinforcement.
The key next step for future systems is then to ﬁnd way to
extend the support for the parent and child beyond the video
activity itself, helping them connect the strategies to their ev-
eryday ‘hot’ moments. The parent interview and MTurk sur-
veys showed that four parents have already appropriated the
existing activity in similar way, using a reference to the story
to label the on-going situation and remind about available
strategies. SEL theory suggests such behaviours are likely
to help the child generalise learned skills into other everyday
contexts. While this again shows promise in the potential of
technology-based delivery to promote such on-going engage-
ment, the open question is how to speciﬁcally facilitate such
transfer through design. For example, what are the opportuni-
ties for ‘smart’ objects that could be delivered home together
with the magnetic card, such as a ‘calming down token’ or an
‘anti-anger wand’, helping the child connect the learning with
their everyday interactions? And, what might be the best de-
velopmentally appropriate metaphors to build on, similar to
the ‘treasure hunt’ trope used in the current probe?

Scaffolding of parental scaffolding (RQ3)
The second crucial enabling component within the SE learn-
ing theory is the skillful scaffolding provided to the child by
the adult, in this case the parent. The probe deployment sug-
gests that designing for interdependence between the child
and the adult as part of the activity seems like a promising
direction to facilitate a part of such parental scaffolding: sup-
porting the parent’s active engagement with child’s activity.
In our case, such interdependence created a shared experi-
ence for the child and parent that could be then worked with,
e.g., through the prompts suggested by the activity. While
the current probe only scratched surface of designing for
interdependence—through expecting the adult to narrate the
story—it points to a wide range of opportunities for future
systems (e.g., using multiple devices to drive a single story).
The aim of the carefully selected prompts has been to model
Emotion Coaching-like interaction on part of the parent: ask-

1761

ing for and validating emotional experiences of the child in-
cluding labelling of emotion, providing support when needed
(e.g., through the progression of questions), and promoting
agency and emotional reﬂection on part of the child. The
analysis of the MTurk videos suggests that this approach
is promising. We saw that the most engaging and well-
scaffolded interactions happened when parents and children
turned away from the screen, building on the shared experi-
ence provided by the activity to have a dialog with each other.
In such instances, the parents used the pre-prepared prompts
as an opportunity to be elaborated on: either by asking the
child for more detail about their experiences, or by bringing in
their own agenda (such as strengthening the connections be-
tween what is learned within the story and real-life use). This
opens questions around the methods to scaffold the parental
role in a way that is not too tightly bound to the story/activity
itself, but rather designed to help the parent to use the story
and the embedded prompts as examples that can creatively
appropriated to scaffold interactions ‘outside of the phone’.

Limitations and novel design opportunities
The series of studies reported here form a ﬁrst important step
into this design space. We now point to several open ques-
tions that have not been addressed here and that invite follow-
up work.
SEL expert vs. parent perspectives
The work has been so far focused mainly on understanding
the SEL expert perspective: starting from identifying chal-
lenges address-able by technology; to designing a system that
complements existing curricula and ﬁts with what the SEL
experts consider to be best-practices in the ﬁeld. This pro-
vided us with the opportunity to directly work with key ex-
perts who have many years experience in developing SEL
curricula used by millions of students and to directly draw
on the existing SEL literature and theory, which is mostly
curricula focussed.
However, such expert-centric approach needs to be comple-
mented by in-depth participatory research with parents to val-
idate if and how their perspective matches that of SEL ex-
perts. In particular, future work should aim to more deeply
understand the key reasons behind some parents’ existing
lack of engagement with SEL. The SEL literature—and in-
terviews with SEL experts and teachers here—would suggest
that one of the key reasons is the lack of time (and overload
with school materials). The full issue is however likely to
be more complex and might depend on cultural background,
socio-economic status, and multiple other aspects. More thus
needs to be learned about the existing practices of how fami-
lies communicate around SEL at home (and with school); the
underlying parental beliefs and motivation; and the support
that parents already provide their children around SE skills.
Drawing on the longitudinal work by Gottman’s et al. [17]
can be a good starting point to understand what is known
about parenting in these aspects, but should be complemented
with established participatory methods within HCI.
Complex ethical space
Designing social-emotional learning interventions, whether
at home or school, form a complex ethical space. By scoping

1762

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

the research as based on SEL experts perspective and curric-
ula, this paper has side-stepped a number of important ques-
tions that will need to be critically examined as future work
in this space emerges. In particular, we should be mindful of
the possible tensions between expert knowledge and parents’
approaches to parenting; the distribution of power in the ed-
ucational space, especially as seen by lower socio-economic
status families; as well as key discussions about what does
‘supporting the well-being of children’ mean, for whom, and
who should make decisions. Existing work in CSCW and
HCI in similarly complex settings such as healthcare [14] or
persuasive computing more broadly [46] can serve as starting
points for examination of these aspects.
Evaluating learning
This work has focused on exploring the potential of tech-
nology to enable important parent-child interactions that are
needed for social-emotional learning to occur (cf., RQ1-3)
but are seen as hard to establish at home with existing SEL
methods. The deployments have, however, not aimed to test
whether the scaffolded interactions lead to actual learning
outcomes for the child or the parent.
Any such evaluation should distinguish between evaluating
the success of the delivery channel (i.e., has the information
reached the parents at all and has system scaffolded the rele-
vant kind of parent-child interactions?); and whether the de-
livered content was psychologically powerful (i.e., have the
interactions lead to lasting changes in parents’ or child’s be-
haviour?). While the former is more easily detectable during
the deployment (e.g., through the methods used here such as
logging or recording of interactions), evaluating the psycho-
logical effects of the interventions require speciﬁc experimen-
tal methodology that is applicable in-the-wild deployments:
Quasi-experimental studies or Randomised Controlled Tri-
als are the most common approaches (cf., [12, 42]). Coyle
et al. [8] and Slovak and Fitzpatrick [43] recommend a two-
stage approach to such evaluations, where the initial evalua-
tion are ran by HCI researchers to establish that the systems
are likely to lead to positive outcomes, but the needed large
scale experimental evaluations are progressively led by SEL
experts.
Existing SEL literature also provides well-tested indicators
of SEL interventions outcomes e.g., see [10] or [11, chp.19].
These include methods such as speciﬁc behavioural tasks,
questionnaires, real-world indicators such as academic out-
come or lowered behavioural issues, or established coding
systems for a detailed analysis of subsequent natural parent-
child interactions.

CONCLUSIONS
This paper presents the ﬁrst exploration into the role digital
technology could play in bridging the home-school barrier in
the context of SEL curricula. We draw on an interview study
with SEL experts, representing major SEL curricula providers
in US, to identify the key challenges in and learning princi-
ples that need to be supported for SEL reinforcement to take
place – the reliance on active, experiential learning as well
as the importance of scaffolding the parents’ scaffolding role.
Through the design and deployment of a technology probe in

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

two complementing contexts, we gathered a nuanced under-
standing of how technology-based interventions might reach
out and engage parents, as well as help them to scaffold learn-
ing experiences that reinforce their children’s SEL skills at
home. Overall, our ﬁndings point to the potential of digital
technology to support parent-child interactions that can rein-
force social-emotional learning, providing an important ﬁrst
step for future research in this direction.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Blind for review.

REFERENCES
1. Morgan G Ames, Janet Go, Joseph Joﬁsh Kaye, and

Mirjana Spasojevic. 2010. Making love in the network
closet: the beneﬁts and work of family videochat. In
CSCW ’10. ACM Press, 145. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1718918.1718946

2. R Bar-On, K Maree, and MJ Elias. 2007. Educating

people to be emotionally intelligent. Greenwood
Publishing Group.

3. John A. Bargh and S Gardner. 2003. The unconscious

mind. Perspectives on Psychological Science 3, 1
(2003), 73–79. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/067150d0

4. Marc A. Brackett, Susan E. Rivers, Maria R. Reyes, and
Peter Salovey. 2012. Enhancing academic performance
and social and emotional competence with the RULER
feeling words curriculum. Learning and Individual
Differences 22, 2 (April 2012), 218–224. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.lindif.2010.10.002

5. Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using

thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative research in
psychology 3, 2 (2006), 77—-101.
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1191/
1478088706qp063oa

6. J Bridgeland, M Bruce, and A Hariharan. 2013. The

missing piece: A national teacher survey on how social
and emotional learning can empower children and
transform schools. (2013).

7. Xiang Cao, Abigail Sellen, A.J. Bernheim Brush, David

Kirk, Darren Edge, and Xianghua Ding. 2010.
Understanding family communication across time
zones. In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM conference on
Computer supported cooperative work - CSCW ’10.
ACM Press, New York, New York, USA, 155. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1718918.1718947

8. David Coyle, Gavin Doherty, Mark Matthews, and John

Sharry. 2007. Computers in talk-based mental health
interventions. Interacting with Computers 19, 4 (July
2007), 545–562. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.intcom.2007.02.001

9. Allison Druin. 2009. Mobile Technology for Children.

Elsevier.

10. Angela L Duckworth and David Scott Yeager. 2015.
Measurement Matters: Assessing Personal Qualities
Other Than Cognitive Ability for Educational Purposes.
Educational Researcher 44, 4 (2015), 237–251. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.3102/0013189X15584327
11. Joseph A Durlak, Celene E Domitrovich, Roger P.

Weissberg, and Thomas P Gullota (Eds.). 2015.
Handbook of Social and Emotional Learning: Research
and Practice. Guilford Publications.

12. Joseph A Durlak, Roger P Weissberg, Allison B

Dymnicki, Rebecca D Taylor, and Kriston B
Schellinger. 2011. The impact of enhancing students’
social and emotional learning: a meta-analysis of
school-based universal interventions. Child development
82, 1 (2011), 405–32. DOI:http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2010.01564.x
13. Maurice J Elias, Joseph E. Zins, Roger P. Weissberg,
Karin S. Frey, Mark T. Greenberg, Norris M Haynes,
Rachael Kessler, Mary E. Schwab-Stone, and Timothy P.
Shriver (Eds.). 1997. Promoting social and emotional
learning: Guidelines for Educators. ASCD. 164 pages.

14. Geraldine Fitzpatrick and Gunnar Ellingsen. 2012. A
Review of 25 Years of CSCW Research in Healthcare:
Contributions, Challenges and Future Agendas.
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) (June
2012). DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10606-012-9168-0

15. S Follmer and Rt Ballagas. 2012. People in books: using

a FlashCam to become part of an interactive book for
connected reading. Proceedings of the . . . (2012),
685–694. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2145204.2145309

16. John M Gottman, Lynn Fainsilber Katz, and Carole

Hooven. 1996. Parental meta-emotion philosophy and
the emotional life of families: Theoretical models and
preliminary data. Journal of Family Psychology 10, 3
(1996), 243.

17. John Mordechai Gottman, Lynn Fainsilber Katz, and
Carole Hooven. 1997. Meta-emotion: How families
communicate emotionally. Psychology Press.

18. Mark T Greenberg. 2006. Promoting resilience in

children and youth: preventive interventions and their
interface with neuroscience. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences 1094 (Dec. 2006), 139–50. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1196/annals.1376.013

19. Mark T. Greenberg. 2010. Schoolbased prevention:

current status and future challenges. Effective Education
2, 1 (March 2010), 27–52. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19415531003616862

20. Hwajung Hong, Jennifer G. Kim, Gregory D. Abowd,

and Rosa I. Arriaga. 2012. Designing a social network to
support the independence of young adults with autism.
In CSCW ’12. ACM Press, New York, New York, USA,
627. http:
//dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2145204.2145300

1763

21. Seth E. Hunter, Pattie Maes, Anthony Tang, Kori M.

Inkpen, and Susan M. Hessey. 2014. WaaZam!
Supporting Creative Play at a Distance in Customized
Video Environments. In Proceedings of the 32nd annual
ACM conference on Human factors in computing
systems - CHI ’14. ACM Press, New York, New York,
USA, 1197–1206. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557382

22. Hilary Hutchinson, Heiko Hansen, Nicolas Roussel,
Bj¨orn Eiderb¨ack, Wendy Mackay, Bosse Westerlund,
Benjamin B Bederson, Allison Druin, Catherine
Plaisant, Michel Beaudouin-Lafon, St´ephane Conversy,
and Helen Evans. 2003. Technology probes: inspiring
design for and with families. In CHI ’03. ACM Press,
New York, New York, USA, 17—-24. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/642611.642616

23. Stephanie M Jones and Suzanne M Bouffard. 2012.

Social and Emotional Learning in Schools: From
Programs to Strategies. Social Policy Report. Volume
26, Number 4. Society for Research in Child
Development (2012).

24. C.-M. Kam, M. T. Greenberg, and C. A. Kusche. 2004.

Sustained Effects of the PATHS Curriculum on the
Social and Psychological Adjustment of Children in
Special Education. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral
Disorders 12, 2 (Jan. 2004), 66–78. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/10634266040120020101

25. Lynn Fainsilber Katz, Ashley C. Maliken, and Nicole M.

Stettler. 2012. Parental Meta-Emotion Philosophy: A
Review of Research and Theoretical Framework. Child
Development Perspectives 6, 4 (2012), 417–422. DOI:
http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1750-8606.2012.00244.x

26. Julie A Kientz, Matthew S Goodwin, Gillian R Hayes,
and Gregory D Abowd. 2013. Interactive Technologies
for Autism. Synthesis Lectures on Assistive,
Rehabilitative, and Health-Preserving Technologies 2, 2
(2013), 1–177.

27. Hendrik Knoche, Niklas Ammitzbøll Rasmussen,

Kasper Boldreel, Joachim Lykke Østergaard Olesen, and
Anders Etzerodt Salling Pedersen. 2014. Do interactions
speak louder than words?: Dialogic Reading of an
Interactive Tabletbased Ebook with Children between 16
Months and Three Years of Age. In IDC ’14. 285–288.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2593968.2610473

28. David A Kolb. 2014. Experiential learning: Experience

as the source of learning and development. Pearson
Education.

29. Cathy Lewin and Rosemary Luckin. 2010. Technology

to support parental engagement in elementary education:
Lessons learned from the UK. Computers & Education
54, 3 (April 2010), 749–758. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2009.08.010

1764

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

30. Rosemary Luckin. 2008. The learner centric ecology of
resources: A framework for using technology to scaffold
learning. Computers & Education 50, 2 (Feb. 2008),
449–462. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2007.09.018

31. Kurt Luther, Jari-lee Tolentino, Wei Wu, Amy Pavel,
Brian P Bailey, Maneesh Agrawala, Bj¨orn Hartmann,
and Steven P Dow. 2015. Structuring, Aggregating, and
Evaluating Crowdsourced Design Critique. In CSCW
’15. 473–485. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675283

32. Xiaojuan Ma, Li Yu, Jodi L. Forlizzi, and Steven P.
Dow. 2015. Exiting the Design Studio: Leveraging
Online Participants for Early-Stage Design Feedback. In
CSCW ’15. 676–685. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675174

33. Gabriele Paolacci and Jesse Chandler. 2014. Inside the
Turk: Understanding Mechanical Turk as a Participant
Pool. Current Directions in Psychological Science 23, 3
(2014), 184–188. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0963721414531598
34. Evanthia N Patrikakou, Roger P. Weissberg, Sam
Redding, and Herbert J. Wahlberg (Eds.). 2005.
School-family partnerships for children’s success.
Teachers College Press.

35. J. Payton, R.P. Weissberg, J.A. Durlak, A.B. Dymnicki,

R.D. Taylor, K.B. Schellinger, and M. Pachan. 2008.
The Positive Impact of Social and Emotional Learning
for Kindergarten to Eighth-Grade Students – Findings
from Three Scientiﬁ c Reviews. Technical Report.
Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional
Learning, Chicago.

36. Eyal Peer, Joachim Vosgerau, and Alessandro Acquisti.

2013. Reputation as a sufﬁcient condition for data
quality on Amazon Mechanical Turk. Behavior research
methods (2013), 1023–1031. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/s13428-013-0434-y
37. Laura Pina, Kael Rowan, Asta Roseway, Paul Johns,
Gillian R Hayes, and Mary Czerwinski. 2014. In Situ
Cues for ADHD Parenting Strategies Using Mobile
Technology. In Pervasive Health ’14.

38. Hayes Rafﬂe, Mirjana Spasojevic, Rafael Ballagas,

Glenda Revelle, Hiroshi Horii, Sean Follmer, Janet Go,
Emily Reardon, Koichi Mori, and Joseph Kaye. 2010.
Family story play: reading with young children (and
elmo) over a distance. In CHI ’10. ACM Press, 1583.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753563
39. Sathiyaprakash Ramdoss, Wendy Machalicek, Mandy

Rispoli, Austin Mulloy, Russell Lang, and Mark
O’Reilly. 2012. Computer-based interventions to
improve social and emotional skills in individuals with
autism spectrum disorders: {A} systematic review.
Developmental Neurorehabilitation 15, 2 (2012),
119–135. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/17518423.2011.651655

emerging mental health problems: proximal impact on
school behavior. Journal of abnormal child psychology
38, 5 (July 2010), 707–20. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10802-010-9398-x

52. Lu Xiao and Jennifer Martin. 2012. Supporting

parent-young child activities with interactive tabletops: a
conceptual analysis. In CSCW’12 Companion. 301–310.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2141512.2141606

53. Svetlana Yarosh, Hilary Davis, Paulina Modlitba,

Mikael Skov, and Frank Vetere. 2009. Mobile
technologies for parent/child relationships. Elsevier,
Amsterdam.

54. Svetlana Yarosh, Kori M Inkpen, and A.J. Bernheim
Brush. 2010. Video playdate: toward free play across
distance. In CHI ’10. ACM Press, New York, New York,
USA, 1251–1260. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753514

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

40. Herman Saksono, Ashwini Ranade, Geeta Kamarthi,

Carmen Castaneda-Sceppa, Jessica A Hoffman, Cathy
Wirth, and Andrea G Parker. 2015. Spaceship Launch:
Designing a Collaborative Exergame for Families. In
CSCW ’15. 1776–1787. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675159

41. Donald A Sch¨on. 1983. The reﬂective practitioner: How

professionals think in action. Vol. 5126. Basic books.

42. William R Shadish, Thomas D Cook, and

Donald Thomas Campbell. 2002. Experimental and
quasi-experimental designs for generalized causal
inference. Houghton Mifﬂin Boston.

43. Petr Slov´ak and Geraldine Fitzpatrick. 2015. Teaching

and developing social and emotional skills with
technology. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction (TOCHI) 22, 4 (2015), 19.

44. Petr Slov´ak, Ran Gilad-Bachrach, and Geraldine

Fitzpatrick. 2015. Designing Social and Emotional
Skills Training. In CHI ’15. 2797–2800. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702385

45. Larry R Squire, Barbara Knowlton, and Gail Musen.

1993. The structure and organization of memory.
Annual review of psychology 44, 1 (1993), 453–495.

46. Peter-Paul Verbeek. 2006. Persuasive Technology and
Moral Responsibility Toward an ethical framework for
persuasive technologies. Persuasive 6 (2006), 1–15.

47. K. Weare and M. Nind. 2011. Mental health promotion

and problem prevention in schools: what does the
evidence say? Health Promotion International 26, S1
(Nov. 2011), i29–i69. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/heapro/dar075

48. Carolyn Webster-Stratton and M Jamila Reid. 2004.
Strengthening Social and Emotional Competence in
Young Children-The Foundation for Early School
Readiness and Success: Incredible Years Classroom
Social Skills and Problem-Solving Curriculum. Infants
& Young Children: 17, 2 (2004), 96–113.

49. C Webster-Stratton and T Taylor. 2001. Nipping early

risk factors in the bud: preventing substance abuse,
delinquency, and violence in adolescence through
interventions targeted at young children (0-8 years).
Prevention science : the ofﬁcial journal of the Society
for Prevention Research 2, 3 (2001), 165–192. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1011510923900

50. Beverly J. Wilson, Holly Petaja, Jenna Yun, Kathleen

King, Jessica Berg, Lindsey Kremmel, and Diana Cook.
2010. Parental Emotion Coaching: Associations With
Self-Regulation in Aggressive/Rejected and Low
Aggressive/Popular Children. Child & Family Behavior
Therapy 36, 2 (2010), 81–106. DOI:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1467-985X.2009.00585.x.Analyzing
51. Peter a Wyman, Wendi Cross, C Hendricks Brown, Qin

Yu, Xin Tu, and Shirley Eberly. 2010. Intervention to
strengthen emotional self-regulation in children with

1765

