CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Using Mobile Phones in Pub Talk
Martin Porcheron*, Joel E. Fischer*, and Sarah Sharples†

Faculty of Engineering

*The Mixed Reality Laboratory
School of Computer Science
University of Nottingham, UK
University of Nottingham, UK
{martin.porcheron, joel.ﬁscher, sarah.sharples}@nottingham.ac.uk

†Human Factors Research Group

ABSTRACT
We present the ﬁndings from a study of how people interleave
mobile phone use with conversation in pubs. Our ﬁndings,
informed by ethnomethodology and conversation analysis, un-
pack the interactional methods through which groups of people
in pubs occasioned, sustained, and disengaged from mobile de-
vice use during conversation with friends. Fundamentally, the
work that is done consists of various methods of accounting
for mobile device use, and displaying involvement in social
interaction while the device is used. We highlight multiple
examples of the nuanced ways in which interleaving is prob-
lematic in interaction, and relate our ﬁndings to the CSCW
and HCI literature on collocated interaction. We conclude by
considering avenues for future research, and discuss how we
may support or disrupt interleaving practices through design
to overcome the highlighted interactional troubles.

Author Keywords
mobile devices; smartphones; third place; bar; collocated
interaction; ethnomethodology; conversation analysis.

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.3. Group and Organization Interfaces: Computer-
supported cooperative work; H.5.m. Information Interfaces
and Presentation (e.g. HCI): Miscellaneous.

INTRODUCTION
Mobile phones have become truly ubiquitous and have perme-
ated each and every walk of life; they accompany us through-
out the day, from ﬁrst thing in the morning to last thing at
night. However, in conjunction with the meteoric rise in mo-
bile device ownership, researchers have begun to highlight a
number of growing pains such as the impact on social order
when using technology during collocated interactions [30, 40,
44, 52]. Given the increased prevalence of mobile devices,
an arguably important yet understudied research question we
seek to address in this paper is how do individuals conduct the
interactional work of interleaving mobile device use with their
ongoing conversation?

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not 
made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear 
this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of 
this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting 
with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or 
to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. Request 
permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW ’16, February 27–March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02...$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820014

1649

Existing work within the HCI community has highlighted both
how mobile devices provide eminent support for distributed
interactions and the power of mobile devices to assist in con-
necting non-collocated individuals [19, 27]. Moreover, mobile
devices have been purposed for use in collaborative task sit-
uations amongst collocated groups [24, 35, 39]. However,
in spite of considerable progress in mobile technology, crit-
ical voices from academic [53] to popular [55] writers have
pointed out the ways in which mobile devices may isolate
people from one another in social situations. On the other
hand, socio-technical studies have shown people are skilled
at interleaving mobile device use and social interaction, for
example in a living room setting [47] and in a collaborative
photo-taking setting [16].
While we are not interested in making moral judgements, we
are interested in how exactly people accountably organise
mobile device use in casual social settings. We conducted
ﬁeldwork in situations where friends devote time to socialising
with each other in a face-to-face manner in a setting that
epitomises the very deﬁnition of a place that is both casual
and social — the pub. In this work, we identify the naturally
accountable methods through which individuals make use of
mobile devices during focused encounters [20] in the pub.
Through our study, informed by ethnomethodology and con-
versation analysis, we contribute two key ﬁndings to HCI and
social computing: ﬁrstly, we identify the interactional methods
through which mobile devices are introduced to, sustained in,
and disengaged from conversations; and secondly we draw out
the machinery of interaction [48] members employ to manage
mobile device usage within collocated interactions. When
combined, these contributions allow us to discover a number
of interactional troubles, and hypothesise ways for how fu-
ture technology could be developed to better support focused
interactions in such casual social settings.
This paper begins by reviewing and positioning the literature
in relation to our work and then we explain our analytic ori-
entation and why we feel that pubs are an interesting setting
for this research. We go on to present our ﬁndings that unpack
the interactional methods through which mobile device use
is interleaved with conversations. We present interactional
fragments as vivid exhibits [10, p. 112] of how this interac-
tional work is accomplished, and then discuss the ostensibly
problematic nature of interleaving practices in interaction and
link our ﬁndings with existing literature on related studies.
Finally, we describe how these considerations can be incor-
porated into future design and research of both hardware and
software based technologies.

RELATED WORK
We review literature that has contributed to greater understand-
ing of the pervasive nature of mobile devices, and their use in
public and collocated settings.

Mobile Devices and Space
We begin by highlighting a substantive body of work investi-
gating how to better deliver mobile notiﬁcations to individuals
in face of the potentially disruptive nature of such interrup-
tions [11, 14, 17, 33]. The pertinence of this is that as individ-
uals gather to socialise, device use can impact an individual’s
orientation to the space and co-inhabitants. In relation to how
we now make use of devices anywhere and everywhere we go,
Geser [19] states that “a new, more ﬂuid culture of informal
social interaction therefore can emerge”. Furthermore, Camp-
bell [5] highlights how “mobile communication around cop-
resent others (. . . ) personalizes the communal experience of
being in that space”; which also supports work by others of the
practice of using technologies to create private spaces in public
places (e.g. [1, 56]). In linking these ﬁelds of work, it can be
seen that how people manage both the virtual and co-present
interactions is of great interest to researchers examining the
disruptive nature of technology-mediated interruptions. This
approach bears the ultimate goal of ameliorating the overall
experience of the mobile device user, and their orientation to
both the space and co-present others.
Mobile devices also present a method for owners to remain in
touch with their extended network. This raises expectations
that we should quickly respond to our contacts from our ex-
tended network, just as we expect them to respond [1]. This
immediacy provides users the sense of being “always con-
nected, to be accessible at all times and places” [45]. Given
the desire, or in some cases, compulsion, to remain connected,
there is a need to understand the complex factors around the co-
management of both the virtual and physical interactions. This
is, in part, due to the relative ease for individuals to retreat to
their phone and “shield oneself from wider surroundings” [19].
Thus, the fact that mobile devices are always connected, and
that devices can provide notiﬁcations at any point, a situation
becomes engendered where virtual interactions can potentially
rub up against collocated physical interactions. As opposed
to attempting to reduce device usage in such instances, we
are interested in guiding how the impact of this use can be
considered in design by understanding the nuanced ways in
which the device use occurs.

Mobile Devices in Public Settings
The use of mobile devices in public settings has been well doc-
umented in literature for a variety of purposes, from how an
iPod allows an individual to reshape their experience of time
and space [4] to how individuals use new technologies such as
cellphones to adapt their social perspective [26, 42, 45]. Mo-
bile devices possess the advantage of portability and ﬂexibility
that allows for their greater use within many different settings,
including conversation. Certainly, the increased portability
and functionality of mobile devices seems to be encouraging
their use in such settings, within the implications of usage
in public spaces derided as annoying or rude by co-present
others [1, 26]. For example, Humphreys et al. [28] highlight

1650

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

ﬁndings that suggest that the ease of using the ‘mobile Inter-
net’ potentially exacerbates the problem of “mis-prioritizing
communication through their mobile device over and above
face-to-face communication”. Additionally, in relation to the
use of mobile devices in public places, and in particular pubs,
Su and Wang [53] state that technology can “threaten con-
versation by creating the present-but-absent, anti-social, and
app-addicted patron”. Finally, beyond merely being a distrac-
tion, mobile devices can also be utilised as a tool to avoid
co-present others, or even facilitate the avoidance of sociality
and meeting people in public places altogether [27], although
we note that such observations are less impactful in our work
given we are interested in post-congregation for the purpose
of meeting and socialising.

Mobile Devices in Collocated Interactions
CSCW literature contains many use cases of collocated mobile
device use such as photo sharing [9, 12], video watching [41],
and collaborative searching tasks [6, 8], often involving inter-
action with additional screens or multiple mobile devices [2,
35]. This work demonstrates the beneﬁcial uses of technology
in collocated interactions, and this refutes — or at least qual-
iﬁes — simplistic popular views that mobile devices create
“social isolation” [53].
However, there is also a gap in the literature around the ways
in which such interactions are occasioned, and how individuals
co-manage device use and social interactions. Furthermore,
not all interactions are likely to engender collaborative work
that all members can engage in. Our interests lie in how indi-
viduals manage the use of these ‘always connected’ devices in
conversation, the observable-and-reportable actions of those
in the setting, and just how device use is embedded in the
social order enacted in and throughout ongoing interaction.
Thus, we are interested in attempting to understand the spe-
ciﬁc interactions that occur, and how mobile devices become
occasioned during conversation. Our aim with this research
is to fundamentally examine the detail of how devices are
brought in and out of conversation. Insights in this space have
the potential to help designers in the goal of creating more
ﬂuid device interactions for multiple users, allowing others to
take into account the uncovered interactional practices in their
own future work.

STUDY APPROACH
We were motivated by rhetoric around the impacts of mo-
bile device use in everyday situations, and especially when
friends are socialising. Therefore, our focus is on casual so-
cial settings; such settings, termed by Oldenburg [43] as ‘third
places’, can be deﬁned as places where individuals purpose-
fully co-inhabit with the purpose of socialising in a relaxed
and unimposing environment and where conversation is the
main activity. This stance also does not restrict us in choosing
a venue that is exclusively public or private. For example, our
experience teaches us that it is common for groups of friends
to meet in public plazas, as well as cafés or restaurants. The
purpose of the gathering in such a venue is to socialise, with
a “common code of conduct” that is both informal but still
provides a guidance of behaviour [32].

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Research Setting
In choosing a setting to conduct our ﬁeldwork, we gave con-
sideration to a variety of venues including cafés and public
squares, however, we opted for a local pub. We chose a pub for
a number of reasons, some logistical and others sentimental.
The devotion of spending leisure-time in pubs and bars with
friends is a popular British pastime; pubs typically open early
and close late, many provide food and drink, and they serve as
an environment suited to relaxing and conversing with others.
In describing her observations of English culture, anthropolo-
gist and popular social science writer Kate Fox describes pubs
as “a central part of English life” [18] and others have also
highlighted pubs “as a social centre for the community” [7].
These descriptions are also reﬂected in ofﬁcial statistics [51],
which state that 48% of people aged 16 and over would choose
to go to a pub or bar in their free time; this ﬁgure is even
higher for younger age groups.
Finally, from our own experience we knew the pub setting
would allow us to observe naturally occurring interactions
around device use in an environment in which mobile phone
use is common, and sometimes at the derision of co-present
others. We concluded that pubs are a suitable natural environ-
ment for the study of how people interleave mobile device use
during conversations in a casual social setting.

Methodology
We performed an ethnomethodological study with a focus
on revealing the interactional methods members employ to
accomplish the work of interleaving mobile device use with
ongoing conversation. We collected video and audio record-
ings as part of our approach in an effort to allow us to identify
the embedded nature of mobile devices, and the subtly observ-
able actions exhibited by members within the setting through
video analysis. Overall, the ethnographic record comprises
video recordings of the interaction, ﬁeld notes and individual
questionnaires completed by members, and each group also
participated in an informal semi-structured interview.
Questions were asked after the ‘observation phase’ as an in-
terview so as not to interrupt the conversation. The purpose
of the interview was to contextualise the observations and
gain an insight into the participant’s perceptions of mobile
device use in conversation. Participants also completed a short
questionnaire after the observation phase to allow us to gather
information on the technology they owned. Given the evolv-
ing landscape of mobile technologies, this acted as a point of
curiosity to understand the present situation.
To analyse our corpus of collected data, we conducted video
analysis drawing on ethnomethodology and conversation anal-
ysis [21, 22], and interaction analysis [29]. Firstly, shortly
following data collection, the corpus of data was catalogued
and indexed to identify episodes in which mobile device use
occurred. We used timestamps and descriptive language to
construct a record of the interactions that took place, which
allowed us to iteratively re-examine prior data with relative
ease. This was in order to aid the discovery of the observable-
and-reportable actions performed by the members within the
setting and to help us gain an overall impression of the data
collected across all the sessions.

We identiﬁed a total of 51 episodes of mobile device use in
the sessions (some of which were overlapping), with episodes
ranging from a few seconds to a few minutes in length. We
then performed a substantive review of the episodes to ex-
amine the interaction, honing in on episodes that represented
observable-and-reportable intersections of mobile device use
and conversation for a more in-depth analysis. This process
required the transcription of both verbal (i.e. talk) and non-
verbal (e.g. gestures and gaze actions). We chose to ignore sit-
uations where, for example, mobile devices were used merely
as timepieces for a split-second.
Following multiple iterative reviews, we engaged in a collabo-
rative ‘data session’ to allow colleagues to watch, review, and
comment on collected video to help contribute towards this
analysis. Our observations and commentary were provided
along with transcripts of the clips.

Study Procedure and Participants
After ﬁnding a pub that agreed to host our research, partic-
ipants from the local University were recruited using email
and word-of-mouth. Participants were recruited as groups of
friends who felt they would “typically go to the pub with each
other” and were willing to be observed for their ‘behaviours
around mobile devices’ within a pub. In total, eleven par-
ticipants took part (in three separate groups); seven of the
participants identiﬁed as female, with the remaining four iden-
tifying as male. Each group had at least one female and one
male, although this was by chance and not intention. Of the
recruited participants, four were 18–23, ﬁve were 24–29, and
two were 30–39. Fieldwork was conducted over a three-month
period in the UK, with studies taking place at a time agreed
with the recruited participants. The study was approved by the
University’s School of Computer Science Ethics Committee
and we reimbursed all participants with an online shopping
voucher for their time spent during the study.
On the day of the visit, a researcher accompanied the group
to the pub, set up the recording equipment and then took
on the role of participant observer. In addition to video and
audio recordings, ﬁeld notes were taken, but not until after the
session so as not to distract the participants. We positioned two
cameras carefully to capture the participants around a table,
while limiting the recording of others in the pub. Studies took
place during the mid-to-late afternoon at times agreed to be
suitable by all and during normal opening hours. Although
we note that drinking alcohol was by no means a requirement
for the study, most participants chose to do so. Recording
sessions typically lasted between 60–90 minutes, depending
on the natural course of the pub talk.
It was common for participants in our observations to have
their phones visible on the table at some point, with six
members maintaining the presence of the device on the table
throughout the observation (others kept their phones in their
pocket or bag during non-use). Through the questionnaire,
we asked participants about which technology they owned:
all participants owned smartphones, and had them present,
a majority (seven) also owned tablets (although six of these
relied on a Wi-Fi connection), however none had a tablet with
them, and there were no smartwatches.

1651

FINDINGS
In order to unpack the orderly ways in which members use
mobile devices in pubs, we orient to the temporal sequentiality
in which device use is begun, carried out, and ended in the
course of conversation. We adopt this common approach as it
brings into focus the internal structure of the process through
which the work is managed [29].
Thus,
following the ethnomethodological focus on the
observable-and-reportable actions of members within the set-
ting, we focus on the following key sequences of activity
conducted by members:
• Occasioning: The ways in which mobile device use is oc-
casioned in and through interaction, including the talk and
embodied actions that lead up to the usage (if observable);
• Sustaining: How the mobile device usage is sustained with
respect to both the role of the mobile device use in the
conversation, and the actions of the members within the
broader context;
• Disengaging: The ways in which the mobile device is dis-
engaged from, either temporarily or (semi-)permanently.

Each of these activities can take multiple forms, and in the
following sections we present each stage as well as a number
of selected relevant episodes as ‘fragments’ of our data that
provide the vivid exhibits of the work conducted by members.
In so doing, we also scrutinise the interactional resources that
members employ to accomplish this work. Interactional re-
sources include talk, body movement and orientation, and
gestures [37]. Furthermore, we can comment on situations
where mobile devices provided notiﬁcation chimes, or displays
turned on, as this was observable within the setting. We pro-
vide numbers in relation to occurrences as descriptive indices
into our qualitative data corpus.
All transcripts are given like this, using the verbal notation by
Heath et al. [22], with the addition of non-verbal actions within
double-parentheses where relevant, in addition to emphasis,
volume (LOUD, °quiet°) and pauses (.) between words. We
provide imagery that depicts the embodied actions of members.
All names and identiﬁable information are entirely ﬁctional.

Occasioning
In discussion of the use of artefacts in workplaces, Hindmarsh
and Heath [23] discuss how “objects, and their occasioned
determination, implicate speciﬁc courses of action by particu-
lar participants”. The knowledge of how objects, speciﬁcally
mobile phones in our case, are occasioned is fundamental in
understanding the later behaviours of members during mobile
device usage. In our work, the usage of mobile devices was
occasioned in a number of ways; occasioning of the mobile
device usage is constituted of the actions of those within the
setting that lead to at least one member making use of their
mobile device. We identiﬁed two key forms of mobile de-
vice usage occasioning within the context: occasioning that
was related to the conversation, and occasioning which was
ostensibly unrelated to the conversation.

1652

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Occasioning In and Through the Conversation
The purpose of leisure-time socialising is that of conversing
and spending time with friends in a group. Through the actions
of the members within the group, mobile devices can become
occasioned in a number of different ways. In our work, perhaps
unsurprisingly given the nature of the context, we found that
in 47% of occasioning instances, occasioning of device use
was related to the conversation. That is, nearly half of the
time, a member chose or acquiesced to use their device in and
through the conversation.
Firstly, we present the episode given in Fragment 1 as an
exhibit of how readily mobile device use is occasioned. The
mobile phone usage in this episode is as a result of confusion
amongst the members within the setting over what the exact
deﬁnition of a ballad is. In this episode, we join four friends:
Dayna, Jenna, Cally, Roj, and the researcher Philip, as Dayna
offers the deﬁnition that she believes to be the case. Before this
discussion, Jenna has her (locked) mobile phone on the table,
while the others in the group all have their mobile phones
either in their bags or pockets.
←D:

°I thought a ballad is a
poem, like twen(cid:2) twelve
lines, or something, you
know?°
(
°Poem° oh, it’s a, it can
be a-

) sorry?

J:

J:

R:

←D:

J:

R:

C:

J:

D:

R:

J:

←D:

Oh, poem?

Poem with twenty lines,
no? it’s a ballad!

Yeah, we call it as well a
ballad

a BALLAD!
°oh, right°
ballad=

=ballad

Ah:, right, OK

(. . . )

Yeah sometimes there are
romantic songs that can be
called ballad
°I think° cos I remember
we were said, we told
((gets phone out of bag,
holds in lap and then
begins to use)) °I think
we were told that (.)
to
Google°

Fragment 1. Ballad Deﬁnition

This discussion, which lasts 34s from the ﬁrst utterance to the
completion of the last remark, quickly leads to the introduction
of a mobile phone to resolve the group dilemma. In fact, from
the ﬁrst deﬁnition of a ballad, as proposed by Dayna (who is
also the member who begins to use her phone), it takes just 27s
for her to begin the process of retrieving her phone from her
handbag. In the episode, we also note that Dayna, who in the
informal interview later confessed to using her mobile phone
“all the time”, retrieves her phone from her handbag, and as
she does so, continues to clarify her confusion over the exact

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

deﬁnition of ballad. Then, just prior to the commencement of
her mobile device use, she provides the conﬁrmation to the
group of the task she is about to perform by articulating her
intention with “°to Google°”. This declaration conﬁrms that
the purpose of her retrieving the device is that of resolving the
group dilemma.
We also see further examples of this as, following this frag-
ment, Dayna uses her phone within her lap, below that of
the table edge; while using her mobile device she ostensibly
disengages from the conversation through which the use was
occasioned in the ﬁrst place. The conversation amongst the
friends quickly reverts to a previous topic that was taking
place before this particular tangent occurred. Dayna remains
disengaged from the conversation for a short time while she
continues to use her phone.
There are various points within the sequence that, when com-
bined, contribute to the occasioning of the mobile device.
When Dayna utters “°I think?°” we can see signs of self-
doubt which is then followed by further conﬂicting deﬁnitions
from others members. This helps to establish a ‘state of confu-
sion’ within the group which is then followed by Dayna’s act
to retrieve her phone and make the statement “°to Google°”.
By declaring her intent in this way, Dayna justiﬁes her device
use by making it accountable to the situation at hand. Dayna’s
actions are accountable to the members as they offer a way of
dealing with the confusion, which in turn has contributed to
the occasioning of the mobile device use. Similar situations
in which mobile devices were used to retrieve information us-
ing search engines, and resolve conﬂicts within conversations,
occurred in all the groups that took part in the study.

Turn Allocation
We now consider the relevance of this work in relation to
the systematics of turn-taking allocation techniques, as given
by Sacks et al. [49]. Accordingly, turn allocation works as
either (1) an individual chooses to take the next turn in the
conversation, or (2) the current speaker selects who will take
the next turn within the conversation.
These two possible techniques are both observable within situ-
ations where mobile devices are occasioned in and through the
conversation. For example, in the previous episode, we note
that it was Dayna who self-selected using her phone. Equally,
however, it is possible for a member to allocate device use to
another member. Here, we present an episode taken from a
later stage of the conversation of the same group. Fragment 2,
which includes a small segment of a larger conversation around
dog breeds, is between two of the group’s members: Cally
and Dayna. In this episode, we witness Cally attempt to de-
scribe the size of the breed of dog by gesturing with her hands,
however, she then follows up this by instructing Dayna to use
phone to look up more information.
This episode presents a straightforward example of mobile
device use occasioning in and through the conversation, in
which the speaker allocates the device use to another member.
Dayna, who in the conversation had previously stated that she
likes big dogs, enquires about the size of Cally’s favourite
dog breed (which we learn is the Miniature Schnauzer). Cally

C:

D:

←C:

I like Miniature
Schnauzers
°How big are Schn-?°
It’s like, like, they’re
so: cute

D:

←C:

D:

C:

((briefly looks at her bag
to her left before looking
back at Dayna))

I like big dogs

I know, but Google
Schnauzer, right?

((gets phone out from her
handbag))

((subtly leans towards
Dayna)) The puppies,
Schnauzer puppies are
gorgeous

Fragment 2. Miniature Schnauzers

seems to glance around at her bag before turning back to
face Dayna and then acknowledging Dayna’s remark about
big dogs before directly instructing her to “Google Schnauzer,
right?”. In review, this conversation both demonstrates the oc-
casioning of the mobile device usage for purposes to research
information, and that turn allocation of mobile device use is
not restricted to self-selection. While Dayna was willing to
use her phone, Cally identiﬁed herself as someone who uses
her phone less often than Dayna, potentially contributing to
the factor of allocating the device use to Dayna.

Occasioning Ostensibly Unrelated to the Conversation
Members can choose to engage with their mobile device for a
variety of factors external to the conversation. For example,
device use may be prompted by a device notiﬁcation, or the
individual can choose to use the mobile device at will. During
the observations, we identiﬁed 14 instances in which we could
observe notiﬁcations and subsequent device use during the
study, which equates to 51% of all non-conversation related
occasioning. We have excluded episodes from our analysis in
which device use is neither accounted for, nor topicalised in
some way in the conversation.
Fragment 3 presents an example in which occasioning that
is apparently unrelated to the conversation is followed by
topicalisation related to mobile device use in the conversation.
In this episode, the owner of the mobile device, Lawrence,
is using his mobile phone while a conversation is ongoing.
Lawrence has recently rejoined the group after leaving for
some time, with his phone left at the table. Upon his return
to the table, he picks up his phone and begins to use it. He
then brings up an email he has recently received, but he does
this by interrupting an existing conversation around Christmas
meals. In total, this episode includes four friends: Lawrence,
Malcolm, Zöe, Jayne, and researcher Philip. We join the group
14s after Lawrence returned to the table.
In order to identify the method of occasioning within this
episode, we must consider that although Lawrence has almost
continually used his mobile phone since returning to the table,
this has ostensibly not been occasioned in and through the

1653

←J:

J:

←L:

J:

←L:

J:

M:

←L:

<No, no, no> I’m just
saying mulled wine is not
just Christmas

(. . . )

I think we went in, like,
quite late, I tweeted, I
took a photo and I tweeted
No:↑ cos it’s-
What?

)°

Beginning of September
they had their, all their
Christmas stuff out, and
I was °like oh my god,
nobody (
°Jesus!°
We just booked ours (1.0)
we do, me, and Liam, and
James and Malcolm do (one
every year and we) just
booked it
Duboit↑
=Sorry, have you, um,
Jonathan has sent round
an email. This is great
for your study isn’t it?
((chuckles)) Have you seen
the font size?

(. . . )

M:

Is that him or is that
your phone fitting the
line in?

Fragment 3. Email Interruption

conversation. He brieﬂy takes a hiatus from using his mobile
phone to have a drink and perhaps to clarify what the topic
of the current conversation is: “What?”, looking at Jayne as he
does so. However, despite this brief interjection, Lawrence
then turns back to using his mobile phone whilst the conversa-
tion runs its course, without looking at Jayne as she concluded
her explanation. In turning back to his phone, he also lifts the
device closer to his face, as can be seen within the imagery in
the fragment. This posture suggests to those present that he
is engrossed in studying the contents of his device’s screen,
which may be seen to display considerable involvement in his
mobile device usage.
Lawrence’s displayed orientation to the device is crucial to
accounting for the later topicalisation of the contents of his
screen in the conversation. Lawrence interrupts the current
conversation, ﬁrst with an apology for doing so (“Sorry”). He
then makes his previous actions of holding his phone close to
his face accountable by explaining that the email he received
appears in a small size on his mobile phone. He also further
corroborates this explanation by performing a screen-sharing
gesture allowing others to see the email on his screen, pro-
viding further evidence for both his previous actions and his
articulation, as exempliﬁed when we see him share his phone
with others at the end of Fragment 3.
Finally, this episode also demonstrates how some ‘modes’ of
use, such as ‘close to face’ are remarkable, and therefore call
for an explicit account to be offered to the co-participants. The
member’s display of holding his mobile device close to his face
is accounted for in retrospect by introducing it to the group.

1654

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

This practice of accounting for the use took place through
interrupting the ongoing group conversation and bringing up
the device use-related issue (small font size) that occasioned
his holding of the device in a not naturally accountable way
and thus, both a verbal and visual (‘showing-and-telling’)
account was offered.

Sustaining
Members routinely engage in the activity of sustaining their
co-presence within a social setting while interacting with a
mobile device. Given the nature of the gathering, individuals
may try to maintain a level of interaction with others in the
collocated group, however, the form this interaction takes
varies given that the individual must also balance their focus
with their mobile device and the demands it places on their
attentional orientation.
We identiﬁed two primary foci that this sustaining activity
can take: managing one’s relation to and within the social
situation, and managing the mobile device’s role within the
situation. The social norms that govern acceptable behaviour
for a current setting (i.e. the pub) provide the framework for
members to manage both of these relationships [53]. Our anal-
ysis identiﬁed two methods through which members sustained
their mobile device use and co-presence within the collocated
group: the ﬁrst, demonstrating continual social interaction,
is where members work to maintain a presence (to a varying
degree) within the conversation; and the second, performing
accountable actions, is where members make their device in-
teraction both observable and reportable to the other members
within the setting.

Demonstrating Continual Social Interaction
The ﬁrst method we observed adopted by individuals to sustain
their device interactions is to account for the usage while also
performing actions that provide a contribution to the social
setting. We brieﬂy present the episode in Fragment 4 that
includes a conversation between Jayne and Zöe, as Zöe is
looking for a photo on Facebook on her mobile phone. In this
episode, we see Jayne talking to Zöe about the photo during
this task, with Zöe’s gaze remaining ﬁxed on her phone.

←J:

There’s an amazing <well,
no, no, no> there’s an
amazing photo of dunno if
you’ve got it actually of
of erm (tt) (0.5) Malcolm
with Richard

(2.1)

J:

←Z:

You know Richard from my
year?
°(hm::)°

Fragment 4. Verbal Nudge

During this episode, which only lasts a few seconds, we see
that as Jayne provides her comment, she looks towards Zöe,
but does not receive a response. She follows this up with
a question: “You know Richard from my year?”, to which she

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

receives a subtle and succinct acknowledgement of her com-
ment (“°(hm::)°”). This response is typical of a perfunctory
response members give when they are preoccupied with some-
thing else. As Zöe provides her response, she maintains her
posture of keeping her head down and her gaze ﬁxed on her
mobile phone. However, Zöe’s response may be seen to in-
dicate that she is still listening. This episode is an example
of work to maintain presence within conversation, even at a
minimal level, while also continuing to use a mobile device.

Accounting for Device Use
We also observed that individuals made use of interactional
resources, such as body orientation, gaze, and talk to high-
light their device interactions by making it observable-and-
reportable to those within the setting. One common observed
approach is to continually articulate one’s actions to the group,
thereby offering a verbal account for the device use, be it
in a speciﬁc detail such as verbalising what you are typing,
or an abstract deﬁnition of the task you are attempting. We
demonstrate the way in which individuals account for their
actions by joining Lawrence, Jayne, Zöe and Malcolm again.
In the episode, given in Fragment 5, the group are discussing
shorthand notation. Lawrence has expressed an interest in
learning shorthand notation, and Jayne explains that she had
previously been taught one form of notation although also
discusses another form of which she is aware.

←L:

Isn’t it mainly phonetic?

J:

It’s like:

(3.2)

←J:

L:

←J:

L:

Z:

M:

←L:

There’s various versions
so the one she tried to
teach me first so I could
start going is missing out
all the vowels
↓ Yeah

and once you get good at
that you just write a lot
quicker (0.7) but then
she had one which was
literally like (.)=
↓ Yeah
=swiggles and just didn’t
look like anything and
I don’t know if that’s
phonetic or::::

(

)

Hang on!
(schuh::::::::ort (.....)
hand

Fragment 5. Shorthand

This episode presents both methods of sustainment: we see
Lawrence demonstrate his continual social presence when he
responds to Jayne’s explanation of the ﬁrst shorthand notation
that she learnt with his remark “↓ Yeah”, and later we see the

1655

provision of an account in which Lawrence begins to spell out
the word shorthand while typing on his phone. Although he
does not provide visual conﬁrmation to the other members, or
indeed, speciﬁc explanation of what his exact interaction is
with his device, the clear implication of his spelling out the
phonetic sounds is that he is presently typing the word into a
search engine. Our later conversation conﬁrmed that he was
using Google to ﬁnd information about shorthand. Unfortu-
nately, while Lawrence demonstrates that he is maintaining
awareness of the verbal aspects of the conversation, he fails to
respond to gestures used by Jayne to exemplify her explana-
tions. Jayne makes two visual contributions to the interaction,
ﬁrst demonstrating the form of shorthand in the air (as seen
in the second image in the Fragment) and then on the table as
she explains the second form of shorthand.
In addition to articulating actions, the process of providing
a continual account of actions can include more visual as-
pects such as making the device screen visible (i.e. available
for glancing). This could be to allow others to engage as a
spectator during your device usage, or alternatively to engage
in a collaborative task that allows one-or-more other mem-
bers within the setting to contribute. We saw both of these
behaviours as members were searching for information to
contribute, or to corroborate members’ opinions.

Disengaging
The disengaging of mobile devices can itself be brought about
by a number of different factors pertaining to the conversa-
tion and the mobile device use (e.g. search task completion).
External factors that are not related to the conversation or the
mobile device may play a part in this disengaging, although
we have not examined these in our research. Additionally, a
process of ‘re-entering the conversation’ may follow disengag-
ing from a mobile device. Disengagement from mobile device
usage concludes sustaining ‘concurrent’ device interaction and
conversation (as outlined in the previous section). We further
observed that the disengagement of mobile devices can also
either be temporary or semi-permanent in nature. We deﬁne
temporary disengagement to be where a task is still ongoing,
but the user halts their mobile device interactions, and semi-
permanence to be the completion, or failure to complete, a
particular task. We use the term semi-permanence in the latter
case as an individual may later use their phone for some other
cause, irrespective to the outcome of the previous interaction.

Disengaging In and Through Conversation
We have already presented a number of episodes in which
mobile device use is occasioned in and through the conversa-
tion, both in terms of resolving debates, or enhancing one’s
explanation or viewpoint. When looking at disengagement,
relevant situational features include the interaction before and
after the disengagement occurs, including how the member
‘rejoins’ the conversation. Mobile devices place a demand on
an individual’s attentional resources, and shifting focus from
one task to another is likely to be problematic. For example,
from the temporary disengagement highlighted in Fragment 3,
when Lawrence asks “What?” he articulates that he was unable
to maintain a full awareness of the conversation while using
his mobile phone.

We present one example of disengaging from mobile device
use through the evolution of conversation, focusing on the
point at which the member suspends their mobile device us-
age to orientate their focus back to the conversation. In this
episode, given in Fragment 6, we join a third group of friends:
Leonard, Christine, Janice, and the researcher Philip. The par-
ticipants have only recently arrived for the study, and although
they have been through the process of informed consent, the
researcher uses this opportunity to recap the information that
was given to participants in the initial email that was used to
promote the study. Before we join the group, Leonard caught
a glimpse of Philip’s mobile phone, and clariﬁes the speciﬁc
model of phone he owns. As we join the group, Leonard, who
is holding his phone, moves to hold it next to Philip’s phone
as a visual comparison.

L:

P:

L:

C:

L:

P:

Yeah, it’s like an iPad, er, a small iPad mini

There’s no need to have both, is there, em, no, um

No, compare ((laughs and holds his phone next to the iPhone 6
Plus))

It’s quite big!
begins to use his own phone))

((as he stops holding the phones together,

) lot bigger°

Yes::
°Yeah it’s (
(. . . )
So yeah, the study is basically focusing on peoples
behaviours (.)
their interactions around mobile phones
and- ((Leonard who is holding his phone, but looking at
Philip))

Fragment 6. Distraction

The change in conversation topic by Philip leads to Leonard
sitting back in his chair and temporarily halting his mobile de-
vice usage. As Philip starts talking, we observe Leonard place
his (unlocked) phone down on the table, face up, and look
towards Philip. This may be seen to display an acknowledge-
ment of the importance of the social (research) setting within
which he ﬁnds himself. However, it is noteworthy to highlight
that the action of leaving the mobile device unlocked may de-
clare his intention to resume usage later, and perhaps it points
to the untimely nature of the topic change that interrupted the
task he was attempting to complete.

Disengaging from the Device as a Result of Task Completion
Finally, we rejoin Cally and Dayna from the episode in Frag-
ment 2 as one example where the purpose for which the device
usage was occasioned has been satisﬁed.
In the previous
episode, Dayna used her phone to provide an enhancement to
Cally’s explanation of her favourite dog breed. The continua-
tion of the episode, given in Fragment 7, takes place roughly
11s after we left the action. In the time we have been away
from the action, Cally had brieﬂy engaged with the main con-
versation before returning to help co-ordinate the search task
with Dayna.
Instead of simply leaving Dayna to complete the task alone,
we see the mobile device become an artefact embedded within
the conversation between the pair, and a collaborative search
task forms. Using terminology by Brown et al. [3], we could
describe Dayna as “driving” the search task with Cally as a

1656

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

“passenger”, or back-seat driver, providing support to Dayna
throughout. We can see that both members continually take
turns to engage with each other, while Dayna acts as the opera-
tor of the mobile device as the pair work together to complete
the task. This episode contains a number of notable observa-
tions that corroborate ﬁndings in collaborative search literature,
as we observe Dayna re-orienting the mobile display towards
Cally, and Cally re-positions herself to engage with the mobile
search task [3]. We note that this task, which is co-steered by
both members, is cut short and the episode ends with an artic-
ulated apology by Dayna: “°My internet is rubbish so this
may take some time°”. In this utterance, Dayna removes her
mobile device from the conversation, in which it had become
embedded, because of the slowness of her mobile Internet.
Although technological progress continually improves the re-
sponsiveness of user interfaces and device connectivity, issues
still persist in situations where a mobile device is interleaved
with a conversation. This may be due to the pace of talk—
conversations can quickly move on, especially when more
than two individuals are co-present and engaged.

C:

So it’s Miniature
Schnauzer

D:

←C:

D:

C:

How do you?=

=Erm::

(Sccchhhh) (tea) (ee) (ar)

Oh Schnauzer, it’s
S-c-h-n-a-u-z- n-a-u-
(2.2) Schnauzer

D:

Oh, Schnauzer

←C:

D:

Schnauzer, go look
at Schnauzer puppies
right↑ ((continues to lean
over looking at Dayna’s
phone))
°My internet is rubbish so
this may take some time°

Fragment 7. Collaborative Search

Following this episode, Dayna leaves her phone unlocked in
her lap, although a short while after the device automatically
locks itself. Later on, Dayna unlocks her phone and, following
conﬁrmation of the result from Cally, shares the photo with
others in the whole group. She then locks the mobile phone
and puts it back on her lap, given the task of identifying the
dog breed, and reinforcing Cally’s opinion, has been com-
pleted. The entire process from Cally’s initial instruction to
the demonstration to the group took 3m 14s, although possibly
could have been performed quicker had the mobile device not
been temporarily removed from the conversation.
To recap, in our analysis we found two methods through which
mobile device usage was disengaged from and we have pre-
sented two exhibits that demonstrate these interactional meth-
ods. These also highlight the importance of considering how
disengagement occurs, and the interactional trouble that may
follow afterwards.

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

INTERLEAVING USE WITH SOCIAL INTERACTION
Thus far, we have provided exhibits that demonstrate the meth-
ods through which members employ interactional resources
to accomplish the interleaving work of using mobile devices
in conversation. We now unpack these ﬁndings in order to
reveal the machinery of interaction [48] that underlies the in-
terleaving work. It is at this point at which we transfer, as
Sacks put it, “our view of ‘what happened’, from a matter of
particular interaction done by particular people, to a matter
of interactions as products of a machinery” [48, p. 26]. We
highlight the methods that comprise the machinery below.

The Machinery of Interaction
In occasioning device use, members exhibited two fundamen-
tal methods: occasioning in and through conversation, and
occasioning ostensibly unrelated to conversation. With the
former, we witnessed mobile device use both as a tool to an-
swer questions and resolve disagreements within the group,
and as a utility to help reinforce or corroborate a member’s
point. Furthermore, where the occasioning warranted sus-
tained usage, mobile device use became embedded in a num-
ber of situations within the setting: for example, the mobile
device interactions around providing information to the group
on Cally’s favourite dog breed led to a collaborative search
task. In reviewing exhibits of the latter of the two occasioning
methods, we highlighted that unrelated mobile device use it-
self is accountable to the group, which may be done verbally
and/or visually by bringing up the mobile use-related topic in
the conversation. As with the former occasioning method, this
form of occasioning succinctly leads to the management of a
mobile device allowing for the conversation to re-orient to and
sustain the usage. In both of these situations, the management
of the mobile device was dependant on that of the method
through which the usage became occasioned.
Sustaining mobile device use whilst the conversation con-
tinues is done in and through members performing actions
to continue to display their attention to the conversation
in line with the social norms of the setting and purpose of
the gathering. We saw that members visually shared their
devices with others, be it either by making the device use
visible, or by embedding the device use in the conversation
(e.g. Fragments 3 and 7 respectively). We also saw where
individuals made their actions audibly accountable; to demon-
strate to the group that, despite the completion of a task, there
is an emphasis on remaining engaged with the conversation
(e.g. Fragment 5). Equally, we observed a number of ways
members demonstrate attentiveness to the conversation while
using a mobile device, for example as in Fragment 4.
Disengaging from mobile devices could also occur through
a number of different methods, disengaging in and through
interaction on the one hand, or by satisfying the purpose of
mobile phone use on the other: for example, if the mobile
device was occasioned for a particular purpose, then once the
purpose of its usage has been met, the need for the mobile
device may be lost and usage is halted. The way in which
disengagement is achieved depends on how the mobile device
use was occasioned and sustained, as well as the present social
situation. Furthermore, mobile device disengagement may

only be temporary, as we witnessed in a number of cases, if
the actual operation of completing has not been brought to
a close. For example, in some cases, the task was ongoing
but would take some more time, or in other cases, members
would re-orientate their focus of attention to the conversation.
In the cases we presented, this could be considered temporary
disengagement in and through the conversation.

The Problematic Nature of Interleaving
While we wish not to be misunderstood to make moral judge-
ments such as whether device use in social settings is socially
acceptable, we do want to critically examine the interleav-
ing practices we observed in terms of interactional trouble it
causes for the co-participants. We have seen that interleaving
device use with social interaction places continual demands on
the member to remain engaged, or at least display attentiveness
to the conversation while using their device (e.g. Fragment 4).
However, we have seen evidence that suggests it may in fact
be difﬁcult to pay attention to a conversation whilst using the
device (e.g. Fragments 4 and 5). This is further corroborated
by literature on divided attention, with performance factors
including task difﬁculty and practice [38, p. 38]. For example,
individuals may ﬁnd it difﬁcult to read and understand infor-
mation on webpages while also engaging with a conversation.
Although we would not disagree with characterising the inter-
leaving practices demonstrated in episodes in which members
co-orient to one member’s mobile device use in and through
the conversation (e.g. Fragments 2 and 3) as successful, this
co-orientation does not come without interactional trouble.
In Fragment 3 the device user interrupts the conversation in
topicalising his screen contents, and later in Fragment 7 the
co-oriented device use is disengaged from with an apology
“°My internet is rubbish°” — and the purpose for which the
device use was instigated in the ﬁrst place (looking up a dog
breed) remains (temporarily) unsatisﬁed.
In summary, while the trouble we observed was subtle, and
in all cases repaired swiftly in and through interaction, it may
nevertheless be fair to say that interleaving practices are in-
teractionally problematic. Interleaving practices frequently
feature interruptions, recapitulations of the conversation for
members re-joining, displays of attentiveness despite ostensi-
ble inattentiveness, and prompts of absent-minded members.
We also saw how individuals apologised for their device use,
or the slowness of their device, and for bringing device use-
related topics into the conversation. The interactional prob-
lems revealed in our data suggest current mobile device use is
perhaps ill-suited to be interleaved with social interaction in
unproblematic ways. In our view, this calls for a program of
work that investigates how interleaving practices may best be
supported by design.

DISCUSSION
We have presented the ﬁndings from our ﬁeldwork in a casual
social setting, and made use of fragments to explicate the in-
teractional methods through which the work of interleaving
mobile device use and conversation is accomplished. Whilst it
is a well-known challenge in the CSCW community to design

1657

systems that support collaborative interactions within collo-
cated groups, we felt that there was a need to go and look
to understand in detail the interactional work that members
undertake to interleave mobile device use while engaged in
collocated interactions. Our work focused on documenting
the accountable methods that members performed in occasion-
ing, sustaining, and disengaging from device use. A number
of related pieces from the academic literature have looked at
coherent user experiences in collocated groups (e.g. [9, 34]).
We also felt compelled by the rhetoric around ‘social isola-
tion’ and other negative connotations of device use in social
settings [55]. Our ﬁndings forbid such simpliﬁcations, in-
stead, they show the ways in which interleaving practices are
situationally context-shaped and context-shaping [21], and in-
teractionally problematic, as evidenced through features such
as apologies, interruptions, and inattentiveness.

Embedding Mobile Devices in Conversation
In our analysis, we saw that mobile devices are occasioned and
become embedded in conversations for several purposes, one
of which was information seeking, as highlighted by similar
literature [3, 6]. Information seeking-related mobile device use
was occasioned in and through the conversation, for example
to clarify points or to resolve disagreements. Information
seeking in collocated settings is arguably a practice enabled
by smartphones; a practice that could in future be provided or
enhanced by the introduction of differing technologies, such
as wearable mobile devices and interactive tables [13, 36].
Although we did not examine how people felt about the use
of mobile devices in detail, others have discussed the loss of
“authentic banter” due to the introduction of mobile phones
into conversations [53], however, we have in fact witnessed
humour arising from topics actually instigated as a result of
mobile device use.
We further found that members often took great care to ar-
ticulate their actions when devices are embedded to sustain
their usage and social presence, be it through utterances while
their gaze was ﬁxed on their device, or an announced state-
ment of intent. We note the use of interactional resources
and social cues by members in the setting allowed them to
purvey their current focus and task. In one such example we in-
cluded, body co-orientation accountably displayed participants
working together (see Fragment 2) [50]. Furthermore, mem-
ber’s orientation towards their mobile device screen whilst
visibly typing messages for itself provides a non-verbal, yet
observable-and-reportable account of their actions.
In addition, our study also echoes the literature on interruptions
that has found an impact on our attentional orientation [15,
25]. We saw several instances in which members responded
to notiﬁcations; such a ‘readiness to respond’ may perhaps
be related to the informal nature of the setting in which we
conducted our ﬁeldwork [31]. Authors have suggested that
although there is a need to be accountable towards collocated
members, there is equally a duty to manage accountabilities to
those we are remotely connected to [54]. This may have helped
to develop a contentious situation where individuals feel that
they need to constantly respond to the virtual interruptions that
permeate their physical surroundings [1].

1658

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

The Role of Mobile Devices in Interactional Trouble
While work has been done to support mobile device interac-
tions in collaborative tasks, there still remains an issue with
the speed (e.g. ‘sluggishness’) of device use that makes align-
ing it with the social interaction challenging: conversations
ebb and ﬂow, they may get faster and slower, whereas device
interactions do not. Sluggish device responsiveness and in-
ﬂexible alignment to conversational pace makes it extremely
difﬁcult for device use to remain in step with the conversation.
It arguably increases the potential to disrupt the conversation.
For example, our work also shows that mobile device use was
eventually given up on because of the lack of responsiveness
(during internet search), opening up design challenges around
speed and alignment that need to be addressed in order for
devices to enable unproblematic interleaving in conversations.
We feel that such interactional troubles are unlikely to be
solved with one ‘solution’, just as there is not a single deﬁn-
able ‘problem’, but many smaller, nuanced issues with mobile
device interactions in conversation. As devices increase in
processing power and sensory input, and the ability to ofﬂoad
functionality to the ‘cloud’ increases, it is likely that a number
of these issues that contribute to interactional troubles will be
solved in the near-term. In terms of disruptions, while man-
ufacturers have implemented simple controls to mute device
notiﬁcations, such actions are not (yet) automated or linked to
sensory data. We may ask the same questions that others have
asked of the impact of mobile devices in conversations, for
example, whether it is detrimental to conversations [3]. We
note that the literature has highlighted the potential of mobile
devices to be utilised to avoid social interaction [27, 52]. This
may also contribute to negative reﬂections on mobile devices
in social settings, which have been highlighted in literature
as being a symptom of “double-standards”, where members
were critical of device users’ actions, but also engaged in those
same actions themselves [1]. Furthermore, while some say that
individuals use mobile devices to avoid awkward situations,
describing the phenonem as social isolation [55], it has also
been noted that many with anxiety disorders or who are shy
may shield themselves from unmanageable situations [57].

Ideas for Future Work
Finally, we offer considerations on a number of different
avenues future design work may take. For example, work
could follow the response of supporting the observed practices
through design by making mobile devices less invasive and
demanding of an individual’s attentional resources. This work
could turn upon utopian ideas inspired by calm computing
or context awareness, and could be attempted by using tech-
nologies such as ‘smart tables’, context sensing applications
on mobiles, making mobile notiﬁcations sensitive to some
current group context [16], or the use of additional screens
in collocated interaction to facilitate collaborative tasks [34].
Alternative ideas could be around building a ‘provocative’
smart phone that prevents users from opening certain apps on
mobile phones when the device detects ongoing conversation;
not to ‘solve’ a problem, but to evoke critical reﬂection by
the members of the setting [46, p. 137]. Regardless of the
approach, we would suggest to frame design interventions as

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

an attempt to create a resource members draw upon in every-
day social interactions (cf. [23]). Perhaps most importantly,
researchers may then go and look at real-world deployments
to study how members actually mesh the intervention with the
broader assembly of resources drawn upon in interaction.

CONCLUSION
In this paper we presented the ﬁndings from our ethnographic
study to identify the interactional methods through which
members co-ordinate the work of interleaving mobile device
use with conversation in a pub setting. We presented exhibits
that demonstrate the methods through which device use is
occasioned, sustained, and disengaged from conversations,
unpacked the machinery of interaction that underlies these
methods, and revealed the ways in which they are interaction-
ally problematic as evidenced in apologies, interruptions, and
inattentiveness. We conclude that there is value in research
on collaborative collocated work, but that taking our ﬁndings
seriously means there is a need for future work to explore the
ways in which interleaving practices may be supported, or
disrupted, by design.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank: The Johnson Arms, Nottingham,
for graciously providing the venue for our observations; the
anonymous reviewers for their constructive feedback; and our
colleagues for their contributions throughout the project. The
authors are supported by the Horizon Centre for Doctoral
Training at the University of Nottingham (RCUK Grant No.
EP/G037574/1), by the RCUK’s Horizon Digital Economy
Research Institute (RCUK Grant No. EP/G065802/1), and by
grants EP/L02392X/1, and EP/M000877/1. The data that this
paper is based on is provided in this paper.

REFERENCES
1. Morgan G. Ames. 2013. Managing Mobile Multitasking:

The Culture of iPhones on Stanford Campus. In
Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’13). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 1487–1498. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2441776.2441945

2. Joanna Bergstrom-Lehtovirta, Tommy Eklund, Antti

Jylhä, Kai Kuikkaniemi, Chao An, and Giulio Jacucci.
2013. BubblesDial: Exploring Large Display Content
Graphs on Small Devices. In Proceedings of the 12th
International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous
Multimedia (MUM ’13). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
Article 1. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2541831.2541845

3. Barry Brown, Moira McGregor, and Donald McMillan.

2015. Searchable Objects: Search in Everyday
Conversation. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work &
Social Computing (CSCW ’15). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 508–517. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675206

4. Michael Bull. 2005. No Dead Air! The iPod and the

Culture of Mobile Listening. Leisure Studies 24, 4 (Jan.
2005), 343–355. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0261436052000330447

1659

5. Scott W. Campbell and Yong Jin Park. 2008. Social

Implications of Mobile Telephony: The Rise of Personal
Communication Society. Sociology Compass 2, 2 (March
2008), 371–387. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-9020.2007.00080.x

6. Karen Church, Antony Cousin, and Nuria Oliver. 2012. I

Wanted to Settle a Bet!: Understanding Why and How
People Use Mobile Search in Social Settings. In
Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on
Human Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and
Services (MobileHCI ’12). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
393–402. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2371574.2371635

7. Ian Clarke, Ian Kell, Ruth Schmidt, and Claudio Vignali.

2000. Thinking the thoughts they do: Symbolism and
meaning in the consumer experience of the “British pub”.
British Food Journal 102, 9 (Oct. 2000), 692–710. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/00070700010362059

8. Helen Cole and Danaë Stanton. 2003. Designing mobile

technologies to support co-present collaboration.
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 7, 6 (Dec. 2003),
365–371. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00779-003-0249-4

9. Scott Counts and Eric Fellheimer. 2004. Supporting

Social Presence Through Lightweight Photo Sharing On
and Off the Desktop. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’04). ACM, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 599–606.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/985692.985768

10. Andrew Crabtree, Mark Rounceﬁeld, and Peter Tolmie.

2012. Doing Design Ethnography. Springer, London.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4471-2726-0

11. Edward B. Cutrell, Mary Czerwinski, and Eric Horvitz.

2000. Effects of Instant Messaging Interruptions on
Computing Tasks. In CHI ’00 Extended Abstracts on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’00).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 99–100. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/633292.633351

12. Abigail Durrant, Duncan Rowland, David S. Kirk, Steve

Benford, Joel E. Fischer, and Derek McAuley. 2011.
Automics: Souvenir Generating Photoware for Theme
Parks. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’11). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 1767–1776. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979199

13. Wim Fikkert, Michiel Hakvoort, Paul van der Vet, and

Anton Nijholt. 2009. Experiences with Interactive
Multi-touch Tables. In Intelligent Technologies for
Interactive Entertainment, Anton Nijholt, Dennis
Reidsma, and Hendri Hondorp (Eds.). Lecture Notes of
the Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics
and Telecommunications Engineering, Vol. 9. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 193–200. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-02315-6_19

14. Joel E. Fischer. 2010. Interrupting the Here and Now:

Implications and Opportunities. In Mensch & Computer
2010: Interaktive Kulturen, Jürgen Ziegler and Albrecht
Schmidt (Eds.). Oldenbourg Verlag, München, 159–168.

15. Joel E. Fischer, Chris Greenhalgh, and Steve Benford.

2011. Investigating Episodes of Mobile Phone Activity as
Indicators of Opportune Moments to Deliver
Notiﬁcations. In Proceedings of the 13th International
Conference on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile
Devices and Services (MobileHCI ’11). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 181–190. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2037373.2037402

16. Joel E. Fischer, Stuart Reeves, Stuart Moran, Chris

Greenhalgh, Steve Benford, and Stefan
Rennick-Egglestone. 2013. Understanding Mobile
Notiﬁcation Management in Collocated Groups. In
Proceedings of the 13th European Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (ECSCW ’13).
Springer, London, 21–44. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4471-5346-7_2

17. Joel E. Fischer, Nick Yee, Victoria Bellotti, Nathan Good,

Steve Benford, and Chris Greenhalgh. 2010. Effects of
Content and Time of Delivery on Receptivity to Mobile
Interruptions. In Proceedings of the 12th International
Conference on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile
Devices and Services (MobileHCI ’10) (MobileHCI ’10).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 103–10. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1851600.1851620

18. Kate Fox. 2004. Watching the English: The Hidden Rules

of English Behaviour. Hodden & Stoughton, London.
19. Hans Geser. 2006. Is the Cell Phone Undermining the

Social Order?: Understanding Mobile Technology from a
Sociological Perspective. Knowledge, Technology &
Policy 19, 1 (2006), 8–18. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12130-006-1010-x

20. Erving Goffman. 1963. Behavior in Public Places. Simon

and Schuster, New York.

21. Charles Goodwin and John Heritage. 1990. Conversation

Analysis. Annual Review of Anthropology 19, 1 (Oct.
1990), 283–307. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.an.19.100190.001435

22. Christian Heath, Jon Hindmarsh, and Paul Luff. 2010.

Video in Qualitative Research. SAGE.

23. Jon Hindmarsh and Christian Heath. 2000. Sharing the

Tools of the Trade The Interactional Constitution of
Workplace Objects. Contemporary Ethnography 29, 5
(Oct. 2000), 523–562. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/089124100129023990

24. Jussi Holopainen, Andrés Lucero, Hannamari Saarenpää,

Timo Nummenmaa, Abdallah El Ali, and Tero Jokela.
2011. Social and Privacy Aspects of a System for
Collaborative Public Expression. In Proceedings of the
8th International Conference on Advances in Computer
Entertainment Technology (ACE ’11). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, Article 23. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2071423.2071452

1660

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

25. James M. Hudson, Jim Christensen, Wendy A. Kellogg,
and Thomas Erickson. 2002. “I’d Be Overwhelmed, But
It’s Just One More Thing To Do”: Availability and
Interruption in Research Management . In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’02). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 97–104.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/503376.503394

26. Lee Humphreys. 2005. Cellphones in public: social

interactions in a wireless era. New Media & Society 7, 6
(Dec. 2005), 810–833. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1461444805058164

27. Lee Humphreys. 2010. Mobile social networks and urban

public space. New Media & Society 12, 5 (Aug. 2010),
763–778. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1461444809349578

28. Lee Humphreys, Thilo Von Pape, and Veronika

Karnowski. 2013. Evolving Mobile Media: Uses and
Conceptualizations of the Mobile Internet.
Computer-Mediated Communication 18, 4 (May 2013),
491–507. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jcc4.12019

29. Brigitte Jordan and Austin Henderson. 1995. Interaction

Analysis: Foundations and Practice. the Learning
Sciences 4, 1 (Jan. 1995), 39–103. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/s15327809jls0401_2

30. Oskar Juhlin and Elin Önnevall. 2013. On the Relation of

Ordinary Gestures to TV Screens: General Lessons for
the Design of Collaborative Interactive Techniques. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’13). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 919–930. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2466118

31. Claudia Krehl, Sarah Sharples, and Martin Flintham.

2013. Less is More: Classifying Mobile Interactions to
Support Context Sensing in Journeys. In Proceedings of
the 27th International BCS Human Computer Interaction
Conference (BCS-HCI ’13). BCS, Swinton, Article 8.
32. Eric Laurier, Angus Whyte, and Kathy Buckner. 2001.
An ethnography of a neighbourhood café: informality,
table arrangements and background noise. Mundane
Behaviour 2, 2 (July 2001), 195–232.

33. Hugo Lopez-Tovar, Andreas Charalambous, and John

Dowell. 2015. Managing Smartphone Interruptions
through Adaptive Modes and Modulation of Notiﬁcations.
In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on
Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI ’15). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 296–299. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2678025.2701390

34. Andrés Lucero, Jussi Holopainen, and Tero Jokela. 2012.

MobiComics: Collaborative Use of Mobile Phones and
Large Displays for Public Expression. In Proceedings of
the 14th International Conference on Human-Computer
Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services
(MobileHCI ’12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 383–392.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2371574.2371634

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

35. Andrés Lucero, Matt Jones, Tero Jokela, and Simon

Robinson. 2013. Mobile Collocated Interactions: Taking
an Ofﬂine Break Together. interactions 20, 2 (March
2013), 26–32. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2427076.2427083

36. Andrés Lucero and Akos Vetek. 2014. NotifEye: using

interactive glasses to deal with notiﬁcations while
walking in public. In Proceedings of the 11th Conference
on Advances in Computer Entertainment Technology
(ACE ’14). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article 17. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2663806.2663824

37. Paul Luff and Marina Jirotka. 1998. Interactional

Resources for the Support of Collaborative Activities:
Common Problems in the Design of Technologies to
Support Groups and Communities. In Community
Computing and Support Systems, Toru Ishida (Ed.).
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 249–266. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/3-540-49247-X_17

38. Nick Lund. 2002. Attention and Pattern Recognition.

Routledge.

39. Sus Lundgren, Joel E. Fischer, Stuart Reeves, and Olof

Torgersson. 2015. Designing Mobile Experiences for
Collocated Interaction. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
&#38; Social Computing (CSCW ’15). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 496–507. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675171

40. Sus Lundgren and Olof Torgersson. Bursting the Mobile

Bubble. In Designing Mobile Face-to-Face Group
Interactions workshop at ECSCW ’13.

41. Kenton P. O’Hara, April Slayden Mitchell, and Alex

Vorbau. 2007. Consuming Video on Mobile Devices. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’07). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 857–866. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1240624.1240754

42. Virpi Oksman and Jussi Turtiainen. 2004. Mobile

Communication as a Social Stage: Meanings of Mobile
Communication in Everyday Life among Teenagers in
Finland. New Media & Society 6, 3 (June 2004), 319–339.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1461444804042518

43. Ray Oldenburg. 1989. The Great Good Place. Paragon

House, New York. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/sf/69.3.931

44. Antti Oulasvirta, Tye Rattenbury, Lingyi Ma, and Eeva

Raita. 2011. Habits make smartphone use more pervasive.
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 16, 1 (June 2011),
105–114. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00779-011-0412-2

45. Oscar Peters and Somaya ben Allouch. 2005. Always

connected: a longitudinal ﬁeld study of mobile
communication. Telematics and Informatics 22, 3 (Aug.
2005), 239–256. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tele.2004.11.002

1661

46. Johan Redström. 2006. Towards user design? On the shift

from object to user as the subject of design. Design
Studies 27, 2 (2006), 123–139. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.destud.2005.06.001

47. John Rooksby, TimothyE. Smith, Alistair Morrison,

Mattias Rost, and Matthew Chalmers. 2015. Conﬁguring
Attention in the Multiscreen Living Room. In
Proceedings of the 14th European Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (ECSCW ’15).
Springer, 243–261. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-20499-4_13
48. Harvey Sacks. 1984. Notes on Methodology. In

Structures of Social Action: Studies in Conversation
Analysis, John Maxwell Atkinson and John Heritage
(Eds.). Cambridge University Press, 21–27.

49. Harvey Sacks, Emanuel A. Schegloff, and Gail Jefferson.

1974. A Simplest Systematics for the Organization of
Turn-Taking for Conversation. Language 50, 4 (Dec.
1974), 696. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/412243

50. Allison Sauppé and Bilge Mutlu. 2014. How social cues

shape task coordination and communication. In
Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing
(CSCW ’14). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 97–108. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2531602.2531610

51. Carla Seddon. 2011. Lifestyles and Social Participation.

Ofﬁce for National Statistics.

52. Lara Srivastava. 2005. Mobile phones and the evolution
of social behaviour. Behaviour & Information Technology
24, 2 (March 2005), 111–129. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01449290512331321910

53. Norman Makoto Su and Lulu Wang. 2015. From Third to

Surveilled Place: The Mobile in Irish Pubs. In
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’15). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 1659–1668. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702574

54. Peter Tolmie, Andy Crabtree, Tom Rodden, and Steve

Benford. 2008. “Are You Watching This Film or What?”
Interruption and the Juggling of Cohorts. In Proceedings
of the 2008 ACM Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work (CSCW ’08). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 257–266. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1460563.1460605

55. Sherry Turkle. 2011. Alone Together. Basic Books.
56. Ran Wei and Louis Leung. 1999. Blurring public and

private behaviors in public space: policy challenges in the
use and improper use of the cell phone. Telematics and
Informatics 16, 1-2 (Feb. 1999), 11–26. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0736-5853(99)00016-7

57. Ran Wei and Ven-Hwei Lo. 2006. Staying connected

while on the move: Cell phone use and social
connectedness. New Media & Society 8, 1 (Feb. 2006),
53–72. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1461444806059870

