CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Embeddedness and Sequentiality in Social Media 

Mixed Reality Lab, School of Computer Science 

Mobile Life @ Stockholm University 

Barry Brown 

SE-164, Kista, Sweden 

barry@mobilelifecentre.org 

Stuart Reeves 

University of Nottingham, UK 

stuart@tropic.org.uk 

research 

is  generative 

show  how  EMCA 

ABSTRACT 
Over the last decade, there has been an explosion of work 
around social media within CSCW. A range of perspectives 
have  been  applied  to  the  use  of  social  media,  which  we 
characterise as aggregate, actor-focussed or a combination. 
We outline the opportunities for a perspective informed by 
ethnomethodology and conversation analysis (EMCA)—an 
orientation that has been influential within CSCW, yet has 
only  rarely  been  applied  to  social  media  use.  EMCA 
approaches  can  complement  existing  perspectives  through 
articulating how social media is embedded in the everyday 
lives of its users and how sequentiality of social media use 
organises  this  embeddedness.  We  draw  on  a  corpus  of 
screen and ambient audio recordings of mobile device use 
to 
for 
understanding  social  media  through  concepts  such  as 
adjacency pairs, sequential context, turn allocation / speaker 
selection, and repair. 
Author Keywords 
Social  media 
ethnomethodology; conversation analysis. 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous. 
INTRODUCTION 
Research into social media use has recently become a core 
part  of  CSCW,  so  much  so  that  in  2013  the  CSCW 
conference  formally  modified  its  title  to  include  “Social 
Computing” in recognition of this. Social media represents 
one  of  the  most  significant  and  widely  adopted  new 
expressions  of  collaborative  technology  and  CSCW  has 
rightly taken on the use of these systems as one of its areas 
of concern. Fortuitously, the online nature of social media 
also  provides  large  quantities  of  readily  available  data 
derived from social media systems themselves. Capture and 
analysis  of  this  data  has  supported  a  wide  range  of 

research; 

analysis; 

network 

social 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for 
components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific 
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to 
ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02...$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820008

1052

studies 

particularly 

in  CSCW, 

themselves  (such  as 

important insights into the complexities of our online lives. 
While this research is diverse, we characterise it as having 
two core perspectives. The aggregate perspective involves 
the  acquisition  of  large  amounts  of  data  collected  directly 
from  social  media  systems 
the 
properties of social networks, or content in terms of ‘status 
updates’ or ‘tweets’) and analyses it to find structures and 
patterns of aggregate online behaviour. The actor-focussed 
perspective,  in  turn,  examines  smaller  scales  of  data 
(typically  but  not  exclusively  qualitatively)  that  has  been 
collected  from  the  users  of  social  media  themselves, 
administered  via 
instruments  such  as  surveys  and 
interviews. Social media research also frequently combines 
these approaches together as a form of triangulation. 
In this paper we call for an enrichment of this programme 
through  the  development  of  ethnomethodological  and 
conversation analytic (EMCA) perspectives on social media 
use.  EMCA  has  been  broadly 
influential  for  many 
foundational 
for 
ethnographic  studies  of  work  practice  with  and  around 
technology. Yet there are few studies of social media which 
have adopted this perspective (exceptions include [44]). By 
reviewing 
and 
conversation  analytic  orientations,  we  demonstrate  the 
potential  generativity  of  this  perspective  for  doing  social 
media research. As part of this we unpack how one might 
go  about  investigating  how  social  media  use  comes  to  be 
embedded in everyday life through the sequential ordering 
of action. 
The  following  section  expands  upon  distinctions  between 
aggregate and actor-focussed perspectives. We then outline 
how an EMCA perspective might take shape, and through 
this  describe  concepts  of  embeddedness  and  sequentiality. 
In  order  to  exhibit  these  empirically,  subsequent  sections 
use vignettes from a corpus of screen recordings of mobile 
device use coupled with ambient audio capture. From this 
we  show  how  core  conversation  analytic  concerns  can 
illustrate the ‘ethno-methods’ of social media practice. 
SOCIAL MEDIA RESEARCH 
In  reviewing  the  literature  we  restrict  ourselves  mainly  to 
publications  in  CSCW  and  closely  related  fields.  We  can 
distinguish  two  broad  approaches  or  perspectives  taken 
within this body of work: the aggregate perspective and the 
actor-focussed perspective. It is important to note that these 
perspectives  are  not  mutually  exclusive  and  often  are 
combined. Broadly speaking, aggregate perspectives tend to 

ethnomethodological 

concepts 

from 

to 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA
 

tend 

examine  large-scale  patterns  in  the  data,  while  actor-
focussed  perspectives 
to  be  concerned  with 
interpreting  user-generated  content  or  responses  produced 
during research interventions. 
Aggregate perspectives  
The  aggregate  perspective  uses  social  media  systems 
themselves  as  a  source  of  empirical  data.  This  approach 
documents the structure in mass online behaviour, seeking 
out  patterns  that  occur  across  multiple  users  and  uses.  It 
tends  to  be  associated  with  notions  of  ‘big  data’,  ‘data 
science’  and  so  on.  Further,  it  usually  takes  a  quantitative 
form, which typically involves processing large amounts of 
data  collected  from  social  media  systems,  particularly 
platforms such as Twitter, Facebook or Instagram. This data 
may  be  collected  and  aggregated  ‘from  within’  the  social 
media system itself (e.g., by mapping friend networks), or it 
could be derived as an aggregate from logging use (or some 
combination of both, e.g., Bernstein et al. examined client-
side 
instrumentation  of  news  feed  viewing  activities 
alongside  Facebook  log  data  [3]).  As  an  aggregate  set  of 
data,  it  is  then  examined  using  a  range  of  metrics,  often 
informed  by  network  theory  (e.g.,  tie  strength,  centrality, 
density, cliques etc., e.g., [1, 13], but also see [15]). Other 
approaches take collections of properties specific to social 
networking services such as Facebook ‘likes’ or ‘shares’, or 
Twitter ‘retweets’ or ‘hashtags’ (e.g., [8]), while others use 
derived  metrics  of  their  own  (e.g.,  ‘reputation’  [24])  to 
apply to these aggregate data sets. Sometimes these metrics 
are  combined  [55].  As  an  approach, 
the  aggregate 
perspective necessarily involves the study of large corpuses 
of  data,  so  as  to  produce  statistical  correlations  between 
different  forms  of  behaviour  and  thus  offer  the  possibility 
of  producing  causal  models  with  predictive  qualities  [56]. 
The  recent  textbook  “Analyzing  the  Social  Web”  [15] 
presents many of these methods as a way of following this 
aggregation approach. 
Broadly speaking, the aggregate perspective tends to focus 
on  structural  analyses  of  social  media.  Examining  the 
structure and form of social media leverages its scale-free, 
power law features [36]. In particular, analysis of the graph 
of  social  relations  derives  from  the  work  of  Watts  and 
social network analysis more widely [60]. The focus of that 
work  has  been  on  the  social  graph  and  extracting  the 
mathematical  shape  or  ‘form’  of  the  social  world,  as 
opposed  to  actual  instances  themselves.  Yet  in  practice 
aggregate  perspective  also  document  the  content  of  social 
media,  which  in  some  senses  breaks  with  the  theoretical 
foundations  of  social  network  analysis  [9].  Studies  of 
content  may  use  more  qualitative  social  research  methods 
that  may  be  similar  to  the  actor-focussed  perspective 
(described  below),  such  as  conducting  content  analysis  of 
the  data  via  various  coding  strategies  (e.g.,  [25,  20]), 
bringing with it procedures of inter-rater reliability testing 
and  iterative  coding.  Yet  because  of  the  large  volume  of 
data 
these  methods, 
researchers  may  also  employ  a  variety  of  algorithmic 

is  rendered  collectable  by 

that 

 

1053

the  system 

coding  systems  such  as  sentiment  analysis  [41]  to  address 
scaling problems associated with studying aggregated social 
media content. 
Actor-focussed perspective 
A second distinctive approach takes a more actor-focussed 
perspective, and is primarily concerned with eliciting users’ 
accounts of their behaviour on social media. So, rather than 
understand  social  media  as  an  entity  in  its  own  right,  the 
focus is on understanding users’ perspectives on their use, 
and  the  goals  to  which  social  media  is  put.  In  this 
perspective,  empirical  data  is  drawn  from  individual  users 
of  social  media  systems,  usually  obtained  in  a  way 
‘external’ 
itself.  While  actor-focused 
perspectives  are  typically  qualitative,  surveys  and  rating 
scales are one quantitative method that is used within actor-
focused perspectives (e.g., [29, 11]). In some sense, actor-
focussed  perspectives  are  most  similar 
to  standard 
sociological  and  social  psychological  research;  although 
large aggregate data sets may be still collected, the success 
of its findings does not turn fundamentally upon this.  
For  example,  researchers  conduct  interviews  with  users 
(e.g., [28, 59]), ethnographic studies, or collect survey data 
(e.g.,  online  questionnaires  [29],  scenario-based  surveys 
[11],  etc.).  Often  this  involves  recruitment  using  social 
media itself (e.g., [59, 38]). Sometimes both interviews and 
surveys  are  combined  (e.g.,  [21,  63]).  In  contrast  to 
aggregate  perspectives,  the  focus  is  on  ways  of  helping 
users to recollect upon and review their own social media 
use,  eliciting  accounts  of  their  own  behaviour  with  social 
media systems. Rather than logs or recordings made at the 
point of use, data is collected after the event. This data may 
be analysed using a range of standardised coding methods, 
e.g., axial coding derived from grounded theory, or coding 
schemes  developed 
[29]. 
Alternatively,  more  general  thematic  analysis  techniques 
may be put to use based on a range of different epistemic 
orientations  (e.g.,  [28]).  Broadly  speaking 
the  actor-
focussed  perspective  seeks  to  elicit  individual  actors’ 
experiences  of  social  media  and  the  uses  to  which  social 
media  is  put.  There  is  a  predominant  focus  on  the 
perspective  of  social  media  users, 
their  motivations, 
interpretations  and  the  connections  between  social  media 
and their other activities. 
Combined perspectives 
These  two  perspectives  mirror  historic  divisions  of  the 
structure-agency  dichotomies  of  the  social  sciences,  in 
which large-scale social structures or individual agency are 
(alternately)  analysed  as  causal  forces  in  explaining  the 
constitution  of  society.  Yet,  in  many  senses  social  media 
research  in  CSCW  has  avoided  the  intellectual  feuds 
associated  with  this  debate.  Instead,  the  two  perspectives 
are  frequently  combined,  albeit  still  within  a  somewhat 
dichotomous  framing.  A  popular  formulation  of  this  is  to 
compare  measures  derived  both  from  survey  data  and 
aggregate  social  media  traces  (in  terms  of  e.g.,  reputation 

social  psychology 

from 

 

SESSION: SOCIAL NETWORK METHODS

AND 

CONVERSATION 

[24],  social  ties  [7]  or  personality  [42]).  Alternatively  the 
actor-focussed  perspective  may  be  employed  to  elaborate 
upon  data  derived  from  the  aggregate  perspective.  For 
instance, Gilbert and Karahalios used interviews to further 
explore  metrics  like  tie  strength  [13].  In  this  comparison, 
often the actor’s perspective (i.e., accounts from the user) is 
subordinated  to  the  authority  of  data  collected  from  the 
aggregate  perspective.  Thus,  for  instance,  one  might 
contrast  user  ‘folk  theories’  about  social  media  use  with 
traces of behaviour collected online (e.g., [3, 55]). 
ETHNOMETHODOLOGY 
ANALYSIS 
Here, and in the rest of the paper, we attempt to outline a 
distinctive perspective on studying social media, one that is 
oriented by ethnomethodological and conversation analytic 
studies of technology use. This differs in various ways from 
the two perspectives described above; while it shares some 
apparent  similarities  with  an  actor-focussed  perspective, 
EMCA  is  concerned  with  examining  how  interactional 
phenomena are made orderly—and therefore meaningful to 
users—in and through their moment-by-moment activities, 
as opposed to the post-hoc descriptions from users of those 
activities.  In 
this  way  EMCA  often  makes  use  of 
ethnographic  techniques  and  in-the-moment  recordings 
rather than relying on recollection data (which itself would 
be  analysed  as  a  different  phenomena—i.e.,  the  work  of 
doing  ‘a  recollection’).  We  feel  that  this  perspective  and 
emphasis  on  moment-by-moment,  unfolding,  real-time 
human action—although rarely employed for understanding 
social  media—could  be  generative  for  enriching  social 
media research. 
Ethnomethodology  is  a  familiar  social  research  approach 
within  CSCW.  It  seeks  to  explicate  the  orderly  ways  in 
which social interaction is brought off in everyday life [12], 
and  as  such  it  is  not  concerned  with  the  development  of 
causal  explanations  of  human  action  (e.g.,  theory)  but 
rather  in  articulating  the  methods  that  are  used  by 
individuals to organising their everyday affairs in the world. 
Ethnomethodology  is  concerned  with  the  reflexivity  of 
these methods: i.e., how actions produced by members are 
done  so  in  ways  that  make  the  actions  recognisable  for 
other  members  of  the  situation.  Emerging  from  the 
ethnomethodological orientation, conversation analysis [45] 
focuses  strongly  on  language-in-action,  and  how  the 
orderliness  of  talk  may  be  investigated  empirically  by 
unpacking  the  ‘machinery’  of  turn  taking,  the  selection  of 
speakers,  the  ‘repair’  of  utterances  in  talk  and  so  on 
(concepts  we  will  return  to  later).  While  the  precise 
relationship  between  ethnomethodology  and  conversation 
analysis  is  complex  [32],  we  refer  to  this  perspective  as 
‘EMCA’  in  a  broad  sense.  In  various  foundational  studies 
of  CSCW, 
that 
pioneered understandings of technology and work practice; 
writing  in  1994,  Shapiro  argued  that  EMCA  studies  had 
“dominated in CSCW at least since Suchman [i.e., 1987]” 
[52]. This EMCA-oriented work required close attention to 

it  was  often  EMCA-informed  work 

 

1054

a 

phenomenological 

approach 

that 

offers 

the  details  of  work  practice,  details  that  had  been  mostly 
absent  from  the  conception  of  ‘work’  in  previous  office 
information systems research. As Barley and Kunda put it, 
this focus is on the “moment-by-moment flow of activity” 
and  “the  situated  integration  of  tools,  documents,  action, 
and  interaction”  [2]. Importantly,  researchers  looked  not 
just at outcomes or motivations but how things were done 
in real time, in-the-moment [19]. Yet, although the tradition 
of EMCA-oriented studies in CSCW is very much ‘alive’, 
there has been an absence of that tradition in providing new 
perspectives on social media systems specifically. 
EMCA 
to 
understanding social media through its central concern for 
examining  human  experiences  of  everyday 
life  (the 
‘lifeworld’)  as  a  practical  matter  [31].  From  an  EMCA 
orientation,  the  use  of  social  media  is  fundamentally  and 
inextricably  embedded  in  the  continuous  temporal  flow 
everyday  life.  Hence  to  study  social  media,  we  examine 
how  this  embeddedness  is  experienced  and  accomplished 
by  its  users.  This  means  paying  more  attention  to  how 
social  media  is  part  and  parcel  of  other  locally  managed 
activities.  For  EMCA,  the  activities  of  everyday  life  are 
structured  in  time—some  things  routinely  happen  before 
others. Fundamentally there is a ‘sequentiality’ to activity, 
something that has been vital for developing understanding 
of  the  orderly  nature  of  talk  [45]  and  bodily  interaction 
[16]. This is a core way in which our lived experiences—
i.e., the temporal flow of experience that is encountered by 
humans  as  social  beings  in  the  world—are  made  orderly 
and  thus  comprehensible,  and  comprehensible  in  a  shared 
way, between members of society.  
Sequentiality  has  been  pursued  strongly  by  foundational 
texts 
the 
organisation  of  turn-taking  in  talk  [46].  Sequentiality  has 
non-trivial 
the 
organisation  of  utterances 
in  conversation  may  be 
considered  a  sequence  in  a  “strong  fashion”  in  that 
“conditional  relevance”  [47]  holds  between  elements  of 
sequences  of  talk  (i.e.,  they  are  not  just  mere  subsequent 
temporal occurrences) [48]. Hence, utterances in everyday 
exchanges  between  conversationalists  are  constructed  by 
them  in  various  ways  that  enable  other  participants  to 
discover when it is ‘their turn’ and what ‘kind’ of turn that 
might  be  (e.g.,  whether  it  is  sequentially  relevant  and 
adequate for a co-conversationalist to utter “uh huh” in their 
turn). The preservation of sequentiality has also been a key 
intellectual resource in CSCW research (e.g., see [39]). Past 
CSCW system design has taken account of this, e.g., within 
online  chat  environments  (e.g.,  [54,  58]).  We  believe  that 
revisiting this existing appreciation in CSCW for the role of 
sequentiality in ordering online communication could shed 
new light on social media use. Further, we point to recent 
conversation analytic studies of social media chat—notably 
published  outside  CSCW  research—that  have  uncovered 
how “participants in both online and spoken interaction are 
oriented  to  the  same  basic  contingencies  of  maintaining 

implications;  Schegloff  argues 

in  EMCA,  such  as  work 

that  explicates 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

audio 

from 

the 

technique  enabled  us 

sequentially  organized 

intersubjectivity  and  building 
courses of action” [35] (also see [10]).  
METHODOLOGY AND CORPUS 
In  order  to  investigate  how  an  EMCA  approach  might  be 
taken for studying social media, we repurposed an existing 
data  set  of  captured  mobile  device  use.  The  data  offered 
instances of social media use, and let us examine how that 
use was embedded in the details of users’ everyday lives, as 
well as how it was sequentially organised. Here we describe 
the origins of the approach, the data set itself, and how the 
data was collected. It is important to note at this point that 
we  are  not  using  this  data  set  to  present  the  results  of  a 
study;  instead  we  are  using  the  vignettes  drawn  from  the 
data  set  as  generative  examples  to  elaborate  a  set  of  key 
topics  for  EMCA  approaches  to  studying  social  media.  It 
should also not be implied that this data or the approach to 
collecting  it  is  somehow  necessary  to  EMCA-oriented 
research (e.g., see [10]). Instead we see such data merely as 
an  “aid  to  the  sluggish  imagination”  (Garfinkel,  quoting 
Herbert Spiegelberg) [12]—one that just so happens to help 
us observe more clearly the unfolding, moment-by-moment 
sequentiality of interaction with social media.  
Recordings 
Broadly  speaking,  the  data  set  consists  of  recordings  of 
interactions  with  smartphones,  combined  with 
screen 
simultaneously-recorded 
device’s 
to  capture 
microphone.  This 
something of the interaction occurring around instances of 
social  media  use  with  the  mobile  device.  The  captured 
audiovisual  data  was  then  combined  with  interviews 
conducted  before  and  after  the  collection  period,  so  as  to 
build  a  diverse  corpus  of  data  on  social  media  use  as  it 
happens.  Fifteen  social  media  users  were  originally 
recruited  to  trial  this  approach.  Screen  recording  software 
was  installed  on  their  iPhones,  which—if  not  disabled  by 
the participant—captured touch interactions and the display 
contents when their phone was in use. Each captured set of 
data was subsequently uploaded to our servers each night. 
A  website  was  provided  for  users  to  go  through  each  clip 
and highlight clips that they wanted to delete or share with 
us, but also to add a diary description for each clip of what 
they were doing. The recording software itself could also be 
stopped by users or they could choose to delete a recording 
from  the  last  thirty  minutes.  Around  half  the  clips  in  our 
data corpus have descriptions entered by users. More details 
of the original dataset are available in prior papers [34]. The 
data  corpus  consisted  of  3-13  days  of  phone  use  per 
participant,  with  a  median  of  7  days  per  user.  This 
translated  into  2,684  video  clips  of  use  (over  176  video 
hours). On average 16.3% of application launches were of 
social media apps, with Facebook at 7.6%, Instagram 5.8% 
and Pinterest at 1.3%, and Twitter at 1.10%. Around 15% 
of the videos contained some social media application use. 
EMBEDDEDNESS OF SOCIAL MEDIA 
As we outlined above, social media use does not take place 
outside or separately from other activities. It happens in a 

way  that  is  interwoven  and  embedded  within  these  other 
activities  in  real  time.  We  note  that  while  social  media 
research  has  indeed  explored  the  role  it  plays  in  everyday 
life  in  some  depth  (e.g.,  [28]  and  the  work  of  Boyd  more 
broadly  [4]),  we  distinguish  our  conceptualisation  of 
‘embeddedness’  in  terms  of  the  primacy  that  EMCA 
perspectives  give  to  the  real  time,  continually  unfolding 
aspects of human action. 
Our  data  corpus  of  recordings,  coupled  with  concurrent 
capture of talk, gives us unusually detailed access to social 
media use as it unfolds moment-by-moment. It lets us see 
(in  a  limited  way)  something  of  the  first-hand  perspective 
of  the  user  and  the  corresponding  resources  that  are 
available and mobilised so as to help them make sense of, 
use,  and  communicate  through  it.  It  also  moves  us  away 
from  a  reliance  upon  post-hoc  accounts  and  recollections 
that we argued tended to be leveraged by the actor-focussed 
perspective.  We  can  ask  questions  like:  How  does  social 
media start being used, stop being used? When it is being 
used,  and  how  is  that  usage  ordered  and  integrated  into 
other,  parallel  activities  at  the  time?  Example  1  is  a  short 
clip of two (physically co-located) Facebook users (A an B) 
engaging  in  a  brief  conversation  about  a  Facebook  post 
from B. As we join them, A, having seen B’s status update 
(“Whee!”), reformulates it as a question for B. 

A: we?  
B: °what’s that↑°  
   ((B responds from the 
   other side of the room,  
   where they can be heard  
   typing on a keyboard))
A: we:e:e↑  
   ((A repeats the  
   question about B’s  
   status update))  
B: we wha:at?  
A: you said WE 
B: oh (.) Whee↑eee 
A: oh my gawd Jo- !  
   ((muffled groans as  
   participant A ‘gets’ the  
   joke)) 
   ((A opens a Facebook  
   message from his aunt))   
   (12.0)  
A: Aunt Jolene wants us to  
   move to Bakersfield 

Example 1: Social media as a resource for talk. The extracts 
make use of Jefferson notation [25] to show some of talk’s 
features such as: [overlapping talk], (pauses), le::ngthened 

sounds. 

Participant A initially does not seem to understand the joke 
(or, more correctly, participant A produces “we?” which is 
then  followed  with  “what’s  that?”).  When  the  “Whee!”  is 
spoken  aloud  with  an  elongation  of  the  “e”,  A  gives  an 
amused  response.  This  is  perhaps  a  rather  uneventful  clip 
but it is revealing of a number of points. 
Firstly, it is worth remarking that an ordinary conversation 
takes  place  using,  and  around,  social  media.  This  is 
recognisably  a  conversation,  and  one  in  which  (at  least  in 
this  case)  social  media  does  not  distract  or  disturb  the 

 

 

1055

in 

the  environment)  provide 

conversation  as  it  unfolds.  In  fact,  the  short  sequence  of 
conversation is occasioned by the Facebook status update. 
By  ‘occasioned’  we  mean  that  social  media  makes  it 
possible to have this conversation since it provides the topic 
of  the  short  exchange.  We  are  reminded  here  of  Sacks’s 
comments on the ways in which ‘local resources’ (meaning 
physical  objects 
topical 
resources for conversation [45 vol. ii p. 92]. What we find 
here is talk sparked off by something that, once it is found, 
is common to the conversationalists. Indeed, we were struck 
by  how  much  co-present  social  media  consumption 
appeared in the data, with social media offering an array of 
topical  resources  to  be  introduced  and  discussed.  The 
device  then  acts  as  something  that  can  rather  naturally  be 
brought into conversation or discarded.  
Secondly,  an  important  examinable  aspect  of  B’s  status 
update  comes  from  how  it  is  read  aloud  and  discussed  in 
conversation.  This  is  not  something  that  would  have  been 
recorded  on  Facebook  itself,  and  might  easily  have  been 
missed  in  recollection.  Since  the  moment-by-moment 
nature  of  video  gives  us  some  access  to  real  time 
consumption of social media, it lets us focus our attention 
on the reading out of the status update. While we only have 
limited access to this, it is enough to exhibit how Facebook 
and  its  ‘consumption’  are  not  separate—and  thus  how 
Facebook  might  supply  a  conversation  topic.  Indeed, 
following  the  status  update,  a  Facebook  message  is  then 
used  to  supply  the  next  conversation  topic  concerning 
“Aunt Jolene”. This leads us to another point. Often social 
media  has  been  judged  as  a  distraction  for  social  life  (as 
found  both  popular  and  academic  accounts  of  interactive 
technology  use  e.g.,  [57]).  Yet,  when  we  look  at  its  use 
embedded in everyday life, it appears instead as expansive; 
that  is,  it  is  generative  in  occasioning  new  face  to  face 
social  interactions  around  the  social  media.  Collaborative 
search  around  phones  also  exhibits 
this  expansive 
behaviour—where  phone  activity  can  also  come  to  be 
collaboratively  arranged,  and  so  the  activity  of  reading 
social  media  becomes  something  achieved  jointly,  with 
‘showings’  of  the  results  acting  to  guide  or  structure  the 
conversation [5, 43]. 
Temporal projection 
While the previous example exhibited how social media use 
itself  can  occasion  interaction  with  others,  we  can  also 
explore  how  the  use  of  social  media  may  be  arranged  in 
ways  that  embed  this  use  within  the  temporal  flow  of 
ongoing interaction. In our next example, a Facebook user 
(C) is browsing videos while he and a group of friends (A 
and  B)  are  listening  to  music after  dinner (Example  2).  C 
participates  in  the  conversation,  but  is  simultaneously 
browsing  through  videos  from  his  Facebook  feed.  As  he 
waits  for  Facebook  to  load  more  posts,  he  jumps  into 
conversation.  Just  after  C  taps  the  ‘more  posts’  button  in 
Example 2, he enters into the conversation to make a point 
about science fiction and fantasy novels.  

 

1056

SESSION: SOCIAL NETWORK METHODS

What  we  see  here  is  how  C  times  his  interaction  with 
Facebook in concert with the ongoing conversation, pausing 
in his use during moments where ‘hearable’ opportunities in 
talk  arise  for  relevant  ways  to  engage  in  the  conversation 
(such  as  C’s  overlapped  response  to  B’s  question  “don’t 
they just have sci-fi and fantasy books”—the start of which 
is  marked  by  an  arrow  in  Example  2).  Interaction  with 
Facebook  here  is  interwoven  with  the  projected  turns-at-
talk. Hence, C starts to produce the next turn (breathing in 
with  “.hhhh”)  at  the  end  of  B’s  turn  (i.e.,  oriented  to  a 
transition relevance place) just as Facebook is loading more 
content. C also pauses in scrolling through the content until 
some way into the next speaker’s (A) sentence. 

A: and I never read them but when  
   I went back to buy it, it  
   wasn’t there, and now I’m  
   really upset
B: heh [heh] 
A:     [hhh] (1.7) n:: because  
   [(        )]
B: [yeah but I]
A: and its opened up a whole li-   
   [just ] 
B: [don’t] they just have like  
   sci-fi and ((C clicks the “See  
   More” button)) °fantasy books° 
A: but [(.)  ] 
A
C:     [.hhhh] 
   ((C’s Facebook content loads)) 
A: [thats the thing is that ] 
C: [there no there          ]  
   theres uu-= 
A: =I [bought (   )] 
C:    [the idea of ] what sci-fi  
   [and fantasy books is really  ] 
A: [No (.) hang on we bought each] other books the 
   other week and I bought you a book that has been  
   on the top (.) of the Sunday Times in:: London  
   (0.6) it’s been the top bestseller (0.5) for ((C  
   starts to scroll page)) I dunno (.) how many  
   months now 

C➔

Example 2: Temporal projection 

 

In  other  recordings  from  this  session,  C  also  stops  videos 
when he gets engaged in more focused conversation with a 
friend,  as  well  as  pausing  his  scrolling  at  different  points 
depending  on 
the  conversation.  Licoppe  and  Figeac 
describe this as “temporal projection”: the decision of what 
to  do  with  the  device  relies  to  an  extent  on  how  long  the 
‘gap’ that the user has to fill can reasonably expected to be 
[30].  At  the  end  of  our  example  C  starts  a  conversational 
turn (“the idea of...”, that is cut short by A) while their new 
content is loading, and then pauses before continuing with 
looking at more videos. 
Temporal projection is not only a matter attended to during 
conversations.  Another  clear  example  of  this  is  when 
waiting,  during  which  attending  to  a  mobile  device  may 
both serve as a way of filling time, but also appear properly 
engaged  in  a  “minimal  main  involvement”  (in  Goffman’s 
terminology)  that  can  be  “immediately  discarded  when 
one’s turn or destination arrives” [14 p. 52]. In an example 
elsewhere in our data, a participant is meeting a friend at a 
local  square.  Location  data  indicates  that  the  participant 
arrives  in  the  square,  whereupon  they  check  Facebook, 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA
 

browsing through item after item for a few minutes. In one 
view we could gloss these actions as ‘killing time’. Yet this 
description ignores how the sequential order of the actions 
furnishes them with their meaning. The purpose here is not 
just to deal with the ‘boredom of waiting’, but rather about 
the participant taking advantage of a pause that has opened 
up  through  their  actions.  This  is  similar  to  how  a 
conversationalist  may  take  advantage  of  the  projected  end 
of an utterance being completed by a speaker. 
In summary, these examples start to offer a way of looking 
at the embeddedness of social media in the lived experience 
of its users, as a research topic. We are not claiming we are 
the  first  to  examine  this,  but  rather  underscoring  that  for 
EMCA,  everyday  life  becomes  a  natural  first  topic  of 
enquiry,  in  that  it  forces  our  attention  on  the  temporally 
unfolding  nature  of  social  media  use  as  it  comes  to  be 
embedded  in  the  everyday  lives  of  its  users.  We  have  set 
this  as  a  different  perspective  to  looking  at  aggregate 
corpora  of  social  media  data,  or  actor-focused  recollected 
accounts from users, valuable though both are. As we move 
onto our next section we can begin to examine the analytic 
implications  of  EMCA’s  prioritisation  of  embeddedness, 
particularly  in  understanding  how  social  media  use  is 
structured sequentially in everyday life. 
THE SEQUENTIALITY OF SOCIAL MEDIA  
It  is  not  only  that  the  details  of  lived  experience  that  are 
examinable for EMCA. One of its core findings is that this 
lived experience is orderly and that order can be researched 
and documented. One of the key aspects of that order is—as 
we  have  introduced  earlier—sequentiality.  As  competent 
members of society, we can use the assumptions of order to 
recognise and understand what is going on to the point of 
even  reprimanding  those  involved  when  sequentiality 
breaks  down.  EMCA  has  documented  how  sequences  are 
used  to  order  conversation  so  that  we  can  understand  the 
structure  in  both  our  own  talk  and  that  of  our  co-
conversationalists. 
“sequential 
organization” as “any kind of organization which concerns 
the  relative  positioning  of  utterances  or  actions  [...]  turn-
taking  is  a  type  of  sequential  organization  because  it 
concerns the relative ordering of speakers” [51]. Thus, we 
sought to find sequential organisation in online social media 
comments and interactions. This is not a hidden order, but 
an  order  that  is  findable  for  those  reading  and  creating 
social media content in common. 
Critically, sequentiality is not identical to temporal order (in 
the  sense  that  one  thing  follows  another—indeed,  much 
research  on  social  media  use  employs  the  capture  of 
timestamp  data),  but  rather  is  a  method  employed  by 
members of society so as to make sense of the experience of 
temporality.  This  means  that  while  sequentially-linked 

Schegloff 

defines 

in  ‘lockstep’  with 

events  may  occur 
the  relentless 
phenomenon  of  temporality,  as  we  shall  see,  there  is  no 
‘requirement’ that they do so. One of the simplest instances 
of  sequentiality  in  conversation  is  an  adjacency  pair—for 
example,  a  question  and  an  answer.  These  are  a  ‘pair’  in 
that  they  act  together  as  paired:  a  question  puts  a  certain 
prospective  compulsion  on  recipients  to  answer  in  some 
way  and  thus  complete  the  pair.  Questions  may  not  be 
followed by an answer, of course, but in this case they are 
seen as unanswered because of the expectation for a ‘pair’. 
Sequentiality also broadly extends to other actions such as 
walking through a revolving door [61] or playing hopscotch 
[17]. Sequentiality is has also been documented in various 
online  interactions—text  messages  [23]  and  online  chat 
exchanges [39, 22, 54].  
How  might  sequentiality  in  conversation  help  us  in 
understanding  social  media?  After  all,  social  media  is  a 
varied  and  distinct  medium.  Yet  research  into  online  chat 
[10,  35,  39],  search  engine  use  [37],  and  text  messaging 
[23] is suggestive of similarities in sequential organisation 
despite their very different material forms. Although social 
media use is clearly different to talk, during its developing 
use, users of social media draw upon their existing methods 
of  interaction.   This  is  somewhat  similar  to  the  way 
conversational  practices  around  phone  calls  draw  (and 
innovate)  upon  methods  employed  in  ordinary  co-present 
talk,  or  how  use  of  email  draws  upon  the  practices  and 
conventions of letters (although also changed them, such as 
in  the  indentation  of  replies,  the  addition  of  complex 
signatures, and so on). In this section we will examine four 
sequential  organisational  forms  that  we  suggest  are  to  be 
found in social media: adjacency pairs, sequential context, 
turn allocation / speaker selection, and repair. 
Adjacency pairs 
As  we  have  mentioned  above,  perhaps  one  of  the  most 
prevalent sequential organisational forms in talk is the pair. 
Besides questions, there are many other adjacency pairs to 
be found in everyday conversation: greetings, summons and 
invitations  take  similar  forms.  Questions  appear  in  social 
media frequently; they have been extensively examined as a 
way  for  social  media  users  to  search  for  information  and 
maintain network tie relations [18]. Yet, questions on social 
media are not necessarily about finding out information but 
also as an action, a way of ‘doing things’. So, rather than 
focusing on questions as information search, we can instead 
look at their sequential form to see how they are organised 
as actions in their adjacency pairings, and what gets done in 
the pairing. In our next example, a user posts a question on 
Facebook  concerning  a  visit  to  the  movies  (Example  3). 
Through the comments he receives replies to the message, 
arranging  a  trip  to  the  cinema  that  evening  (note  that  this 
has been translated from Swedish). 

 

1057

SESSION: SOCIAL NETWORK METHODS

intrinsic  to  what  is  actually  said  and  thus  is  vital  for 
understanding what is being done and communicated.  
Sequential context 
Staying with Example 3, we can see that David’s replies do 
not directly refer to the previous discussion with Philip. Yet 
they do set a sequential context for the conversation, and if 
they  were  switched  around 
this  would  cause  some 
confusion.  David,  for  example,  assumes  that  they  will  be 
going to see the film in 3D (and mentions that they already 
have  glasses).  Here,  the  prior  turns  work  to  set  the 
sequential  context  for  the  subsequent  discussion:  prior 
turns  give  context.  As  Manyard  puts  it  “An  utterance’s 
context  is  the  organized  sequence  of  turns  in  which  it 
appears”  [33  p.  64].  “Thinking  of  20:50”  on  its  own  is 
ambiguous, but it collects its context from prior turns that 
are  mutually  available  to  reader  and  writer.  “20:50”  is 
possibly a time, and a time that is visibly relevant as a start 
time for the movie “Pacific Rim”, playing today.  
This  might  seem  an  obscure  point  were  it  not  for  the  fact 
that sequentiality is something that can break down during 
online  conversations.  For  instance,  one  of  our  participants 
related a story about the deletion of a spam comment on a 
photo posted on Instagram. Its deletion broke sequentiality, 
and her ‘put down’ (which referred to the spam) was taken 
to  be referring  to  the  original  photo,  resulting  in  another 
user  ‘calling  her  out’  and 
the  subsequent  need  for 
explanation.  Indeed,  sequentiality  and  its  relationship  to 
to  be  more  broadly 
maintaining  context 
problematic 
in  spoken 
conversation,  because  systems  can  disrupt  or  change 
sequences in ways that would be impossible in talk.  
So,  in  social  media  systems  a  simple  ‘oldest  first’  rule  is 
most  commonly  used  to  order  contributions.  This  form 
preserves  sequentiality  in  most  cases  (although  with  some 
issues around simultaneous composition—duplicate posts). 
Yet  it  offers  little  priority  to  highlight  more  interesting 
contributions. It is for this reason that high traffic sites such 
as Slashdot and Reddit have pioneered user voting systems 
to  establish  this  sense  of  priority.  These  sites  rely  upon 
‘replies’  being  hierarchically  separated,  so 
two 
comments  to  the  same  prior  turn  are  separate  from  each 
other and may be positioned in different ways. This means 
that  while  sequentiality  can  be  preserved  through  replies, 
sequentiality  between  multiple  comments  is  sacrificed  (at 
this point we note that Facebook has recently implemented 
elements  of  threading  via  direct  replies  to  comments  on  a 
shared  post).  Although  such  sites  rearrange  contributions, 
meaning  that  regular  contributors  quickly  learn  how  to 
make use of the different sequences generated, this is not to 
say  that  confusion  is  entirely  avoided.  This  said—and 
leaving aside for a moment attempts to design systems that 
address this (e.g., Smith et al. [54], and Viegas and Donath 
[58])—most  analytic  work  around  threaded  conversation 
has  ignored  the  role  of  sequentiality  and  focused  on 
aggregate 
items.  For 

relationships  between 

in  social  media 

turns  out 

threaded 

than 

it 

is 

that 

Anyone want to see 
Pacific Rim today? 

Shall we go David? 
Thinking of 20:50 

Can you book, and I 
give you cash there! Or 
reserving tickets might 
work! 

We have 3D glasses! So 
don’t book them Marcus 

Ok, I will book or buy 
tickets depending on 
what works. 20:50 at 
Biopalatset then 

Marcus: Anyone want to see Pacific Rim today? 
Philip: Possibly, if I can make the time and if it is not  
        in 3D :-) 
Marcus: The only 2D showing is 17:05
Philip: Little tight possibly. Another time :) 
David:  Have you booked tickets? 
Marcus: I haven’t booked 
Marcus: Shall we go David? Thinking of 20:50 
David:  Why not? Can you book and I give you cash there!  
        Or reserving tickets might work! 
David:  We have 3d glasses, so don’t book them for us. 
Marcus: Ok, I will book or buy tickets depending on what  
        works. 20:50 at Bioplatset then 

 Example 3: Anyone want to see Pacific Rim today? 

Clearly  the  initial  question  acts  as  an  invitation,  i.e.,  who 
would  want  to  go  to  see  the  movie?  The  two  sets  of 
responses  are  treated  as  two  second  pair-parts  to  the  first 
question: Philip’s “Possibly, if I can make the time and if it 
is  not  in  3D”  and  David’s  “Have  you  booked  tickets?”. 
Philip’s  conditional  acceptance 
is  followed  by  some 
information about the time of the showing, which results in 
a decline to the initial invitation. As a dispreferred response 
[40], Philip offers a pre-explanation for the decline (“Little 
tight  possibly”),  and  declines  in  the  form  of  an  invitation 
for  “another  time”.  However,  the  reply  from  David  takes 
the form of another question “Have you booked tickets?”, 
which itself produced a further question “I haven’t booked. 
Should  we  go  David?  Thinking  of  20:50”,  which  itself 
generates  “Why  not?”  and  is  then  followed  with  a  brief 
exchange about how to book and yet another question about 
3D glasses. This short sequence has many pairs of questions 
and answers, and indeed layers of them. This means there 
are other questions such as “Have you booked tickets?” or 
“Can you book?” that form ‘insertion sequences’, where a 
question  is  inserted  before  the  answer  to  an  original 
question is given [48].  
Yet  these  questions  are  perhaps  best  seen  not  as  ways  of 
searching  for  information.  Considered  instead  as  actions, 
they  are  about  arranging  a  cinema  visit,  getting  responses 
from those who want to go and sorting out which format to 
go and see and when. The meaningfulness of this exchange 
is  visible  because  of  its  sequential  organisation.  Hence, 
David’s  response  “Why  not?”  is  a  response  to  going  at 
20:50 (not Marcus’s initial offer of 17:05 to Philip), not a 
search  for  reasons  not  to  go.  David’s  response  arrives 
sequentially  after.  The  sequential  order  of  the  turn  is 

 

1058

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA
 

selects  next” 

form,  various 

instance,  Weninger  et  al.  look  at  the  topical  agreement  in 
comment  threads,  finding  that  the  aggregate  comments  in 
discussion threads are topically similar to one another [62]. 
What  is  missing  here  is  analysis  of  attempts  to  preserve 
sequence  itself  and  whether—and  how—users  manage  the 
sequential presentation. 
Turn allocation and speaker selection 
One of the most basic contributions of EMCA has been in 
detailing  how  conversationalists  practically  manage  the 
basic problem of not talking at the same time: whose turn it 
is to speak and when. EMCA argues that this ‘problem’ is 
managed  in  and  through  utterances  themselves.  In  their 
classic foundational paper for conversation analysis, Sacks 
et al. point to two major genres of speaker selection for the 
allocation of turns: “current speaker selects next” and “self-
selection”  [46].  For  dyadic  and  multiparty  conversations, 
turn  allocation  methods  are  distributed  into  these  two 
forms.  Self-selection  occurs  simply  when  a  speaker  takes 
the next turn in a conversation having not been selected in 
some way (see Example 4, bottom left, where a user self-
selects  with  “Hey  long  time  no  see!”).  For  the  “current 
speaker 
turn-allocation 
techniques may be employed, such as the use of first pair-
parts  (such  as  a  question,  as  discussed  above)  or  pre-  or 
post-positioned names [27]—such as “Mary, how are you?” 
or “How are you, Mary?”. Methods of turn allocation also 
“set  constraints”  on  what  can  be  done  by  a  subsequent 
speaker [46]. 
Given the foundational nature of turn allocation methods in 
talk,  it  is  perhaps  no  surprise  that  the  question  of  ‘whose 
turn’  is  managed  in  social  media  environments  in  similar 
ways.  One  first,  trivial  observation  here  is  that  status 
updates  or  tweets  are  themselves  often  a  case  of  speaker 
self-selection.  But  beyond 
this  how  are  subsequent 
‘responses’  to  these  produced?  One  way  to  do  this  is 
through  ‘@-formulations’  of  other  users’  names.  Social 
media systems have become relatively standardised on this 
@-formulation,  either  as  matter  of  explicit  syntactic  form 
(as  in  ‘@user’)  or  as  a  result  of  merely  typing  another 
user’s  name  (e.g.,  Facebook).  Doing  @-formulations 
typically results in a notification or alert to a given user that 
their name was ‘mentioned’. This formulation—along with 
the “spatial relations” of the page [10]—provides resources 
for users to manage turn allocation. In many ways this @-
formulation mirrors that of pre- and post-positioned naming 
associated  with  first  pair-parts  in  talk,  yet  has  subtle 
differences. For instance, Lerner argues that post-positioned 
names  (e.g.,  “How  are  you,  Mary?”)  can  be  a  “device  to 
demonstrate a particular stance toward or relationship with 
a recipient” such as to “underscore personal concern for a 
problem”  [27],  whereas  it  is  not  clear  that  the  @-
formulation  does  similar  work  on  social  media.  However, 
use  of  the  @-formulation  does  nevertheless  provide  for  a 
range  of  turn  allocation  techniques.  Consider  the  three 
Instagram  screenshots  shown  in  Example  4.  At  the  top  of 
the Example, the user posting a photo (“che”) mentions two 

 

1059

other users, one of whom (“ren”) subsequently posts “Haha 
I  love  it”.  While  this  may  look  like  the  @-formulation  is 
acting as the first pair-part of a summons-answer, the user 
responding orients to the photo itself (not fully shown). 
In the bottom left of Example 4, we see an instance of the 
@-formulation being used in a pre-positioned way before a 
second  pair-part,  i.e.,  “@riri  hahah”  in  response  to  riri’s 
“Hey  long  time  no  see!”  which  its  itself  a  sequentially 
relevant  response  to  the  photo  posting.  Finally  on  the 
bottom  right  of  Example  4,  the  @-formulation  is  post-
positioned as part of a question posed by jimi, “OMG who 
is  this  @classy”  directed  at  the  user  posting  the  original 
photo—the user “classy” then disambiguates an answer to 
the  two  questions  posted  (i.e.,  “OMG  who  is  this”  and 
“Why  don’t  I  know  this  girl?”)  by  also  using  the  @-
formulation in spite of the sequential implication of posting 
directly  beneath—i.e.,  classy’s  use  of  @tickn  displays  an 
orientation to the potential for sequential breakdowns as we 
described earlier. 
Our point here is that @-formulations can be deployed as a 
way  of  managing  the  fact  that  ‘anyone’  is  potentially  “in 
play” [47] on social media, while at the same time inviting 
a response. In this sense it is not really about constructing 
‘presence’ as one might assume. This is likely due to social 
media  system  design 
favouring  multiparty 
communication (e.g., status updates to friends on Facebook, 
tweets  to  followers  on  Twitter,  etc.,  although  note  our 
earlier  caveat  on  Facebook’s  direct  reply  features). 
Management  of  this  environment  can  be  achieved  by 
‘listing’ multiple others, as we see Example 4 (top). 

routinely 

Example 4: @-formulations as speaker selection 

 

This  does  various  bits  of  work  for  the  user:  it  invites  a 
response,  frames  the  sense  of  subsequent  posts,  and  also 
constrains what may actions be done in subsequent posts by 
selected  speakers  (e.g.,  ‘appreciation’).  We  also  note  here 
that  the  @-formulation  can  of  course  also  be  used  to 
preserve  sequentiality  through  speaker  selection,  as  we 
pointed  to  in  Example  4  (bottom  right),  where  the  user 
deploys it for their answer but in a way that indicates it is 
part of a sequence with a particular user.  
Repair 
The fourth sequential feature that we will discuss is repair. 
Repair in conversation is a pervasive feature of talk in that 
participants  will  fix  previous  utterances  that  are  unclear, 
ambiguous or wrong in some locally-determined way. Since 
in  talk  we  cannot  go  back  in  time  and  ‘edit’  what  has 
previously  been  said,  subsequent  turns  are  often  used  by 
speakers—but  also  by  co-conversationalists—to  correct 
what is said. A simple example can illustrate from [50]: 

A: Hey the first time they stopped me from sellin
   cigarettes was this morning. 
   (1.0) 
B: From selling cigarettes? 
A: From buying cigarettes. 
  
Here  the  speaker  confuses  buying  and  selling  cigarettes. 
The second speaker than initiates repair by questioning the 
“selling  cigarettes”,  which  then  is  repaired  by  the  original 
speaker.  Repair  types  vary,  but  broadly  can  be  self-  or 
other-repair, each of which may be, in turn, self- or other-
initiated. The example above is an other-initiated self-repair 
in  that  the  speaker  (A)  performs  the  repair,  but  it  is  the 
other (B) who initiates it by producing a question first pair-
part  (“From  selling  cigarettes?”).  But  how  might  methods 
of repair feature in social media use? There has been some 
work  examining  this;  for  instance,  Meredith  and  Stokoe 
analyse  repair  in  Facebook  text  chat  communication, 
focusing on self-initiated repair [35]. Repairs can come in 
the  next  turn  after  a  completed  entry  after,  such  as  in 
Example 5. Here a ‘repair’ comes after the initial comment 
post,  changing  “you  live?”  to  “you  live!”.  This  is  a  self-
initiated self-repair.  

Example 5: You live? 

 

However, we would suggest that repair is less common in 
social media precisely because it is, to an extent, possible to 
go  back  in  time  and  ‘edit’  what  one  has  said.  While 
composing  a  message  an  author  can  go  back  and  correct 
mistakes or typographic errors. An important point to take 
from the EMCA notion of repair is that it is an interactional 

 

1060

SESSION: SOCIAL NETWORK METHODS

and  collaboratively-achieved  phenomenon.  Since  edits  are 
private  and  not  available  to  others,  this  does  not  count  as 
repair  (unless  the  editing  is  shared  locally).  We  can  see  a 
counterpoint  to  this  in  Brown  and  Bell’s  study  of  the 
‘There’ game / chat environment. In that system, text typed 
by  users  is  shared  in-the-moment,  word  by  word  as  it  is 
typed  (in  speech  bubbles  above  an  avatars’  heads)  [6].  In 
that case participants can attempt repair of turns as they are 
produced by other speakers.  
DISCUSSION 
Through  examining  social  media  in  a  way  informed  by 
ethnomethodology  and  conversation  analysis,  we  have 
sought  to  highlight  its  potential  as  a  complementary  and 
generative perspective alongside existing ways of studying 
social media. In this paper we have offered two key ways to 
think about social media. Firstly, we explored the moment-
by-moment use of social media in the life of its users, and 
how  it  is  practically  arranged  and  embedded  in  their 
everyday  activities  and  engagements.  Secondly,  we  have 
described  how  the  concept  of  sequentiality—and  related 
sequential  structures—can  be  used  to  understand  the 
organisation of social media use.  
But  how  might  this  focus  on  lived  experience  be  a 
productive  activity  for  social  media  research?  EMCA 
supports an unrelentingly close focus on the ‘lived reality’
of  social  media  use. If  we  were  to  criticise  the  aggregate 
and  actor-focussed  perspectives  at  all,  then  it  would  be  to 
say that they tend to miss certain phenomena that become 
observable  only  when  we  examine  the  details  of  how 
interactions  on  social  media  systems  are  not  only  made 
orderly  (e.g.,  via  adjacency  pairs,  sequential  context,  turn 
allocation  /  speaker  selection,  and  repair),  but  also  how 
those interactions are themselves embedded in the broader 
orderings  of  everyday 
(e.g.,  how  meaningful 
interactions  around  the  posting  of  “Whee!”  were  not  just 
‘located’ on Facebook). Key to this order is the notion of it 
forming 
those 
involved. This is an order that is always partially assembled 
in  the  perceived  world  as  it  unfolds.  Moreover  this  is  an 
order  that  is  recognisable  and  observably  oriented  to  by 
those involved; one that can be found by looking at social 
media  use  as  it  takes  place.  It  is  an  order  that  is  itself 
discovered  and  produced  by  those  using  this  ‘new’  thing 
(social media technologies). In this sense social media use 
is  a  joint  endeavour  that  involves  creating  new  order 
structures seen in common between users. Hence, it is more 
fitting  to  suggest  that  the  EMCA  approach  is  interaction- 
and  order-focussed  rather  than  actor-focussed.  To  put  this 
another way, since we all need to work together in various 
ways  (such  as  in  talk),  action  is  arranged  so  that  it  is 
understandable  to  our  co-participants,  for  all  practical 
purposes. This means looking at actual action and activity, 
avoiding  a  priori  methods  of  mass  categorisation,  and 
instead  examining  participants’  deployments  of  categories 
over the analyst’s.  

time—moment-by-moment  for 

life 

in  real 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA
 

the  EMCA  perspective  and 

As an approach, EMCA clearly has various limitations for 
the  study  of  social  media  use;  here  we  must  separate 
comments  regarding 
the 
particular approach to data collection we employed. On the 
first topic, we note that EMCA perspectives do not answer 
questions  about  broad  behavioural 
trends  or  address 
network  properties  that  may  be  uncovered  by  aggregate 
perspectives. Equally, it does not directly elicit prospective 
user  needs  for  design  that  may  be  drawn  out  (e.g.,  in 
interviews)  through  actor-focussed  perspectives.  Further, 
the reliance on examining social order closely often results 
in  very  intensive  forms  of  data  collection  that  require 
lengthy  periods  of  analysis  of  complex,  heterogenous  and 
ultimately extremely rich data sets. Finally, and turning to 
the second topic, in our servicing of the EMCA concern for 
preserving sequential context via our use of rich audiovisual 
data,  we  acknowledge  that  the  particular  user-driven  data 
collection  technique  reported  in  this  paper  may  present 
potential  ethical  challenges  regarding  establishing  the 
consent of third parties to the (consenting) participants. 
Our  second  point  for  this  discussion  is  how  the  EMCA 
approach interacts with the design of social media systems. 
Historically,  EMCA’s  role  in  CSCW  has  been  broadly 
productive in terms of design (although we note this has not 
been without tensions [53]). By focussing on the moment-
by-moment use of social media and how it is embedded in 
everyday  life  in  very  practical  ways,  the  perspective  here 
draws  attention  to  particular  design  elements  that  are 
immediately  under  the  control  of  technologists—such  as 
when content is posted and sequentially what is associated 
with  it.  One  extreme  example  of  a  break  down  in 
sequentiality is found in prior studies of IRC [39]. The ‘@’ 
formulation  is  an  attempt  to  remedy  this  by  providing 
resources to retain sequentiality to support the production of 
adjacency pairs in a situation where it might not be possible 
to produce a second pair-part sequentially after its first pair-
part,  as  we  saw  with  photo  posting  on  Instagram  in 
particular. Interestingly, this ‘@’ formulation makes use of 
a very established speaker selection method from talk [27]. 
We  also  note  that  the  design  of  Facebook’s  commenting 
mechanism  has  recently  introduced  greater  support  for 
sequentiality via direct replies to comments (whereas before 
these were temporally organised only). Of course users also 
find  their  own  methods  for  managing  sequentiality  (e.g., 
SMS [23], IRC [39, 22]).  
Here  we  might  return  to  our  example  of  threaded  chat 
systems such as adaptations of IRC-like environments (e.g., 
[54]) or web forums that attempt to support more threaded 
conversations.  Yet  these  systems  tend  to  ‘hide’  chat 
exchanges  away  and  thus  reduce  the  opportunities  created 
by  the  idea  that  ‘anyone’  is  in  play  on  social  media. 
Threading  can  also  inadvertently remove the “single point 
of  focus”  present  in  linear  online  chat  systems  [54]—an 
important  resource  for  interaction.  So,  we  might  wonder 
then  how,  rather  than  subverting  the  use  of  the  ‘@’ 
formulation, we might extend it such as by seeing how we 

 

1061

could use the notification process to communicate different 
forms  of  second  pair  part  (such  as  replied,  asked,  called, 
and so on).  
Building upon this we can also see that particular resources 
for repair are provided, again with impacts on the methods 
used  by  users  to  order  their  interactions  online.  For 
instance,  we  have  seen  how  social  media  reduces  the 
visibility  of  repair  as  it  is  done  in  a  moment-by-moment 
way; instead it is largely private. Alternative designs of chat 
systems  suggest  that  exposing  typing  in  real  time  offers 
users  different  conversational  possibilities, 
such  as 
projecting  the  end  of  a  sentence  (aiding  turn-taking  and 
increasing  the  speed  of  exchanges),  or  enabling  others  to 
complete a turn or repair it for another user (which can be 
used to demonstrate alignment) [6].  
Our  points  here  are  not  offering  a  critique  of  particular 
designs. Instead the EMCA perspective helps us understand 
just how particular and quite subtle design choices can have 
significant impacts upon the very methods with which users 
go  about  making  their  interactions  with  social  media 
orderly  in  the  first  place.  EMCA  lets  us  more  easily  see 
what  is  lost  but  also  what  is  gained  as  these  design 
decisions fit with the actual users’ methods. 
CONCLUSION 
We have sought to articulate an alternative perspective for 
social media research. To this end we have not presented a 
paper involving a singular study, but rather sketched some 
programmatic possibilities around how EMCA approaches 
can enrich existing ways of studying social media use. The 
key contribution of this paper has been to begin scratching 
the  surface  of  what  the  study  of  social  media  use  might 
reveal  when  we  examine  it  in  terms  of  classic  EMCA 
topics:  of 
in 
everyday  life,  and  of  the  methods  of  managing  the 
experience  of  that  everyday  life  through  sequential  order. 
We have indicated some future ways in which studies could 
proceed by considering similarities to some of the methods 
of  everyday  talk:  adjacency  pairs,  sequential  context,  turn 
allocation / speaker selection, and repair.  
these  as  potentially  generative 
Although  we 
investigations for social media research and design, the rich 
body of EMCA work also offers many more that we have 
not  had  space  to  cover,  for  example  how  conversational 
‘closings’ are achieved in talk [49]. We might ask how (and 
whether) similar phenomena are organised for social media. 
There  are  also  many  features  of  social  media  systems 
themselves that have been left untouched here, for example 
Facebook’s news feed could well be examined along these 
lines. We also are hopeful that thinking about sequentiality 
could  let  us  design  different  social  media  systems.  Lastly, 
by  working  through  EMCA  and  social  media  we  may 
reveal aspects of both that have thus far been neglected. 

its  moment-by-moment  embeddedness 

see 

 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This  work  is  supported  by  EPSRC  (EP/K025848/1)  and 
grants  from 
the  Swedish  Governmental  Agency  for 
Innovation  Systems  to  the  Mobile  Life  VinnExcellence 
Centre,  in  partnership  with  Ericsson,  Microsoft,  Nokia, 
IKEA  and  the  City  of  Stockholm.  We  thank  Moira 
McGregor  for  collecting  the  data  examined  in  this  paper. 
We also want to acknowledge anonymous reviewers of this 
paper for their valuable input. 
Data access statement: Due to ethical concerns and consent 
restrictions, supporting research data (collected by Brown) 
cannot be made openly available. 
REFERENCES 
1.  Lars Backstrom and Jon Kleinberg. 2014. Romantic 

partnerships and the dispersion of social ties: a network 
analysis of relationship status on Facebook. In Proc. 
CSCW ‘14. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 831-841. 

2.  Stephen R. Barley and Gideon Kunda. 2001. Bringing 

Work Back In. Organization Science 12, 1 (January 
2001), 76-95. 

3.  Michael S. Bernstein, Eytan Bakshy, Moira Burke, and 
Brian Karrer. 2013. Quantifying the invisible audience 
in social networks. In Proc. CHI ‘13. ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 21-30, 2013. 

4.  Danah Boyd. 2014. It’s Complicated: The Social Lives 

of Networked Teens. Yale University Press. 

5.  Barry Brown, Moira McGregor, and Donald McMillan. 

2015. Searchable Objects: Search in Everyday 
Conversation. In Proc. CSCW ‘15. ACM, New York, 
NY, USA, 508-517.  

6.  Barry Brown and Marek Bell. 2004. CSCW at 

play: ‘There’ as a collaborative virtual environment. 
In Proc. CSCW ‘04. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 350-
359. 

7.  Moira Burke, and Robert Kraut. 2013. Using Facebook 

after losing a job: differential benefits of strong and 
weak ties. In Proc. CSCW ‘13. ACM, New York, NY, 
USA, 1419-1430, 2013. 

8.  Carlos Castillo, Mohammed El-Haddad, Jürgen 

Pfeffer, and Matt Stempeck. 2014. Characterizing the 
life cycle of online news stories using social media 
reactions. In Proc. CSCW ‘14. ACM, New York, NY, 
USA, 211-223, 2014.  

9.  Emily Erikson. 2013. Formalist and Relationalist 
Theory in Social Network Analysis. Sociological 
Theory, 31(3):219-242, Sage 2013. 

10.  Maximiliane Frobenius, and Richard Harper. 2015. 

Tying in comment sections: The production of meaning 
and sense on Facebook. Semiotica. 2015(204): 121-
143.  

11.  Ge Gao, Pamela Hinds, and Chen Zhao. 2013. Closure 

vs. structural holes: how social network information 

 

1062

SESSION: SOCIAL NETWORK METHODS

and culture affect choice of collaborators. In Proc. 
CSCW ‘13. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 5-18, 2013. 
12.  Harold Garfinkel. 1967. Studies in ethnomethodology. 

Polity Press. 

13.  Eric Gilbert and Karrie Karahalios. 2009. Predicting tie 

strength with social media. In Proc. CHI ‘09. ACM, 
New York, NY, USA, 211-220, 2009. 

14.  Erving Goffman. 1966. Behavior in Public Places: 

Notes on the Social Organization of Gatherings. Free 
Press. 

15.  Jennifer Golbeck. 2013. Analyzing the Social Web. 

Elsevier. 

16.  Charles Goodwin. 1986. Gestures as a resource for the 

organization of mutual orientation, Semiotica 62 (1-
2):29-50 (1986). 

17.  Marjorie H. Goodwin. 1998. Games of Stance: Conflict 

and Footing in Hopscotch. In Kids’ Talk: Strategic 
Language Use in Later Childhood, Susan Hoyle and 
Carolyn Temple Adger (eds.), 23-46, New York: 
Oxford University Press. 

18.  Rebecca Gray, Nicole B. Ellison, Jessica Vitak, and 
Cliff Lampe. 2013. Who wants to know? Question-
asking and answering practices among Facebook users. 
In Proc. CSCW ‘13. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
1213-1224. 

19.  Christian Heath, Jon Hindmarsh, and Paul Luff. 2010. 

Video in qualitative research. Sage Publications. 

20.  Libby Hemphill and Andrew J. Roback. 2014. Tweet 
acts: how constituents lobby congress via Twitter. In 
Proc. CSCW ’14. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1200-
1210, 2014. 

21.  Ai-Ju Huang, Hao-Chuan Wang, and Chien Wen Yuan. 
2014. De-virtualizing social events: understanding the 
gap between online and offline participation for event 
invitations. In Proc. CSCW ’14. ACM, New York, NY, 
USA, 436-448, 2014. 

22.  Ian Hutchby. 2000. Conversation and Technology: 

From the Telephone to the Internet (chapter 9). Polity 
Press.  

23.  Ian Hutchby and Vanita Tanna. 2008. Aspects of 
sequential organization in text message exchange. 
Discourse & Communication, May 2008 2:143-164 

24.  Michal Jacovi, Ido Guy, Shiri Kremer-Davidson, Sara 

Porat, and Netta Aizenbud-Reshef. 2014. The 
perception of others: inferring reputation from social 
media in the enterprise. In Proc. CSCW ‘14. ACM, 
New York, NY, USA, 756-766. 

25.  Gail Jefferson. 2004. Glossary of transcript symbols 

with an introduction. In Gene. H Lerner (ed). 
Conversation Analysis: Studies from the First 
Generation, pp. 13–31. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 
2004. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA
 

26.  Cliff Lampe, Rebecca Gray, Andrew T. Fiore, and 

Nicole Ellison. 2014. Help is on the way: patterns of 
responses to resource requests on Facebook. In Proc. 
CSCW ‘14. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3-15, 2014. 

27.  Gene H. Lerner. 2003. Selecting next speaker: The 

context-sensitive operation of a context-free 
organization. Language in Society, 32, 177–201. 

28.  Jessica Lingel, Mor Naaman, and danah m. boyd. 2014. 

City, self, network: transnational migrants and online 
identity work. In Proc. CSCW ‘14, ACM, New York, 
NY, USA, 1502-1510, 2014. 

29.  Eden Litt, Erin Spottswood, Jeremy Birnholtz, Jeff T. 
Hancock, Madeline E. Smith, and Lindsay Reynolds. 
Awkward encounters of an “other” kind: collective 
self-presentation and face threat on Facebook. In Proc. 
CSCW ‘14, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 449-460, 
2014. 

30.  Christian Licoppe and Julien Figeac. 2013. Patterns of 
Gaze Switching in the “Naturally-Occurring” Uses of 
Smartphones in Urban Mobile Settings. Department of 
Economics and Social Sciences, TELECOM 
ParisTech, 2013.  

31.  Michael Lynch. 1997. Scientific Practice and Ordinary 

Action. Cambridge University Press. 

32.  Michael Lynch. 2009. The ethnomethodological 

foundations of conversation analysis. Text - 
Interdisciplinary Journal for the Study of Discourse, 
20(4), pp. 517-532. 

33.  Douglas A. Maynard. 2003. Bad News, Good News: 
Conversational Order in Everyday Talk and Clinical 
Settings. The University of Chicago Press. 

34.  Moira McGregor, Barry Brown, and Donald McMillan. 
2014. 100 days of iPhone use: mobile recording in the 
wild. In CHI ‘14 Extended Abstracts on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ‘14). ACM, 
New York, NY, USA, 2335-2340. 

35.  Joanne Meredith and Elizabeth Stokoe. 2014. Repair: 
Comparing Facebook ‘chat’ with spoken interaction. 
Discourse and Communication, 8(2):181-207, Sage, 
2014. 

36.  Alan Mislove, Massimiliano Marcon, Krishna P. 

Gummadi, Peter Druschel, and Bobby Bhattacharjee. 
2007. Measurement and analysis of online social 
networks. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM SIGCOMM 
conference on Internet measurement (IMC '07). ACM, 
New York, NY, USA, 29-42. 

37.  Robert J. Moore, Elizabeth F. Churchill, and Raj Gopal 

Prasad Kantamneni. 2011. Three sequential positions 
of query repair in interactions with internet search 
engines. In Proc. CSCW ‘11. ACM, New York, NY, 
USA, 415-424. 

38.  Meredith Ringel Morris. 2014. Social networking site 
use by mothers of young children. In Proc. CSCW’14. 

 

1063

39.  Jacki O’Neill and David Martin. 2003. Text Chat in 

Action. in Proceedings of Group ‘03, ACM Press, New 
York, 2003. 

40.  Anita Pomerantz. 1985. Agreeing and disagreeing with 

assessments: some features of preferred/dispreferred 
turn shapes. In J. Maxwell Atkinson (ed). Structures of 
Social Action, pp.  57-101. Cambridge University 
Press, 1985.  

41.  Daniele Quercia, Jonathan Ellis, Licia Capra, and Jon 
Crowcroft. 2012. Tracking gross community happiness 
from tweets. In Proc. CSCW ‘12. ACM, New York, 
NY, USA, 965-968, 2012. 

42.  Daniele Quercia, Renaud Lambiotte, David Stillwell, 

Michal Kosinski, and Jon Crowcroft. 2012. The 
personality of popular Facebook users. In Proc. CSCW 
‘12. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 955-964, 2012. 

43.  John Rooksby, Timothy E. Smith, Alistair Morrison, 

Mattias Rost, and Matthew Chalmers. 
2015. Configuring Attention in the Multiscreen Living 
Room. To appear in Proc. ECSCW ‘15, 19th-23rd 
September 2015, Oslo, Norway. 

44.  John Rooksby and Ian Sommerville. 2012. The 

Management and Use of Social Network Sites in a 
Government Department. Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work, 21(4-5): 397-415. 

45.  Harvey Sacks, Gail Jefferson, and Emanuel Schegloff. 

(Eds.) 1992. Lectures in Conversation. Oxford: 
Blackwell. 

46.  Harvey Sacks, Emanuel A. Schegloff, and Gail 
Jefferson. 1974. A Simplest Systematics for the 
Organization of Turn-Taking for Conversation. 
Language, Vol. 50, No. 4, Part 1 (Dec., 1974) , pp. 
696-735. 

47.  Emanuel A. Schegloff. 1968. Sequencing in 

Conversational Openings. American 
Anthropologist. New Series, Vol. 70, No. 6 (Dec., 
1968) , pp. 1075-1095. 

48.  Emanuel A. Schegloff. 1972. Notes on a conversational 

practice: formulating place. In Sudnow, D. (ed), 
Studies in social interaction, New York, Free Press. 

49.  Emanuel A. Schegloff and Harvey Sacks. 1973. 

Opening Up Closings. Semiotica, VIII, 4 (1973) 289-
327. 

50.  Emanuel A. Schegloff, Harvey Sacks, and Gail 

Jefferson. 1977. The Preference for Self-Correction in 
the Organization of Repair in Conversation. Language, 
53, 361-382.  

51.  Emanuel A. Schegloff. 2007. Sequence Organization in 
Interaction: A primer in conversation analysis, volume 
1. Cambridge University Press. 

SESSION: SOCIAL NETWORK METHODS

 

52.  Dan Shapiro. 1994. The limits of ethnography: 

combining social sciences for CSCW. In Proc. CSCW 
‘94. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 417-428. 

53.  Wes Sharrock and Dave Randall. 2004. Ethnography, 

ethnomethodology and the problem of generalisation in 
design. European Journal of Information Systems 13, 
186–194 (1 September 2004). 

54.  Marc Smith, J. J. Cadiz, and Byron Burkhalter. 2000. 
Conversation trees and threaded chats. In Proc. CSCW 
‘00. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 97-105. 

55.  Tasos Spiliotopoulos and Ian Oakley. 2013. 

Understanding Motivations for Facebook Use: Usage 
Metrics, Network Structure, and Privacy. In Proc. 
CHI’13, Paris, 2013. 

56.  Yuri Takhteyev, Anatoliy Gruzd, and Barry Wellman. 

2012. Geography of Twitter networks. Social 
Networks, 34(1):73-81, January 2012. 

57.  Sherry Turkle. 2011. Alone together. Basic Books. 
58.  Fernanda B. Viégas and Judith S. Donath. 1999. Chat 
circles. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '99). 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 9-16.  

59.  Jessica Vitak and Jinyoung Kim. 2014. “You can't 
block people offline”: examining how Facebook’s 
affordances shape the disclosure process. In Proc. 
CSCW ‘14. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 461-474. 

60.  Duncan J. Watts. 1999. Networks, Dynamics and the 

Small-World Phenomenon. American Journal of 
Sociology, 105(2):493-527, 1999. 

61.  Alexandra Weilenmann, Daniel Normark, and Eric 

Laurier. 2014. Managing Walking Together: The 
Challenge of Revolving Doors. Space and 
Culture, 17(2), 122-136. 

62.  Tim Weninger, Xihao Avi Zhu, and Jiawei Han. 2013. 

An exploration of discussion threads in social news 
sites: a case study of the Reddit community. 
In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE/ACM International 
Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis 
and Mining (ASONAM ‘13). ACM, New York, NY, 
USA, 579-583. 

63.  Hui Zhang, Munmun De Choudhury, and Jonathan 

Grudin. 2014. Creepy but inevitable?: the evolution of 
social networking. In Proc. CSCW’14, ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 368-378, 2014. 

 

 

1064

