CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

A Fundamentally Confused Document: Situation Reports 

and the Work of Producing Humanitarian Information 

University of Washington 

SOAS, University of London 

Elisa Oreglia 

London, UK 

eo6@soas.ac.uk 

Megan Finn 

Seattle, USA 

megfinn@uw.edu 

labor 

information 

ABSTRACT 
Situation reports, or sitreps, are documents commonly used 
by  UN  agencies  and  humanitarian  NGOs  involved  in 
emergency response to disseminate information to and from 
relief  workers  in  the  field.  This  paper  analyzes  the 
information labor involved in producing sitreps, and how it 
can  be  used  to  understand  why  these  documents  are 
described  by 
insiders  as  “fundamentally  confused.” 
Drawing from document analysis and interviews with over 
one  hundred  people  involved  with  sitreps,  we  examine 
humanitarian 
in  a  decentralized, 
hierarchical,  collaborative,  political,  and  competitive  work 
environment. From an empirical perspective, we contribute 
to CSCW by adding a case study about the situated practice 
of  making  humanitarian  information,  which  includes  our 
work as researcher/consultants in reconstructing the details 
of information gathering and sharing processes in order to 
improve  them.  We  consider  how  the  work  of  producing 
humanitarian 
problematic 
humanitarian logics.  
Author Keywords 
Crisis  Informatics;  Information  Labor;  Invisible  Work; 
Humanitarianism. 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.m. Information Systems: Miscellaneous. 

information 

reproduces 

intervention 

INTRODUCTION 
Humanitarian 
relies  on  people  making 
decisions about a crisis on the basis of what they learn from 
actors  on  the  ground,  often  in  faraway  places.  One  of  the 
several inputs in this decision-making process are situation 
reports,  or  sitreps,  documents  commonly  used  by  UN 
agencies, especially the UN Office for the Coordination of 
Humanitarian  Affairs  (OCHA),  as  well  as  humanitarian 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work 
for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies  bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page. 
Copyrights  for  components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  the 
author(s)  must  be honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To 
copy  otherwise,  or republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to 
lists,  requires  prior specific 
fee.  Request 
permissions 
CSCW  '16, February  27-March  02,  2016,  San  Francisco,  CA, 
USA Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed 
to ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820031 
 

permission 
from Permissions@acm.org. 

and/or 

a 

1349

Conditions 

ReliefWeb.int. 

NGOs  and  other  organizations  involved  in  emergency 
response, to disseminate information to/from relief workers 
in the field. These documents may contain qualitative and 
numerical  descriptions  of  the  situation,  and  cover  a  broad 
range  of  topics,  including  security  issues,  analyses  of  the 
humanitarian  situation  and  political  context,  reports  of 
damage to the local population and physical infrastructure, 
program planning and progress information, advocacy and 
media  issues,  etc.  NGO  sitreps  are  typically  confidential 
documents  meant  for  internal  use,  but  OCHA  sitreps  are 
public,  circulated  as  printed  documents  in  the  field,  via 
email,  and  on  humanitarian  emergency  websites  such  as 
OCHA-funded 
during 
humanitarian  emergencies  typically  make  data  collection 
very difficult; sitreps are subjected to widely varying and at 
times contradicting expectations from the various groups of 
people who read them. Despite these challenges, sitreps are 
supposed  to  achieve  a  great  deal  for  various  humanitarian 
actors: they are supposed to help donors understand how to 
spend their money, and to inform humanitarian workers at 
the site of crisis about the work of others. To quote one of 
our  project  informants,  “The  sitreps  are  a  fundamentally 
confused document.” 
This paper is based on a case study of OCHA’s production 
of  situation  reports  to  document  humanitarian  crises  in 
2008-2009.  At  that  time,  OCHA’s  primary  role  was  to 
coordinate  the  multitude  of  humanitarian  response  actors, 
and  one  of  its  activities  was  to  create  a  number  of 
“information  products”  about  disasters,  including  situation 
reports.  Here,  we  analyze  the  “information  labor”  [20–23] 
that  goes  into  such  documents,  which  is  often  overlooked 
even  as  the  necessity  of  having  high  quality  information 
about crises is recognized by all participants as a priority. 
As we will show, though sitreps are valued documents, the 
work of making sitreps is not. The (sometimes) ease of the 
global  circulation  of  humanitarian  information  obscures 
how difficult it is to produce, but this “contradiction is just 
the point” [23]. The information labor analytic is useful for 
revealing  the  power  relations  involved  in  creating  sitreps 
and  demonstrates 
and 
contradictory  situations,  and  fundamentally  irreconcilable 
goals.  Although  our  research  was  conducted  in  2008  and 
2009,  and  both  the  sitrep  document  and  OCHA  have 
changed  since  then,  our  analysis  of  this  near  history  has 
theoretical 
that 
humanitarian  information  labor  is  situated  in  a  particular 

that  are  more  enduring: 

implications 

complex 

reflect 

that 

they 

institutional  context  where  the  humanitarian  information 
produced  about  a  crisis  cannot  be  separated  from  the 
political-economic  relations  in  which  the  production  took 
place. 
The  rest  of  this  paper  continues  with  a  brief  overview  of 
related  work  in  CSCW.  We  then  give  a  synopsis  of  our 
methods  and  research  limitations.  We  put  forth  several 
ideal-typical  scenarios 
that  describe  how  our  study 
collaborators  described  the  sitrep  production  process.  We 
discuss six elements of humanitarian information labor and 
show how it shaped the production of sitrep documents: the 
multiple  audiences  for  the  sitrep;  the  difficulty  of  making 
information  about  a  disaster;  what  people  who  work  on 
sitreps think about the work; the hierarchical and distributed 
organization of OCHA; the relations amongst international 
humanitarian  actors  collaborating  on  crisis  response  and 
competing  for  funding;  and  the  logic  of  humanitarian 
intervention.  We  finally  discuss  in  detail  the  idea  of 
“information labor” and how it shapes sitreps.  
RELATED LITERATURE 
We  situate  our  work  within  the  scholarship  on  the 
information  practices  of  those  involved  with  humanitarian 
action.  In 
the  CSCW  community,  researchers  have 
highlighted  computer-supported  distributed  crisis  response 
work by the people affected by a disaster and survivors of 
war  [35,36,52,53,55],  digital  online  volunteers  [15,44,56–
58],  and  the  use  of  digital  communications  in  crises  by 
professional responders [25,50]. Early CSCW papers about 
crisis  informatics  focused  on  how  those  affected  by  a 
disaster make use of ICTs in innovative ways as they make 
sense of what has happened [55], and engage in information 
verification  [35,52].  Many  early  studies  about  the  use  of 
social media by those affected by a crisis have been about 
US disasters such as shootings [45,46].  
The  focus  of  this  paper  is  on  the  collaborative  work  of 
humanitarian 
produce 
humanitarian 
international  context. 
Although, as we will argue below, the specific institutional 
context  of  humanitarian  work  is  crucial  for  understanding 
the information produced, our work speaks to some of the 
themes  developed  by  CSCW  researchers  who  examine 
information-related  work 
in  complex  human-service 
oriented  (mostly  non-profit)  organizational  environments. 
Much of this work is focused on access to and adoption of 
particular  ICTs  [19],  rather 
the  production  of 
information.  Still,  many  projects  note  the  importance  of 
coordination  amongst  multiple  organizations  in  non-profit 
settings [69], though importantly these collaborations often 
take  place  amongst  organizations  competing  for  funding 
[17].  In  addition  to  a  resource-poor  work  environment, 
different  organizational  structures  shape  intra-  and  inter-
organizational information sharing [18]. Stoll et al describe 
competition  and  collaboration  in  an  networked  multi-
organization  environment  fighting  human  trafficking  [61].  
Though inter-organizational coordination was necessary, it 

professionals 
in  an 

response 
information 

than 

to 

1350

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

to 

to 

involved, 

adherence 

the  professional  humanitarian 

was  challenging  because  of  the  instability  of  the  other 
organizations 
different 
“collaboration  modes” 
in  different  organizations,  and 
concerns about perceptions of donors, called “saving face” 
[61].  Relatedly,  recent  work  about  Electronic  Medical 
Records  finds  that  they  are  inscribed  with  “institutional 
logics” and the differing documentary goals of coordination 
and accountability are impossible [45]. 
Recent scholarship on international humanitarian action and 
disaster  response  has  focused  on  volunteer-driven  online 
efforts  [15,56–58].  For  example,  Starbird  and  Palen 
describe  the  “Humanity  Road”  project,  where  a  group  of 
volunteers  organize  online  to  process  digital  information 
about  a  disaster  [58].  Their  practice  is  augmented  by  a 
variety of digital tools to sort Tweets and coordinate online 
volunteer  activities.  Through  transparency  and  intense 
reflection on processes, these volunteers attempt to produce 
trustworthy  information  to  impact  action  “on  the  ground.” 
The  volunteers  even  adopted  the  term  “sitrep”  to  describe 
one product of their work to legitimize it and make it more 
visible 
responders. 
However, the authors note that it is not clear what impact, if 
any,  that  this  work  has  on  the  world  of  professional 
humanitarian emergency response at the site of crisis.  
Social  media  such  as  Twitter  are  potentially  useful  to 
professional disaster response activity [43], but other forms 
social  media  are  already  influential  amongst  professional 
disaster responders. Open Street Map (OSM), annotated by 
volunteers,  is  being  used  by  humanitarian  workers  in  the 
context  of  relief  work  [44].  However,  these  tools  are  not 
without  complications.  Geographers  have  examined  how 
the  work  of  OSM  mapping  is  biased  [60].  OSM  tools 
sometimes  capture  controversies,  but  other  times  do  not 
[44].  The  work  of  the  digital  volunteers  with  OSM  also 
points to some of the challenges of virtual disaster response 
noted  by  media  studies  scholar  Chouliaraki:  the  work  of 
faraway  volunteers  sometimes  imposes  particular  readings 
of an event that those who live there do not possess [13,14].  
While  much  of  the  CSCW  literature  has  focused  on  the 
information  practices  of  non-professional 
international 
crisis  responders,  Goggins  et  al  have  looked  at  online 
information  sharing  practices  inside  the  “walled  garden” 
[25] of professional disaster response institutional networks 
of  government  and  NGOs.  Like  sitreps,  these  private 
information  sharing  platforms  represent  the  views  of 
professional  humanitarian  actors.  Goggins  et  al  [25] 
highlight the work of the “invisible broker” who “connect 
two networks of activity within APAN [All-Partners Access 
Network, 
is  not 
identifiable from raw post activity.”  Similarly, we seek to 
highlight  “invisible” information work involved in making 
sitreps.  
Moving  outside  of  the  realm  of  CSCW  literature,  recent 
work in the realm of international humanitarian emergency 
response is useful to understanding the collaborative work 

the  platform  being  analyzed],  but 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

to 

in 

identified 

intervention 

is  supposed 

and  expertise  involved  in  sitrep  production.  The  resources 
dedicated  to  humanitarian  action  have  recently  increased 
[1], and along with them a critique of humanitarian work, 
from  academics 
[e.g.  1,2,10,11,27,71],  humanitarian 
practitioners [e. g. 34,66], and the press [e. g. 26,29,47,49]. 
These  critics  decry 
the  compromises  with  corrupt 
governments  in  order  to  access  affected  populations,  ask 
how  much  money  actually  reaches  the  intended  recipients 
versus  the  humanitarian  organizations,  question  the  long 
term  effects  of  aid  on  developing  economies,  and 
acknowledge  the  competition  for  humanitarian  funding. 
Furthermore,  humanitarian  action 
to  be 
“distinct  from  several  other  projects,”  such  as  economic 
development  and  the  promotion  of  democracy  because 
humanitarian emergencies “pose immediate moral demands 
that override other considerations,” though it is in fact often 
intertwined with a state’s international policy, and even an 
instrument  of  it  [11].  Other  critiques  of  humanitarian 
activity  note  that  donations  for  international  emergencies 
are  often  guided  most  obviously  by  the  number  of  people 
killed, but also by colonial relations, language, proximity to 
a disaster, and the amount of news coverage, not simply the 
needs of the affected populations [62].  
In  this  work,  we  move  beyond  the  general  critiques  of 
humanitarian 
examine  humanitarian 
information  production.  Specifically,  we  examine  how  the 
issues 
the  critiques  of  humanitarian 
intervention  shape  information  labor.  We  borrow  Greg 
Downey’s term information labor [5,20–23] to refer to the 
work  of  OCHA  situation  report  document  production. 
Downey, a geographer and historian, examines the labor of 
managing, consuming, and producing and reproducing what 
he  calls  “internetworks”  [20],  or 
infrastructures  for 
circulating 
information.  Downey’s  analysis  highlights 
“invisible” information labor behind the telegram message 
delivery  [21,59]  and  closed  captioning  systems  [22].  The 
concept of information labor seeks to make visible the work 
that  makes  possible  the  circulation  of  information  across 
vast contexts [23]. Furthermore, a close examination of the 
contradictions  in  humanitarian  information  labor  help  us 
understand  why  the  sitrep  is  a  “fundamentally  confused” 
document.  Downey  argues  that  focusing  on  “information 
labor”  means  highlighting  the  political  economic  context, 
the social meaning of information labor, and how the global 
circulation  of  information  shapes  work  [23].  The  work  of 
producing sitreps is not exclusively focused on the process 
of  circulating  information,  but  it  is  about  producing 
information  about  complex  crises  that  is  legible  to  the 
cosmopolitan  audience  of  humanitarian  actors.  We  take 
information 
the  work  of  gathering 
information to include in a sitrep from other humanitarian 
actors and distilling it into an “information product” to be 
circulated outside of OCHA. 
We  also  highlight  the  obstacles  that  information  finds  in 
circulating, in the tradition of “critical information studies” 
[68].  In  studies  of  disasters,  researchers  argue 
that 

include 

labor 

to 

“information  flow  is  the  central  nervous  system  for  all 
disaster relief efforts” [30]. Information is a useful concept 
precisely  because  it  resembles  what  Latour  calls  an 
“immutable  mobile”—an  entity  that  can  move  from  one 
context to another keeping its original properties. However, 
we argue that information might not have the mobility it is 
assumed  to  have.  The  immutable  mobile  “information” 
retains its meaning regardless of context, a sentiment well 
captured  by  the  powerful  metaphor  “information  flow” 
[12,72], whereby information can cross social, political, and 
physical  distances,.  The  materiality  of  digital  documents 
that  can  be  easily  reproduced  and  conjured  on  devices  all 
over the world makes the imagination of flow easier [4,24]. 
However,  “Information  doesn’t  suddenly  flow  out  of  the 
categories  and  classification  it  is  contained  in,  nor  does  it 
jump  from  one  technological  platform  to  another  all  by 
itself”  [28].  The  assumption  that  information  can  flow 
conceals ideological work. Saxenian [51] and Tekhteyev’s 
[64] work on knowledge circulation describes the work that 
has  to  be  done  to  move  “information”  from  one  place  to 
another. Changing what people know, however, is not just a 
matter of information technology, or even “information” as 
an  “immutable  mobile.”  Still,  the  potential  of  information 
flow  is  enticing,  and  many  projects  have  tried  to  build 
software  to  improve  information  flow  on  the  assumption 
that  if  bits  flow,  knowledge  also  flows.  By  focusing  on 
information labor, contextualized in relations of production, 
we show that information does not just easily flow, but is 
painstakingly produced and processed. 
Using 
labor”  and  “critical 
information studies” to examine a case of crisis informatics 
highlights different aspects of collaborative work. Our work 
extends  existing  CSCW  crisis  informatics  literature  by 
showing how the conditions of information production are 
not  only  embedded  in  humanitarian  information  about 
humanitarian  crisis,  but  critical  for  understanding  it.  The 
challenges involved in making information about disasters 
that we identify in this article builds on recent work critical 
of the new tools, epistemologies and practices involved in 
using “Big Data” for “digital humanitarianism” [8,9,16,54].  
While circulating information about humanitarian crisis can 
be straightforward, at least for people with working internet 
interpretation  and 
connections,  we  show  how 
management  of 
the 
information labor involved in producing it.  
BACKGROUND 
Beginning in the early 2000s, OCHA stepped up its efforts 
to  become  an  “intellectual  leader  and  knowledge  broker 
among the international humanitarian community” [39–42]. 
Part  of  this  effort  consisted  in  creating  a  portfolio  of 
documents that included situation reports. Our engagement 
with 
in  2008,  following  an 
information management review that identified sitreps as an 
opportunity 
improve  OCHA’s  management  of 
humanitarian emergencies. 

information  must  consider 

the  organization  began 

lens  of  “information 

this 

the 

the 

to 

1351

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

in 

in 

introduced  a  selection  bias 

Most, though not all, of our interviews were facilitated by 
several people in OCHA offices in New York and Geneva 
information  management.  The  other 
who  work 
interviewees  were  with  humanitarian  actors 
the 
researchers’  professional  networks.  The  choice  of 
interviewees  was  designed  to  give  us  a  broad  view  of 
sitreps. We talked to those who wrote, read, were expected 
to  read,  or  contributed  to  situation  reports.  Most  of  the 
interviewees were introduced to us by OCHA officers, and 
would not have spoken to us without this introduction. This 
clearly 
in  our  sample. 
Furthermore, because of our collaboration with information 
management  professionals  who  worked  at  OCHA 
headquarters,  many  people  thought  of  us  as  members  of 
OCHA  though  we  did  our  best  to  reiterate  we  were  not. 
While  we  tried  to  triangulate  what  we  learned  from  our 
interviewees  through,  for  example,  the  sitrep  documents 
themselves, as well as public reports published by a number 
of  the  organizations  involved  with  this  study,  these 
limitations need to be acknowledged. One other issue needs 
to  be  highlighted:  while  one  of  the  major  drivers  of  the 
project  to  improve  sitreps  was  to  see  the  results  of 
humanitarian aid helping the survivors of crisis, those who 
were  the  recipients  of  humanitarian  aid  do  not  have  an 
explicit voice in the sitrep and are also absent here.  
In  the  next  section,  we  briefly  outline  the  process  that 
produced  the  document  as  we  reconstructed  it  from  our 
fieldwork.  
IDEALIZED SITREP PRODUCTION 
There were a number of different ways that a sitrep might 
come into existence. In a country with a UN OCHA office 
in  place  (typically  places  with  protracted  humanitarian 
emergencies  like  wars),  there  were  people  in  the  country 
who  wrote  sitreps,  usually  an  Information  Management 
Officer  (IMO).  Sitrep  documents  were  shared  by  field 
teams to field offices to country office, and then on to the 
regional  and/or  global  headquarters.  Often,  sitreps  were 
“cleared”  by  the  head  of  country  team  and  possibly  by 
headquarters  in  Geneva  and  New  York.  Clearing  a  sitrep 
involved OCHA management reading sitreps for form and 
quality to ensure it was well-written and conformed to the 
goals of OCHA to coordinate emergency interventions. 
Public  sitreps  like  OCHA’s  depended  heavily  on  the 
information 
that  sitrep  authors  collected  from  other 
humanitarian actors in the field, particularly from the large 
International  NGOs  and  UN  Agencies  with  whom  they 
collaborated. Much of the significant communication in the 
field  was  verbal.  Within  an  organization,  staff  members 
shared updates about the emergencies in general meetings. 
Between  organizations,  staff  shared  information  during 
OCHA  coordination  meetings.  Humanitarian  response 
workers  also  all  had  their  own  personal  networks  of 
collaborators  and  friends  that  transcended  organizational 
boundaries. 

system 

to 

sharing 

support  data 

to  streamline 

Between  2008  and  2009,  a  team  comprising  the  authors, 
Nick Rabinowitz, and John Ward worked with a manager in 
the OCHA information unit to analyze sitreps and suggest 
ways  to  improve  both  the  document  and  the  processes  of 
information gathering and sharing around it. As researchers, 
we  were  interested  in  broad  questions  about  disaster 
information:  how  are  sitreps  created  and  circulated?  As 
consultants,  a  normative  goal  motivated  our  inquiry:  how 
could we improve the process of information gathering and 
sharing  around  sitreps?  Our  ultimate  goal  was  to  build  an 
information 
and 
collaboration  amongst  various  humanitarian  actors.  In 
retrospect, this seems naïve, but it is important to state our 
initial  assumptions.  At  the  end,  the  major  output  of  the 
consultative  part  of  this  project  was  a  Word  template  for 
sitreps, which was adopted in some emergencies, as well as 
recommendations on how to differentiate sitreps from other 
information  products,  and  how 
their 
distribution.  
In  our  role  as  consultants,  the  sometimes-used  document 
template  we  produced  was  a  highly  unsatisfying  result 
given  what  we  had  set  out  to  do;  but  our  real  role  was  to 
“structure  complex  messes”  [70].  In  this  paper,  we  step 
back into our researcher roles, and drop the normative goals 
of  “improving  sitreps”  in  order  to  reflect  on  the  work  of 
making  humanitarian 
information.  Nonetheless,  our 
normative  goals  as  consultants  shaped  the  interviews,  our 
analysis, and interactions.  
Method 
In the course of the project, we spoke to over one hundred 
people  in  one-on-one  interviews,  group  interviews,  and 
roundtables. We conducted individual and group interviews 
over  the  phone  and  in  person  at  OCHA  headquarters  in 
New York, Geneva, and to a field office over a year and a 
half  in  2008  and  2009.  In  this  article,  interviewees  are 
anonymous  and  identified  with  the  type  of  organization 
they  work  for:  OCHA;  UN  Agency  (e.g.  UNHCR, 
UNICEF,  WFP,  etc.);  NGO;  and  Donor.  All  of  the 
interviews  had  at  least  one  interviewer  and  one  note-taker 
present, but not all were recorded. After each interview, we 
did extensive debriefings with team members who weren’t 
present at interviews, and triangulated our notes, especially 
when we did not use a tape recorder.  
In order to better understand the insights that emerged from 
the interviews, and to see if we could substantiate (or not) 
some of the practical assertions that came up around sitreps, 
we  analyzed  a  corpus  of  101  documents,  representing  all 
the  OCHA  situation  reports  sent  out  by  OCHA’s  website 
ReliefWeb between March 18 and April 25, 2008. For each 
document,  we  recorded  the  issuing  office,  the  date  on  the 
sitrep (which at times was different from the date when the 
document  was  issued),  the  number  of  days  covered,  if 
specified,  how  the  document  was  named.  Two  people 
looked  at  different  dimensions  of  the  documents,  and 
classified them according to their content. 

1352

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

From  our  interviews,  we  reconstructed  a  few  generalized 
scenarios  that  illustrate  how  an  Information  Officer  might 
make  a  sitrep.  The  first  is  when  OCHA  has  a  solid 
infrastructure in place, typically in countries with complex, 
long-running emergencies (See figure 1).  
 

regional office. Do my search on ReliefWeb. Cut and paste 
from there… When we have an UNDAC team, the meat of 
the report comes from the UNDAC team.” (OCHA) 
These  are  simplified  models  of 
information gathering, illustrated in Figures 2 and 3:  
 

two  modalities  of 

 

Fig. 1 – Information gathering in countries with an OCHA 
has  a  staffed  country  office  in  place  at  the  time  of  an 
earthquake.  A  stable  network  of  informants  and/or  sub-
offices  constantly  feeds  information  to  the  main  country 
office,  which  sometimes  collects  it  into  databases.  The 
office  has  sufficient  manpower  to  analyze  it,  provide 
cumulative data, and be ready for sudden emergencies.  
Given that it is easier to do well in an emergency what is 
already  done  well  in  regular  situations,  countries  with  a 
stable OCHA office were often the best prepared to make 
sitreps in extraordinary circumstances, because they had the 
large  network  of  other  humanitarian  actors  necessary  to 
gather content for sitreps already in place. 
In  the  second  scenario,  OCHA  did  not  already  have  a 
country  office  at  the  time  of  a  disaster  (though  often  a 
“Regional” office might have personnel monitoring a given 
country).  OCHA  Desk  Officers  in  Geneva  or  New  York 
might work with groups of people in the region over email 
to make the sitrep. They would augment reports from their 
contacts  with  public  documents  from  other  organizations 
available on ReliefWeb, a public website funded by OCHA 
which  posts  humanitarian 
from  many 
organizations.  They  would  also  use,  if  available,  reports 
from UNDAC, the United Nation Disaster Assessment and 
Coordination, a group which is mobilized to disaster-struck 
countries  within  a  day  of  the  disaster  to  assess  what  has 
happened.  This  is  a  description  by  a  Desk  Officer  at 
headquarters  who  had  to  put  together  sitreps  for  a 
“medium”  sized  flood  in  a  country  with  no  OCHA 
presence: 
“I  created  virtual  task  force  with  email.  Talking  with 
regional  office,  and  Geneva….  I  rely  on  info  from  the 

information 

1353

 
Fig.  2  –  Information  gathering  in  countries  without  an 
OCHA infrastructure in place 
 

 

Fig. 3 – Assessment by the UNDAC Team  
These  models  represent  how  sitrep  authors  presented  their 
interactions with other organizations within OCHA and the 
UN  in  the  process  of  creating  a  sitrep.  The  sitrep  writers 
were often confused about how to proceed on “new” crises, 
especially those who were thrown into the process without 
a  clear  idea  of  the  various  hierarchies  at  play.  That  these 
models  are  not  always  consistent  and  even  confusing  is 
indicative  of  the  complexity  of  the  world  in  which  sitrep 
authors worked, something we dive into below. 

the  status  of  sitrep  work;  fourth, 

CHALLENGES IN SITREP PRODUCTION 
The  idealized  version  of  sitrep  production  embodies  the 
illusion  of  information  circulating  freely,  and  all  actors 
working  towards  the  same  goal  of  achieving  an  objective 
description of the emergency and what is needed to address 
it.  The  reality  is  different:  information  for  sitreps  has  to 
come  from  diverse  actors  who  do  not  always  have  an 
incentive to share it. It has to be put together by people who 
are  trying  to  serve  different  and  at  times  incompatible 
audiences.  It  passes  through  many  different  offices,  each 
adding  or  deleting  according  to  what  they  believe  are  the 
priorities  the  document  should  address.  It  is  a  public 
document, rather than an internal one, and thus a document 
of compromise that embodies the politics of the emergency. 
Furthermore,  gathering  information  about  humanitarian 
crises  is  often  an  impossible  task.  For  example,  to 
categorize  and  count  [37] 
the  number  of  Internally 
Displaced  People  in  a  massive  humanitarian  emergency 
requires a significant effort by highly skilled professionals, 
and  even  in  the  best  of  cases  will  result  in  wide 
approximations. 
Here we present six complications in the process of making 
sitreps:  first,  the  multiplicity  of  sitrep  audiences;  second, 
the  hierarchical  and  distributed  organization  of  OCHA; 
third, 
the  unique 
humanitarian  interventionist  logic  where  “neutrality  is  the 
basis  for  access,”  (Calhoun  2010:  51);  fifth,  the  challenge 
of  making  information  about  a  complicated  situation;  and 
sixth, 
amongst 
humanitarian actors with regards to information sharing. 
1st Challenge: The multiple sitrep audiences 
Sitrep  authors  thought  that  the  document  readers  included 
humanitarian actors “in the field” (at the site of a crisis), the 
managers  of  humanitarian  organizations  in  New  York  and 
Geneva,  members  organizations  who  donated 
to 
humanitarian  response,  the  governments  at  the  site  of  the 
humanitarian  emergency  and  abroad.  Each  group  thus 
required different details for sitreps to be useful.  
The  first  audience  were  humanitarian  actors  who  were 
working physically close to the crisis. They were assumed 
to be interested in details that enabled what our informants 
called  “operations”  or  “coordination”  of  humanitarian 
action  at  the  site  of  the  emergency.  However,  most 
humanitarian  actors  working  at  the  site  of  a  crisis  did  not 
find sitreps useful for operation or coordination. For these 
people,  the  main  way  to  share  information  were  meetings 
and  personal  contacts.  In  the  words  of  an  OCHA  senior 
manager, “Program staff in big NGOs sit at the same table 
and already talk about coordination; by the time an OCHA 
sitrep is being written, tents are already going somewhere.” 
(OCHA).  
Another  audience  was  people  in  OCHA  or  the  UN  at 
headquarters in New York or Geneva who wanted to learn 
about long-term trends or compare across emergencies for 
the  purpose  of  resource  allocation.  These  readers  did  not 

cooperation 

the 

competition 

and 

1354

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

find sitreps to be useful for these tasks because they did not 
always  give  data  that  would  allow  comparison.  For 
example,  one  sitrep  might  give  the  number  of  people  in 
need of educational resources in a refugee camp, while the 
other sitrep provided no details. 
A third audience that sitrep writers cited were the donors, 
assumed to be interested in the needs of beneficiaries. Some 
donors  saw  sitreps  as  one  useful  data  point  in  many,  but 
these  donors  were  often  not  those  with  access  to  large 
resources.  Interviews  revealed  that  donors  with  large 
resources at their disposal (USAID, ECHO and DFID) had 
their  own  network  of  people  they  called  upon  to  get  the 
information they needed. One donor explained,  
“We  never  allocate  money  on  basis  of  OCHA  sitreps;  the 
information  must  be  triangulated.  It  can  point  you  in  the 
right direction, it’s part of the picture” (Donor).  
These major donors “in the field” often did not even look at 
OCHA  sitreps,  because  they  could  not  find  many  of  the 
details they relied on to make decisions:  
“[I] don’t use [OCHA sitreps]. Issue of digestibility, issue 
of  quality.  I  looked  at  the  Country  X  sitrep,  very  nicely 
written,  no  use  for  me.  Fine-tuned,  very  bland,  for  public 
consumption.... I may read it to know what will be coming 
at us from the media/press.” (Donor)  
If  each  audience  for  the  sitrep  was  disappointed  in  the 
document, this begs the question: what was the sitrep good 
for?  Many  donors  and  NGOs  valued  the  sitrep  as  an 
official,  publicly  citable  source,  representing  what  an 
OCHA interviewee defined the “humanitarian consensus”:  
“There’s usually a consensus on reliable data that emerges 
in the field. By the time it’s in an OCHA sitrep, it shouldn’t 
be new to anyone who’s reading it. It’s an excellent doc for 
gathering data from multiple agencies.” (Donor).  
The  sitrep  was  also  seen  as  critical  for  the  purposes  of 
circulating the shared understanding of humanitarian actors: 
“Things  go  better  when  there’s  common  information,  a 
common  viewpoint,  even  when  it’s  wrong”  (Donor).  We 
found that most recipients saw sitreps as ideally filling the 
role of a “one-stop shop,” “data point” or “overview,” but 
almost never a primary basis for decision-making. “On the 
basis of the situation reports that we have, we can decide 
that…  at  least  we  need  more  information”  (UN  Agency). 
However,  because  the  sitrep  was  the  consensus  of  the 
humanitarian actors, one senior manager at OCHA felt that,  
“From  a  historical  perspective,  that  is  something  that  is 
important,  it’s  a  publication  that  sets  the  record,  that 
certain  things  have  been  agreed  upon.  It’s  a  baseline  for 
what was the situation at a certain time” (OCHA).  
While the sitrep was “bland” for most humanitarian actors 
to  use  for  decision-making  either  in  situ  or  farwaway,  it 
represented  the  scaffolding  on  which  humanitarian  action 
could take place.  

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

the  use  of 

to  beneficiaries, 

2nd Challenge: The organization of OCHA  
Humanitarian organizations such as OCHA resemble many 
other corporate organizations where authority and resources 
reside  at  the  “top,”  the  headquarters  in  New  York  and 
Geneva, while the knowledge about how to operate resides 
in  the  field  [63].  We  build  upon  the  work  of  researchers 
who argue that information management in human-service 
organizations  [17,18,61,69],  development-oriented  NGOs 
[32], and particularly humanitarian organizations [67] must 
be  understood  from  a  different  perspective  than  that  of 
traditional  economic  organizations.  In  the  sparse  literature 
focused  on 
information  systems  within 
humanitarian  organizations,  researchers  have  found  that 
while  humanitarian  actors  are  accountable  “upward”  to 
donors  and  “downward” 
information 
technology-related  projects  are  often  focused  on  “upward 
accountability”  only  [65].  Similarly,  in  our  work,  the 
information  technology  project that  we  focused  on,  a  new 
sitrep  template,  was  driven  by  people  in  New  York  and 
Geneva. The needs of “headquarters” configured the work 
of  the  information  laborers,  at  the  cost  of  other  parties. 
Senior officials at OCHA and the UN headquarters had to 
make difficult decisions about where to focus attention and 
funding.  
Sitrep  authors  were  typically  junior  staff  members,  who 
were  in  the  field  when  possible.  Oftentimes  this  work 
would  be  closely  supervised  by  OCHA  country  office 
directors.  Generally,  more  senior  information  managers,  
usually located at headquarters, would edit the sitreps later. 
This  “clearance”  process  embodied  a  complex  negotiation 
between OCHA headquarters and the field. Although most 
of  the  people  who  worked  in  headquarters  had  experience 
working  in  the  field,  there  remained  a  tense  relationship 
between 
that  at 
headquarters.  Generally,  people  working  at  the  site  of  the 
emergency thought that the sitrep document needed to meet 
the  needs  of  that  emergency,  and  since  every  emergency 
was different, they were content to issue sitreps when they 
thought it was appropriate in the format that best described 
the  emergency.  Sitrep  creators  in  the  field  were  closest  to 
the  emergency  and  generally  understood  what  was 
happening, but were not always closest to the corridors of 
power  where  people  decided  whether  and  how  to  fund 
humanitarian disaster response.  The people who worked at 
headquarters  were  concerned  about  resource  allocation 
across  emergencies  and  relationships  with  international 
humanitarian  organizations  and  donors.  Often  people  who 
worked at headquarters wanted documents to comply with a 
specific format, so they were consistent across emergencies. 
People  at  headquarters  thought  that  consistency  would 
make  the  sitrep  document  easier  for  readers  who  had  to 
look  at  documents  about  many  emergencies,  particularly 
donors  and  UN  officials  who  needed  to  decide  what  to 
fund. Standardizing the sitreps would also allow OCHA to 
brand the organization and consistently communicate about 
disaster response, achieving their mandate. 

the  perspective  from 

the  field  and 

In  our  research,  the  difference  between  these  perspectives 
was exemplified in debates over the headquarters dictating 
templates. In our role as project consultants, we were often 
working  with  a  group  at  headquarters  on  developing 
templates  for  use  globally.  While  these  people  were 
enthusiastic about templates, those in the “field” were not. 
The template was a locus where the procedures for making 
sitreps were being fought: 
“My  experience  with  OCHA  is  that  if  they  send  you 
guidelines, then they consider them signed conventions! I’m 
weary  of  guidelines  and  templates,  because  they’re  HQ-
driven,  not  for  us  in  the  field.  When  we  develop  them  for 
ourselves, they are different.” (OCHA)  
OCHA  field  staff  tended  to  value  independence  and 
flexibility instead:  
“It’s true, we resist standardization, because sometimes it 
lowers the quality of a good product to suit it to different 
audiences rather than your specific context” (OCHA).  
The standardization of information products walked a fine 
line between people in the field being able to adapt to a new 
emergency or innovate on existing information production 
practices,  and  the  need  to  serve  officials  and  donors  who 
directed  attention,  resources  and  energy.  OCHA  relied  on 
using different people in different parts of the organization 
to bring their perspective to the sitrep document. Different 
people had different understandings of the objectives of the 
sitrep,  which  were  reflected  in  the  final  document.  Along 
with  issues  of  different  audiences,  and  the  challenge  of 
making  humanitarian 
low  status  of 
information  labor,  and  the  hierarchical  and  distributed 
structure  of  OCHA  made  the  document  look  “confused.” 
The  last  two  challenges  of  sitrep  production  further 
elaborate  on  the  context  in  which  this  information  labor 
takes place. 
3rd Challenge: The status of sitrep work 
OCHA was mandated to do “information management” and 
be  a  “knowledge  broker”  in  the  humanitarian  community. 
Yet,  the  work  of  information  laborers  like  sitrep  writers, 
was not well respected within the humanitarian community, 
even when resources were increasingly dedicated to the task 
of  information  management.  More  experienced  officers 
were typically involved in more hands-on emergency work. 
Making  information  products,  in  contrast,  was  seen  as 
unattractive work:  
“It is just not very sexy…. To be in the hottest emergency 
and  you  are  not  out  there  doing  something  in  your  Land 
Rover, you are behind your computer or on the phone with 
people trying to get information or visiting their offices or 
whatever, it’s just not the sexy part of the work.” (OCHA). 
Though sitreps were valued, the work of writing sitreps was 
not  high  status  work  in  the  world  of  humanitarian  actors. 
The  combination  of  sitrep  writing  as  difficult  and  “not 
sexy” work is perhaps best captured by a sentence that we 

information, 

the 

1355

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

limited  the  accuracy  of  what  the  sitrep  can  describe  [48]. 
Backchannels thus were important when it was not safe for 
humanitarian  actors  to  publicly  announce  intervention 
plans. In these cases, sitreps may not represent the private 
“humanitarian  consensus,”  as  described  by  this  OCHA 
employee: 
“The  insurgency  group  is  reading  the  sitreps.  Looking  at 
the soft information that we are giving and they put out a 
press release threatening to blow up food deliveries….  We 
needed  to  get  them  [sitreps]  out  to  the  players  that  we 
needed to get them out to. There was a swath of information 
that would get everyone into trouble.” (OCHA) 
Thus, many OCHA staff felt that the sitrep is an incomplete 
document,  because  being  involved  in  humanitarian  action 
meant  that  often  they  could  not  be  critical  of  groups  who 
had  the  power  to  stop  humanitarian  intervention.  UN 
Agencies and NGOs can only operate in emergencies if the 
country  affected  grants 
them  permission.  External 
humanitarian  intervention  is  typically  welcome  only  when 
the  host  country  resources  have  been  overwhelmed.  Host 
countries or groups of people affected by a disaster might 
want the results of a disaster over-reported so that more aid 
comes into their country; others might want the results of a 
crisis  under-reported  in  order  to  maintain  sovereignty  or 
punish  the  suffering.  Sitreps  might  make  it  difficult  for 
OCHA  to  operate  in  a  country,  if  they  anger  the  host 
government.  But  publishing  a  document  that  allows  the 
organization  to  operate  often  means  publishing  a  watered-
down  document  for  public  consumption,  which  might 
ultimately  undermine  the  authority  of  OCHA.  In  some 
cases, the mere existence of a sitrep is problematic because 
it  indicates  the  existence  of  an  official  emergency.  One 
OCHA employee explained: “The information in the sitrep 
is  not  perturbing,  the  fact  that  there  is  a  sitrep  is  the 
problem”  (OCHA).  The  idea  that  OCHA  did  not  clearly 
include information that would anger local authorities feeds 
into  critiques  of  humanitarian  action  which  argue  that 
humanitarian  aid  can  perpetuate  or  even  worsen 
humanitarian crises by cooperating with a local government 
that  could  be  bent  on  harming  an  ethnic  minority  or 
ignoring the plight of the poor. A UN agency interviewee 
said:  
“You have cases where the government is backing conflict, 
what do you do? In [a place], I’ve been negotiating ‘droit 
de  passage’  [right  of  passage]  with  both  government  and 
rebels.  Sometimes  I’ve  even  been  using  the  trucks  of  the 
army,  which  is  explicitly  forbidden….  It’s  important  to 
reach the beneficiaries.” (UN AGENCY) 
Interviewees  sometimes  called  the  kind  of  reporting  that 
analyzed the activities of host governments or other groups 
“political analysis.” However, including “political analysis” 
in  sitreps  was  problematic  for  their  writers.  A  donor 
explained:  

heard  surprisingly  often  in  the  course  of  our  research: 
sitreps  are  intended  to  “feed  the  beast  at  headquarters” 
(OCHA). An NGO interviewee described a sitrep in similar 
terms:  
“It’s one of the reasons why sitreps are like, ‘F***, I have 
to  do  a  sitrep!’  Because  the  amount  and  the  kind  of 
information—it’s like a ravenous beast.” (NGO).  
During  our  interviews,  we  heard  several  variations  on  the 
concept: “We have to be able to feed the beast. We have to 
give  talking  points…”  (OCHA);  sitreps  need  to  “get 
credible information out and use it for advocacy. They are 
feeding the internal machine” (OCHA). The idea of a beast 
fed by sitreps conveys well the feeling expressed by most of 
our interviewees: sitreps are a burden to put together, write, 
edit, distribute, and use; they are time‐consuming; they are 
always perceived to be useful to someone else, not to those 
who produce them; they require a lot of information. It is as 
if they were humanitarian workers’ Sisyphean task, where 
“…there’s  an  information  beast  here  that  needs  to  be  fed 
all the time—but you can overfeed the beast, and the beast 
gets tired of it and doesn’t want any more.” (OCHA). Thus, 
while  on  one  hand  OCHA  values  information,  or  at  least 
sees  it  central  to  its  mission  as  a  “knowledge  broker,”  on 
the  other  the  people  who  are  supposed  to  make  the  sitrep 
documents  were  not  valued  and  did  not  want  to  do  the 
work.  Yet,  the  outcome  of  their  work,  documenting  the 
humanitarian  consensus,  was  of  great  value 
the 
humanitarian  community.  The  sitrep  writers  ambivalence 
towards their work on sitreps might have also reflected their 
ambivalence towards the logic of humanitarian action more 
broadly, which is discussed below in more detail. 
4th Challenge: The Logic of Humanitarian Action  
As many researchers have noted, humanitarian action relies 
on an “emergency imaginary” that “frames these events not 
as they look to locals, but as they appear to cosmopolitans” 
[11]. Sitreps are documents written by global humanitarian 
actors for other cosmopolitans.   
Highly debated amongst our interviewees was the question 
of  the  limits  of  what  OCHA  could  include  in  sitreps, 
especially now that the internet has made their distribution 
and  archiving  much  easier  and  more  permanent,  and 
therefore  transformed  what  was  originally  an  internal 
document into a highly visible one [48]:  
“The most difficult job doing the sitrep…. [is] not always 
putting the truth. You can’t say that the local government is 
not  leading  the  response  well,  that  they  are  not  giving  us 
access.  I  think  that  the  donors  should  know.  When  people 
call me and ask me then I tell them the situation.” (OCHA) 
Sitrep creators felt that public sitreps could not report some 
details of humanitarian emergencies because the politically 
sensitive  nature  of  these  reports  would  offend  another 
audience: 
allowing 
humanitarian  actors  to  do  their  work.  Thus,  the  public 
nature  of  sitreps  as  a  defining  feature  of  the  document, 

governments  who  were 

to 

the 

1356

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

and 

a  difficult  balancing 
institutional 

“To  what  extent  is  OCHA  mandated  political  analysis/ 
protection of civilians? … It would probably be dangerous 
for  OCHA,  but  we  would  like  to  see  them  use  the 
humanitarian lens. Recently, for weeks in [place omitted], 
the sitreps showed the numbers affected as 3000 but we had 
other  figures  showing  60000  but  OCHA  did  not  have  an 
authorized  re-assessment  from  the  host  government  to 
correct the number.” (Donor).  
Donors  with  enough  resources  to  get  political  analyses 
without  OCHA  were  not  interested  in  seeing  OCHA’s,  as 
they felt this was beyond its mandate, and not as useful as 
what they could get from their own sources:  
“I  don’t  think  that  we’re  looking  to  OCHA  for  political 
analysis—they are the coordinating body for humanitarian 
effort, so we are looking for what are the conditions, what 
is the response—not policy or political issues. . . That’s not 
what  our  focus  is,  that’s  not  OCHA’s  niche  either.” 
(Donor).  
Conversely,  some  OCHA  interviewees  thought  that  it  was 
difficult to credibly represent the realities of a crisis without 
some  kind  of  “political  analysis.”  For  sitrep  writers,  there 
was 
act  between  practical 
considerations, 
external 
roles, 
expectations.  
5th Challenge: The difficulty of producing humanitarian 
information 
Disasters  are  dynamic  and  difficult  to  materialize  into 
“information  products” 
[39–41].  Describing  complex 
humanitarian situations and the response in a concise way 
requires  time,  efforts,  and  resources  to  count  people  and 
understand their circumstances, and to put that information 
into  an  easily  digestible  form  for  multiple  audiences. 
Among our interviewees, like in much academic literature, 
there  was  often  an  assumption  that  “information”  simply 
exists out in the wild, to be plucked up into a sitrep or some 
other document [38]. In fact, all of the data in a sitrep was a 
result  of  laborious  and  complex  work  involving  many 
people  working  for  many  organizations,  reflecting  that 
information as a concept and the artifacts which get called 
“information”  [7]  are  constructed  [6].  Furthermore,  the 
ontological and epistemological process of counting things 
is  not  straightforward  [37].  The  process  of  making 
information something that can be fixed in a document and 
circulated  is  difficult  [31].  The  concept  of  “information” 
often hid the work that goes into making something like a 
sitrep. 
Furthermore, collecting any data about complex crises was 
very  difficult.  For  example,  OCHA  Information  Officers 
had to rely on experts from other NGOs and UN Agencies 
to get an idea of how many people might be affected by a 
famine. One of our interviewees, a field officer who worked 
on 
issues  of  security  and  population  displacement, 
described  being  in  touch  on  a  weekly  basis  with  over  70 
NGOs  as  well  as  other  contacts  on  the  ground  in  the 

1357

country  with  a  growing  food  security  problem,  and 
recording the data in a spreadsheet, in order to achieve an 
estimate of the number of people fleeing the area who were 
experiencing  famine,  and  crossing  international  borders  as 
refugees  in  a  different  country.  As  one  interviewee  put  it, 
“Not everyone can be reduced to a spreadsheet; you need a 
narrative” (OCHA). On top of the data collected by the UN 
Agencies and NGOs, OCHA sitrep writers were expected to 
synthesize  the  different  data  points. All  the  work  that  this 
interviewee  describes  would  be  conveyed  to  OCHA  in  a 
highly  summarized  form,  and  be  further  summarized  into 
perhaps a bullet point in the final sitrep, hiding all the work, 
uncertainties, and negotiations behind it. This not only loses 
all  the  nuance  that  is  behind  a  description  and  that 
disappears in a number, but also hides the amount of work 
that takes place to collect even highly unsatisfactory data. 
The difficulty of gathering data can be exacerbated by the 
political  motivations  of  sources.  The  following  quote 
describes  some  of  the  challenges  of  understanding  how 
many internally displaced people there were as a result of a 
flood. 
“We heard from one ethnic group and they said there was 
100,000  displaced.  Then  the  other  group  said  there  was 
nothing and then changed their story. What we saw was a 
process  of  inflation  about  IDPs  [internally  displaced 
people].  People  in  NGOs  had  sophisticated  models  of 
counting  IDPs.  The  government  said  there  was  6,000 
[IDPs].  The  range  was  600,000  to  6,000.  We  tried  to 
triangulate. We talked to village elders who lied. We wasted 
a lot of time in terms of resources. We couldn’t figure out 
who the beneficiary population should be.” (OCHA) 
As 
rough 
this  OCHA  staff  makes  clear,  even  a 
understanding  of  the  size  of  the  population  in  need  is 
incredibly difficult to know because of the political context 
of humanitarian crises. 
6th  Challenge:  Competition  and  collaboration  amongst 
humanitarian actors  
Traditional 
complex 
research 
informational  environments  is  problematic  when  it  is 
applied to humanitarian organizations because there is little 
recognition  that  multiple  organizations  must  coordinate 
[33]. Furthermore, researchers have found that in this multi-
organization  non-profit  context,  there  is  much  concern 
about  visibility  to  funders,  and  competition  for  resources 
[17,18,61].  
In  the  multi-organizational  setting  where  OCHA  operates, 
not only must the producers of sitreps take into account the 
intricacies of the organization that employs them, but also 
the  fact  that,  as  OCHA,  they  are  not  necessarily  the 
organization 
is 
coordinating 
that  are 
involved. In the last decades, there has been a large increase 
in  spending  on  humanitarian  disaster  response  and  a 
proliferation  in  organizations  and  workers  involved  with 

that 
the  hundreds  of  organizations 

to  disasters.  OCHA 

responds 

on 

governance 

of 

intervention 

and 

other 

towards 

on 

then 

I’ll  stop” 

humanitarian 

coordination, 

relationships  with 

humanitarian  disasters  [3].  Increased  financial  resources 
directed 
have 
corresponded  to  an  increase  of  people  and  material  goods 
moving  to  an  area  with  an  emergency,  as  well  as  an 
emphasis 
accountability.  
Organizations like OCHA are in charge of coordinating all 
the  actors,  and  have  developed  with  the  increases  in 
humanitarian  budgets  and  number  of  actors.  Pre-disaster 
organization-spanning  relationships  are  key 
to  cross-
organizational  information  sharing  in  disaster  response 
(Kapucu  2006).    Thus,  producing  a  sitrep  report  requires 
excellent 
humanitarian 
organizations.  Most  of  the  information  in  OCHA  sitreps 
typically  comes  from  NGOs  and  UN  Agencies  that  are 
working directly with people affected by a disaster.  
A  considerable  obstacle  to  information  sharing  was  that 
actors  in  the  field  were  often  in  competition  for  funding, 
publicity, and resources. Collaboration required time, which 
many  NGO  staff  members  did  not  have,  and  drained 
resources needed for actual humanitarian action. It was also 
often perceived as a burden that would not get reciprocated, 
as  the  sitreps  did  not  seem  to  provide  enough  new 
information to NGOs to make worth their time sharing their 
own  data,  as  this  informant  explains:  “Information  should 
always be both ways, if it’s only one-way, I might do it for a 
while, 
(NGO).  The  sentiment  was 
widespread  among  NGO  informants,  although  some  were 
more willing to recognize OCHA’s value: 
“If  OCHA  can  provide  good  information,  we’re  happy  to 
share our information. It’s getting something out of it. In a 
place like [name omitted] where the government had put in 
place very confusing regulations on NGOs, going to OCHA 
forums was really helpful because they would take on some 
of  those  issues,  and  work  with  the  government  to  provide 
clearer regulations.” (NGO) 
The emergency relief environment is highly competitive, as 
different  agencies  and  NGOs  were  competing  for  funding 
of their projects, and thus for visibility in sitreps. Sitreps are 
perceived as a vehicle for visibility:  
“(We get feedback) mainly from NGOs, because they want 
our sitreps to reflect their work… All acknowledge that it’s 
useful, but they complain that their work is not reflected on 
sitreps,  and  we  reply  that  we’re  happy  to  receive  on  a 
weekly  basis  information  on  what  they  do,  but  this  never 
happens,  nobody  has  the  time  for  dedicated  Information 
Officers  to  sit  down  and  do  that  every  week.  Tricky 
situation,  they  complain  and  we  tell  them  give  us  the 
information.” (OCHA). 
Some  people  who  worked  for  NGOs  agreed  that  visibility 
in  a  sitrep  was  important  to  them.  “I  always  look  for  my 
own stuff, to see if [my agency] is there. If it is, then I look 
at who else is there; if not, then I call OCHA to complain,” 
(NGO). OCHA staff often highlighted how visibility is an 
incentive. As one employee said, “it is about being visible. 

1358

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

these  organizations  and 

Donors want to see them” (OCHA). But though NGOs and 
UN  Agencies  believed  that  it  was  important  for  them  to 
gain  visibility  through  the  OCHA  sitrep,  donors  did  not 
agree:  
“Does it matter if an NGO is highlighted? Generally no—it 
means  they  have  funding  and  can  operate.  We’re  really 
looking at gaps. We might say, oh, this looks great, but we 
know  about  NGO  reputations  based  on  our  own 
institutional experiences.” (Donor).  
Our  document  analysis  showed  that  OCHA  sitreps  were 
heavily focused on UN agencies, giving the most visibility 
to 
their  activities.  Donors 
confirmed this:  
“OCHA’s mandate is to pull it all together, but what we see 
is in fact a UN sitrep. UN agencies are big players in terms 
of funding, but even if they are not, OCHA sitreps seem to 
assume  that  the  UN  is  the  only  player  in  a  particular 
response. So they shortchange their mandate.” (Donor)  
Moreover,  while  organizations  were  sometimes  eager  to 
report  on  their  action,  they  were  not  eager  to  talk  about 
where  they  might  be  falling  short.  When  asked  what  they 
were  looking  for  in  OCHA  sitreps,  our  interviewees  often 
answered  “context.”  By  this  many  of  the  interviewees 
meant  the  needs  of  the  local  population,  the  response  by 
local  governments  and  the  humanitarian  community,  and 
the  unmet  needs,  referred  to  as  the  gap.  The  response-
needs-gap triad was, however, often missing for a variety of 
reasons, the most frequent being that the sitrep authors did 
not know what they were. The majority of our interviewees, 
including  OCHA  staff,  expressed  considerable  frustration 
over the difficulty in providing context, as this was seen as 
the real value added that the organization could provide. As 
one donor explained, 
“What is frustrating is that they [OCHA] don’t put things 
in  a  context.  [Sitreps  say]  this  agency  delivered  this  aid 
[with] no context. Most useful things—needs out there, this 
is  provided,  this  is  the  gap—that’s  what  I  feel  people 
wanted to know. Now as a desk officer it’s like OK, but this 
doesn’t really say anything about the situation” (Donor). 
This  was  confirmed  by  our  document  analysis,  which 
showed  that  every  single  sitrep  featured  details  about  the 
response that was being carried out, but rarely matched it to 
actual,  reported  gaps.  Context  also  referred  to  the  big 
picture  of  the  crisis,  but  it  was  not  straightforward  what 
context  OCHA  could  include,  and  what  content  would  be 
read as OCHA overstepping its mandate of “coordination,” 
as  we  saw  above  in  the  5th  challenge.  Thus,  in  an 
environment  of  competition  for  funding  and  visibility, 
sitrep authors had the complex role of arbiters of what went 
into 
the  humanitarian 
consensus on the emergency. A sitrep was often only going 
to be as good as the relationships that OCHA Information 
Officers  had  with  UN  Agencies,  NGOs  and  other 
organizations working in the field. 

that  represented 

the  document 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

that 

the  economic 

in  “the  consensus  of 

DISCUSSION 
Through  our  analysis,  we  highlighted  the  complexities  of 
sitrep creators’ work, which helps explain how a document 
so vital could also be so “confused.”  
Downey  suggests 
three  analytics  for 
there  are 
examining  information  labor  that  point  us  towards  several 
conclusions.  First,  by  focusing  on  information  labor, 
researchers note “how human labor applied to information 
always  takes  place  in,  and  depends  on,  a  particular 
spatial/temporal  and  political-economic  context”  [23].    In 
order  to  write  a  sitrep,  its  creators  need  knowledge  about 
complex  organizational  structures  involved  in  disaster 
response, 
imperatives  of  humanitarian 
organizations,  interventionist  logics,  as  well  as  the  crisis 
itself.  Notably,  the  sitreps  represent  the  “humanitarian 
consensus,”  as 
international 
humanitarian actors,” not the consensus of those affected by 
a  crisis.  Thus,  the  work  of  sitrep  production  supports  the 
logic of intervention where well-paid international workers 
come in to help “victims.” Social media holds the promise 
of  broadcasting  everyone’s  voices,  but  the  reality  is  often 
that  those  who  are  in  the  most  need  do  not  use  the 
platforms, such as Twitter, that many humanitarians, digital 
and otherwise, listen to. Sitreps, as products of information 
labor,  are  inscribed  with  the  political-economic  context  of 
humanitarian  action.  As  we  described  above,  their  authors 
must  rely  on  other  organizations  for  details  about  a  crisis. 
Humanitarian  organizations  compete  with  each  other  for 
funding,  but  also  must  cooperate  with  each  other  in 
responding  to  a  crisis,  and  providing  data  for  documents 
like sitreps. This environment incentivizes organizations to 
produce information that meets their needs either promoting 
their work or describing a situation so that they can get the 
resources they seek. Thus sitreps are not merely a document 
describing a disaster, but a platform for requesting funding. 
Other humanitarian actors may know how to read between 
the lines of a sitrep, but the general public may not.   
Second,  analysts  must  attend  to  the  social  meaning  of 
information 
the 
circulation of information [23]. Sitrep authors did not have 
high  status  amongst  humanitarian  workers,  and  devalued 
their  own  work.  This  shaped  the  quality  of  their  work,  as 
assessed by other humanitarian actors, because their status 
was  reflected  in  their  access  to  other  organization  and  the 
information that they might be privy to. The status of sitrep 
work meant that the initial products of sitrep authors were 
edited  before  being  circulated  publicly.  Furthermore,  the 
low  status  of  this  kind  of  work  makes  it  easy  to 
underestimate  the  expertise  involved  in  it.  For  example, 
describing the nutritional needs of a population of displaced 
people requires understanding local food customs, available 
cooking 
support  meal 
preparation,  existing  accessible  food  supplies,  and  the 
number  of  people  to  be  served.  Sitrep  authors  themselves 
might not have this expertise, but they often have access to 
it  within  their  networks.  While  we  are  not  against  the 

labor  as  enabling  and  constraining 

facilities,  energy  needs 

to 

1359

labor 

lens 

information 

efforts  and  expertise  of  “digital  humanitarians,”  and  the 
positive  impact  this  discourse  might  have  on  the  status  of 
“information  labor,”  attention  to  the  expertise  needed  in 
humanitarian information production is also critical. 
Third, a focus on how the circulation of information shapes 
the information labor [23] shows that information laborers 
were constantly considering the many invited and uninvited 
audiences  for  sitrep  documents.  Sitrep  authors  hoped  that 
the  documents  would  persuade  potential  donors  to  fund 
humanitarian  relief  efforts.  However,  they  also  had  to 
consider  that  sitreps  might  be  read  by  governments  or 
organizations  involved  in  exacerbating  the  crises.  Thus, 
they  had  to  be  sanitized,  and  facts  left  out.  These 
incomplete sitreps sometimes compromised the standing of 
OCHA  within  the  humanitarian  community;  on  the  other 
hand, its ability to deliver aid depended on its presence in, 
and even cooperation with, unscrupulous state actors. These 
compromises frustrated sitrep authors and other actors, and 
further  highlight  how  the  production  of  sitreps  is  imbued 
with the logic of humanitarian intervention. 
Using  Downey’s 
to  consider 
humanitarian  action,  we  argue  that  the  environment  of 
humanitarian  action  is  reasserted  many  times  throughout 
the  sitrep  creation  process,  and  the    lens  of  “situated 
information  labor”  explains  why  the  documents  look  so 
“fundamentally  confused.”  These  documents  reflect  a 
fundamentally  confused  situation,  with  contradicting 
priorities and audiences, and a multitude of constraints. The 
information 
contradiction 
themselves.  They  do  a  job  that  is  considered  critical  in 
theory,  but  undervalued  and  under-resourced  in  practice, 
and  that  is  characterized  by  a  series  of  misaligned 
incentives. Ultimately, the most significant contribution of 
our  work  as  consultants  has  been  to  make  visible  the 
invisible  work  of  sitrep  writers,  and  to  highlight  how 
misaligned goals were often visible in the form and content 
of the document itself. As researchers, we emphasize how 
all  humanitarian  information  must  be  read  through  its 
context  of  production  (digital  volunteers  or  OCHA 
employees alike), and that the processes behind it can shed 
light on the real priorities of the communities involved.   
CONCLUSION  
OCHA  sitreps  never  met  the  expectations  of  those  who 
made or those who read them—they were too short or too 
long, provided too little or too much detail, and omitted as 
much  information  as  they  provided.  Still,  people  found 
them irreplaceable, even as they were expected to perform a 
variety  of  often 
they 
represented  the  humanitarian  consensus  on  what  was 
publicly citable. By analyzing the complexities of working 
in  a  humanitarian  setting,  we  show  that  the  information 
labor that goes into making sitreps can help us understand 
why  sitreps  are  “fundamentally  confused  documents,”  and 
why  they  are  faithful  representations  of  the  complexity  of 
humanitarian emergencies.  

roles,  because 

incompatible 

laborers 

embody 

these 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank those who took the time to speak with us in the 
course  of  our  fieldwork.  Nick  Rabinowitz  was  integral  to 
the data collection and analysis presented here. This work 
was  made  possible  by  the  support  of  Robert  Glushko  and 
Pamela Samuelson, and funded by Big Ideas @ Berkeley. 
Megan  Finn  and  Nick  Rabinowitz  were  contract  workers 
with  OCHA  after  the  fieldwork  reported  on  above  was 
completed.  Airi  Lampenen,  Janaki  Srinivasan,  Morgan 
Ames, Daniela Rosner, Jaime Snyder, Lilly Irani, and Mary 
Gray kindly read drafts of this paper and gave us invaluable 
feedback. 
REFERENCES 
1.  Michael N. Barnett. 2011. Empire of Humanity : A 

History of Humanitarianism. Cornell University Press, 
Ithaca, NY. 

2.  Michael N. Barnett and Thomas George Weiss (eds.). 
2008. Humanitarianism in Question : Politics, Power, 
Ethics. Cornell University Press, Ithaca. 

3.  Michael Barnett and Thomas George Weiss. 2008. 
Humanitarianism: A Brief History of the Present. In 
Humanitarianism in Question: Politics, Power, Ethics, 
Michael Barnett and Thomas George Weiss (eds.). 
Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY. 
Jean-François Blanchette. 2011. A Material History of 
Bits. Journal of the American Society for Information 
Science and Technology 62, 6, 1042–1057.  

4. 

5.  Aad Blok and Greg Downey (eds.). 2004. Uncovering 

Labour Information Revolutions 1750-2000. 
Cambridge University Press.  

6.  Geoffrey C Bowker. 1994. Science on the run: 

information management and industrial geophysics at 
Schlumberger, 1920-1940. MIT Press, Cambridge, 
Mass. 
John Seely. Brown and Paul Duguid. 2000. The social 
life of information. Harvard Business School Press, 
Boston. 

7. 

8.  Ryan Burns. 2014. Moments of Closure in the 

Knowledge Politics of Digital Humanitarianism. 
Geoforum 53, 51–62.  

9.  Ryan Burns. 2014. Rethinking Big Data in Digital 
Humanitarianism: Practices, Epistemologies, and 
Social Relations. GeoJournal.  

10.  Craig Calhoun. 2004. A World of Emergencies: Fear, 
Intervention, and the Limits of Cosmopolitan Order*. 
Canadian Review of Sociology, April.  

11.  Craig Calhoun. 2010. The Idea of Emergency: 
Humanitarian Action and Global (Dis)Order. In 
Contemporary States of Emergency: The Politics of 
Miliary and Humanitarian Interventions, Didier Fassin 
and Mariella Pandolfi (eds.). Zone Books ; Distributed 
by the MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 29–58. 

1360

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

12.  Manuel Castells. 1996. The Rise of the Network 

Society. Blackwell, Maiden, MA. 

13.  Lilie Chouliaraki. 2011. “Improper distance”: Towards 

a critical account of solidarity as irony. International 
Journal of Cultural Studies 14, 4, 363–381.  
14.  Lilie Chouliaraki. 2013. Re-Mediation, Inter-

Mediation, Trans-Mediation: The cosmopolitan 
trajectories of convergent journalism. Journalism 
Studies 14, 2, 267–283.  

15.  Camille Cobb, Ted McCarthy, Annuska Perkins, et al. 

2014. Designing for the deluge: understanding & 
supporting the distributed, collaborative work of crisis 
volunteers. ACM Press, 888–899.  

16.  Kate Crawford and Megan Finn. 2014. The limits of 
crisis data: analytical and ethical challenges of using 
social and mobile data to understand disasters. 
GeoJournal (November 2014), 1–12.  

17.  Christopher A. Le Dantec and W. Keith Edwards. 
2008. The View from the Trenches: Organization, 
Power, and Technology at Two Nonprofit Homeless 
Outreach Centers. Proceedings of the 2008 ACM 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work, ACM, 589–598.  

18.  Christopher A. Le Dantec and W. Keith Edwards. 

2010. Across Boundaries of Influence and 
Accountability: The Multiple Scales of Public Sector 
Information Systems. Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
ACM, 113–122.  

19.  Lynn Dombrowski, Amy Voida, Gillian R. Hayes, and 

Melissa Mazmanian. 2012. The Labor Practices of 
Service Mediation: A Study of the Work Practices of 
Food Assistance Outreach. Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
ACM, 1977–1986.  

20.  Greg Downey. 2001. Virtual webs, physical 

technologies, and hidden workers: The spaces of labor 
in information internetworks. Technology and Culture 
42, 2, 209–235. 

21.  Gregory J. Downey. 2002. Telegraph Messenger Boys: 

Labor, Technology, and Geography, 1850-1950. 
Routledge, New York. 

22.  Gregory J. Downey. 2008. Closed Captioning: 

Subtitling, Stenography, and the Digital Convergence 
of Text with Television. Johns Hopkins University 
Press, Baltimore. 

23.  Gregory J. Downey. 2014. Making Media Work: Time, 

Space, Identity, and Labor in the Analysis of 
Information and Communication Infrastructures. In 
Media Technologies: Essays on Communication, 
Materiality, and Societ, Tarleton Gillespie, Pablo J. 
Boczkowski and Kirsten A. Foot (eds.). MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA, 141–165. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

24.  Paul Duguid. 1996. Material Matters: The Past and 
Futurology of the Book. In The Future of the Book, 
Geoffrey Nunberg (ed.). University of California Press, 
Berkeley and Los Angeles, California, 63–102.  

25.  Sean Goggins, Christopher Mascaro, and Stephanie 

Mascaro. 2012. Relief work after the 2010 Haiti 
earthquake: leadership in an online resource 
coordination network. Proceedings of the ACM 2012 
conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 
ACM, 57–66.  

26.  Peter Gourevitch. 2010. Alms Dealers. The New 

Yorker. (October 11, 2010) Retrieved May 21, 2015 
from 
http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2010/10/11/alms
-dealers 

27.  Jennifer Hyndman. 2000. Managing Displacement: 

Refugees andthe Polics of Humanitarianism. 
University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, MN. 

28.  Casper Bruun Jensen and Brit Ross Winthereik. 2013. 
Monitoring Movements in Development Aid: Recursive 
Partnerships and Infrastructures. MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA.  

29.  Jonathan M. Katz. 2014. The Big Truck That Went By: 
How the World Came to Save Haiti and Left Behind a 
Disaster. Palgrave Macmillan Trade. 

30.  Rebecca Knuth. 1999. Sovereignty, Globalism, and 

Information Flow in Complex Emergencies. The 
Information Society, October 2011, 37–41. 

31.  David M. Levy. 1994. Fixed or fluid?: document 

stability and new media. Proceedings of the 1994 ACM 
European Conference on Hypermedia Technology, 
ACM, 24–31.  

32.  David Lewis and Shirin Madon. 2004. Information 

Systems and Nongovernmental Development 
Organizations: Advocacy, Organizational Learning, 
and Accountability. The Information Society 20, 2, 
117–126.  

33.  Edgar A. Maldonado, Carleen F. Maitland, and Andrea 
H. Tapia. 2010. Collaborative systems development in 
disaster relief: The impact of multi-level governance. 
Information Systems Frontiers 12, 1, 9–27.  

34.  Michael Maren. 1997. The Road to Hell: The Ravaging 
Effects of Foreign Aid and International Charity. Free 
Press, New York. 

35.  Gloria J. Mark, Ban Al-Ani, and Bryan Semaan. 2009. 

Resilience Through Technology Adoption: Merging 
the Old and the New in Iraq. Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, ACM, 689–698.  

36.  Gloria Mark and Bryan Semaan. 2008. Resilience in 
Collaboration: Technology As a Resource for New 
Patterns of Action. Proceedings of the 2008 ACM 

Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work, ACM, 137–146.  

37.  Aryn Martin and Michael Lynch. 2009. Counting 
Things and People: The Practices and Politics of 
Counting. Social Problems 56, 2, 243–266.  

38.  Geoffrey Nunberg. 1996. Farewell to the information 

age. In The Future of the Book, Geoffrey Nunberg 
(ed.). University of California Press, Berkeley and Los 
Angeles, California.  

39.  Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. 

2007. OCHA Annual Report 2007.  

40.  Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. 

2008. OCHA Annual Report 2008. 

41.  Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. 

2009. OCHA Annual Report 2009. 

42.  Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. 

2010. OCHA Annual Report 2010. 

43.  Alexandra Olteanu, Sarah Vieweg, and Carlos Castillo. 
2015. What to Expect When the Unexpected Happens: 
Social Media Communications Across Crises. ACM 
Press, 994–1009.  

44.  Leysia Palen, Robert Soden, T. Jennings Anderson, 

and Mario Barrenechea. 2015. Scale in a Data-
Producing Organization: The Socio-Technical 
Evolution of OpenStreetMap in Response to 
Humanitarian Events. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual 
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, ACM, 4113–4122.  

45.  Leysia Palen and Sarah Vieweg. 2008. The emergence 
of online widescale interaction in unexpected events: 
assistance, alliance & retreat. Proceedings of the 2008 
ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative 
work, ACM, 117–126.  

46.  Leysia Palen, Sarah Vieweg, Sophia B. Liu, and 
Amanda L. Hughes. 2009. Crisis in a Networked 
World: Features of Computer-Mediated 
Communication in the April 16, 2007, Virginia Tech 
Event. Social Science Computer Review 27, 4, 467–
480.  

47.  Linda Polman. 2011. The Crisis Caravan: What’s 

Wrong with Humanitarian Aid? Picador, New York. 
48.  Nicholas Rabinowitz. 2009. The OCHA Sitrep: Open 

Access and Political Pressure in Humanitarian 
Information. Masters Thesis. University of California, 
Berkeley. 

49.  David Rieff. 2003. A Bed for the Night: 

Humanitarianism in Crisis. Simon & Schuster, New 
York. 

50.  A. Sarcevic, L. Palen, J. White, K. Starbird, M. 

Bagdouri, and K. Anderson. 2012. “Beacons of hope” 
in decentralized coordination: Learning from on-the-
ground medical twitterers during the 2010 Haiti 

1361

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

62.  D Stromberg. 2007. Natural disasters, economic 

development, and humanitarian aid. The Journal of 
Economic Perspectives 21, 3, 199–222. 

63.  Nalini Suparamaniam and Sidney Dekker. 2003. 

Paradoxes of power: the separation of knowledge and 
authority in international disaster relief work. Disaster 
Prevention and Management 12, 4, 312–318.  

64.  Yuri Takhteyev. 2012. Coding places: software 

practice in a South American city. MIT Press, 
Cambridge, Mass. 

65.  Andrea Tapia and Carleen Maitland. 2009. Wireless 
Devices for Humanitarian Data Collection: The socio-
technical implications for multi-level organizational 
change. Information, Communication & Society 12, 4, 
584–604.  

66.  Fiona Terry. 2002. Condemned to Repeat?: The 

Paradox of Humanitarian Action. Cornell University 
Press, Ithaca ; London. 

67.  Emmanuel Tusiime and Elaine Byrne. 2011. 

Information Systems Innovation in the Humanitarian 
Sector. Information Technologies & International 
Development 7, 4. 

68.  Siva Vaidhyanathan. 2006. Afterword: Critical 

Information Studies. Cultural Studies 20, 2-3, 292–
315.  

69.  Amy Voida. 2011. Shapeshifters in the Voluntary 
Sector: Exploring the Human-centered-computing 
Challenges of Nonprofit Organizations. interactions 
18, 6, 27–31.  

70.  L N Van Wassenhove. 2005. Humanitarian aid 

logistics: supply chain management in high gear†. 
Journal of the Operational Research Society 57, 5, 
475–489.  

71.  Michael Watts. 1983. On the Poverty of Theory: 

Natural Hazards Research in Context. In 
Interpretations of Calamity From the Viewpoint of 
Human Ecology, Kenneth Hewitt (ed.). Allen & Unwin 
Inc., Boston. 

72.  Frank Webster. 2006. Theories of the Information 

Society. Routledge, London; New York. 
 

 

earthquake. Proceedings of the ACM Conference on 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work, CSCW, 47–
56.  

51.  AnnaLee Saxenian. 2006. The New Argonauts: 

Regional Advantage in a Global Economy. Harvard 
University Press, Cambridge, Mass. 

52.  Bryan Semaan and Gloria Mark. 2011. Technology-

mediated Social Arrangements to Resolve Breakdowns 
in Infrastructure During Ongoing Disruption. ACM 
Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 18, 4, 21:1–21:21.  

53.  Bryan Semaan and Gloria Mark. 2012. “Facebooking” 
Towards Crisis Recovery and Beyond: Disruption As 
an Opportunity. Proceedings of the ACM 2012 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work, ACM, 27–36.  

54.  Lea Shanley, Ryan Burns, Zachary Bastian, and 
Edward Robson. 2013. Tweeting up a storm: the 
promise and perils of crisis mapping. Available at 
SSRN 2464599. Retrieved May 21, 2015 from 
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=24
64599 

55.  Irina Shklovski, Leysia Palen, and Jeannette Sutton. 
2008. Finding community through information and 
communication technology in disaster response. 
Proceedings of the 2008 ACM Conference on 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work, ACM, 127–
136.  

56.  Kate Starbird. 2013. Delivering patients to sacré coeur: 

collective intelligence in digital volunteer 
communities. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, 801–
810.  

57.  Kate Starbird and Leysia Palen. 2011. Voluntweeters: 

Self-organizing by Digital Volunteers in Times of 
Crisis. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, 1071–
1080.  

58.  Kate Starbird and Leysia Palen. 2013. Working and 
Sustaining the Virtual Disaster Desk. Proceedings of 
the 2013 conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work, ACM, 491–502.  

59.  Susan Leigh Star and Anselm Strauss. 1999. Layers of 
Silence, Arenas of Voice: The Ecology of Visible and 
Invisible Work. Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work (CSCW) 8, 1-2, 9–30.  

60.  Monica Stephens. 2013. Gender and the GeoWeb: 

divisions in the production of user-generated 
cartographic information. GeoJournal 78, 6, 981–996.  

61.  Jennifer Stoll, W. Keith Edwards, and Elizabeth D. 
Mynatt. 2010. Interorganizational Coordination and 
Awareness in a Nonprofit Ecosystem. Proceedings of 
the 2010 ACM Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work, ACM, 51–60.  

1362

