CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

‘A Farmer, a Place and at least 20 Members’

The Development of Artifact Ecologies in Volunteer-based

Susanne Bødker

Department of Computer

Science & Centre for
Participatory IT, Aarhus

University

Aarhus, Denmark
bodker@cs.au.dk

Communities
Henrik Korsgaard

Department of Computer

Science & Centre for
Participatory IT, Aarhus

University

Aarhus, Denmark
korsgaard@cs.au.dk

Joanna Saad-Sulonen
Department of Computer

Science & Centre for
Participatory IT, Aarhus

University

Aarhus, Denmark

jss@cs.au.dk

ABSTRACT
In this paper, we present a case study of an urban organic
food community and examine the way the community shapes
its artifact ecology through a combination of appropriation
of freely or cheaply available tools, and the long-term effort
of building the community’s own website. Based on partici-
patory observation, content analysis of communication docu-
ments, and a series of interviews, we see how the collection
of artifacts that a community uses to support their practice
form what we refer to as their community artifact ecology.
A community artifact ecology is multifaceted, dynamic and
pending on what the members bring to the table, as well as on
particular situations of use. The community artifact ecology
concept is important for CSCW as it enables framing of the
relationship between communities and technologies beyond
the single artifact and beyond a static view of a dedicated
technology.

Author Keywords
Community; volunteering; artifact ecology

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.3 Group and Organization Interfaces: H.3.5 Web-based
services

INTRODUCTION
In this paper, we present a case study of a local organic food
community, their struggle and creativity in ﬁnding and ap-
propriating speciﬁc computational artifacts, software applica-
tions and devices alike, to support their developing practices.
Through participatory observation, content analysis of com-
munication documents, and a series of interviews, we trace
the history of the community from being a few selected peo-
ple searching for a potential for action around a matter of con-
cern, to a growing and established community with practical

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW ’16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA
2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02...$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820029

1142

concerns and duties to fulﬁll. The entry point to this is a study
of the genealogy of the community and its artifact ecology:
The collection of tools that the community uses to support
their core activities, which are based on voluntary work. Like
many other self-organized communities, based on volunteer-
ing work, this one operates with little resources and with an
open and ﬂuent way of organizing their work. The aim of
the paper is to bring forward the kind of everyday ‘vernacu-
lar’ design work (e.g. [26]) that volunteer-based communities
engage in, to shape a working artifact ecology that supports
their needs. This enables us to better pinpoint potential areas
of CSCW research with volunteer-based communities, espe-
cially in the contemporary context where there is an abun-
dance of tools available. The questions we seek to answer are
the following:
• What constitutes an artifact ecology in the context of

volunteer-based communities?

• How do such communities shape their artifact ecology?
• What role does the artifact ecology play in the shaping and

the development of the community?

In the following, we argue that establishing a community arti-
fact ecology is an inherent part of shaping the community and
plays an important role in the formation and ongoing life of
a community. It shapes the community as much as other ele-
ments, e.g. manifestos, regulation, membership terms and the
community space. To understand how self-organized com-
munities go about their work, it is necessary to consider how
they establish, provision and work with their community arti-
fact ecology.
By addressing the development of volunteer communities
through the perspective of community artifact ecologies, we
aim to focus on the technological mechanisms that support,
develop or hinder the emergent practices and purposes of the
community. In contrast to previous contributions in this area,
the importance of this contribution lies in drawing attention
to the multiplicity of experiences and technologies that are
brought into play in such a setting.

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
Whereas CSCW has always discussed work as an activity that
goes beyond paid labor [11], this has not happened without
discussion (see [3] and [48]). Lately, there has been a grow-
ing interest in the notion of voluntary work as a type of col-
laborative endeavor. These endeavors can be temporary (e.g.
as responses to disasters, see [55]), they can happen through
everyday help-giving (e.g. [53]), or as longer-term activities
that eventually scaffold the shaping and sustaining of commu-
nities around particular concerns (e.g. [23]). Community is a
wide concept, which is also applied outside work settings: In
CSCW, attention has been to online communities and com-
munity networking systems (e.g.
[41, 18, 45]). Preece &
Maloney-Krichmar [45] summarize this research and look at
how communication and interaction among members of on-
line communities may be supported, whether at work or not.
In many parts of the world, alternative models for the pro-
duction and distribution of food are being explored. In agri-
culture and food studies, these are referred to as civic food
networks [46], or Alternative Food Networks (AFN), as a rep-
resentation of the so-called “quality turn” that emerged as a
reaction to disappointments in mainstream industrial food cir-
cuits [25]. In practice, this means that, triggered by concerns
over food safety and health, economic strain, ecological ide-
als, and/or civic activism, there is a portion of the population
in various locations worldwide that is putting effort in get-
ting access to clean, local, and often organic food. This has
prompted new alliances between cities and the countryside by
reconﬁguring the distribution chain and creating direct links
between city dwellers and farmers [38], and an interest in e.g.
urban gardening communities [54, 36].
The theme of sustainable food has been picked up by e.g.
[20], and is situated in the wider discussion on sustainabil-
ity [21]. Food distribution networks have been discussed by
[23], communities of organic farmers by [35], and urban gar-
dening communities by [2, 51, 54, 36].
In the wider ﬁeld
of organizing and collaboration online, recent studies of time
banks [6], crowd-funding [28], online learning communities
[40] and other forms of sharing communities are equally rel-
evant [37]. However, much of the discussion remains focused
either on the use of existing digital tools or online platforms
to support these activities, or on the design of new ones, of-
ten from a monolithic perspective. Additionally, in the recent
CSCW cases, the use of multiple technologies is studied in-
side a multiple user setting of relatively short-lived situations
[24], or of established online enterprise communities [39].
Despite its main focus on communities of practice at work,
CSCW has nonetheless provided a number of perspectives
that are useful for the current case: Communities, as re-
searched in CSCW, have often been deﬁned with a back-
ground in Lave & Wenger’s [33] deﬁnition of communities
of practice, which means a focus on learning, as a journey
for newcomers into central members of the community, and
the roles of routines, the physical setting and artifacts, of-
ten, but not entirely, within work. Other parallel theoretical
framings have included socio-cultural activity systems, or a
combination of the two within work settings and beyond [16,

14], emphasizing also that communities ‘work’ whether this
is as paid labor or not.
CSCW has been focused on how groups pick, orchestrate,
use and work with multiple software systems over time, e.g.
Pipek & Wulf [44], Star & Ruhleder [50], and strategies to
cope with systems that do not smoothly support collaboration
routines [15]. Upon these roots, several authors use Star &
Ruhleder’s idea of infrastructure and infrastructuring to em-
brace the notion, that technologies are appropriated and reap-
propriated into networks of technological infrastructures and
use situations, not only within paid work, but in wider pur-
poseful activities [30, 44].

THEORETICAL FRAMING: ARTIFACT ECOLOGIES
In the aftermath of ubicomp (see e.g. [9]) it has become ev-
ident that technologies do not exist in isolation from each
other, and should not be understood and built as such [31,
7, 4, 43, 29, 52, 13, 49, 47]. In continuation of the work by
Krippendorff [31], Jung et al. [29], and Bødker & Klokmose
[13], we use the terms artifact ecologies to focus on the ways
in which human beings, as individuals or together as groups
or communities, are surrounded by multiple technologies, ap-
plications and devices alike, that they appropriate and use in
different combinations for shifting purposes over time.
Jung et al. refer to an artifact ecology as “a set of all physi-
cal artifacts with some level of interactivity enabled by digital
technology that a person owns, has access to, and uses. [29,
p.201]. In their work, the composition of the artifact ecology
is closely tied to the personal context and purpose of use, as
well as to how the artifacts are connected through functional
compatibilities. Based on their study, the authors conclude
that “Ecologies evolve according to individual users’ per-
sonal strategies and appropriation of artifacts.” [29, p.209].
New artifacts have the potential to both inﬂuence new use
patterns and the way in which the existing artifacts are con-
ceived.
However, an artifact is not only a physical device. Krippen-
dorff [31] argues that we cannot distinguish between soft-
ware, hardware and individual devices when it comes to com-
puting. Bødker & Klokmose [13, 12] similarly focus on the
mediation of use, by software as well as hardware. They ex-
pand Jung et al.’s deﬁnition of the artifact ecology by pin-
pointing its collaborative and dynamic nature:
It unfolds
around the introduction of new artifacts and moves through
different states in a dynamic relationship with other artifacts,
people and their activities and practices. In the unsatisfactory
state, the ecology no longer lives up the needs or expecta-
tions of its user. When a new artifact is added to the ecology,
the ecology goes through an excited state where the new and
existing artifacts are explored and (re-) assessed. In the sta-
ble state the artifacts have found their role and the ecology
at large functions in everyday activities. Changing conﬁgura-
tions of people and activities are hence dynamically related to
changing conﬁgurations of artifacts [8, 12]. In this dynamic
whole, past artifacts as well as future ones may play a role for
the shaping of human practices, and accordingly they may be
usefully considered part of the artifact ecology. This histor-
ical view also ﬁts well with Ackerman et al.’s [1] deﬁnition

1143

of resources, based on a summary of analyses of a number
of physical and virtual artifacts for coordination and collab-
oration in a variety of communities of practice: “A resource
is an entity that is used in a particular manner to address
a recurring need or problem. Its manner of use is charac-
terized by shared expectations, understandings and practices
that have built up during the history of its use in a speciﬁc
environment.” [1, p.310]
The work of Nardi & O’Day [42] and Bell [5] emphasize
localities as an anchoring point for place-speciﬁc ecologies,
such as the museum or the library. Nardi & O’Day’s infor-
mation ecology or Bell’s cultural ecology addresses places
where people take part in activities related to a speciﬁc do-
main and interact with the artifacts available in this local en-
vironment. Nardi & O’Day point out that a healthy ecology
is always in motion, and describe how “[P]eople’s activities
and tools adjust and are adjusted in relation to each other,
always attempting and never quite achieving a perfect ﬁt.”
[42, p.53](p.53), while still displaying “stable participation
of an interconnecting group of people and their tools and
practices.” [42, p.53]
[47] introduce the concept of constellations
Rossitto et al.
of technologies to refer to the several technological artifacts
and applications that people use as part of cooperative work.
Based on their study on how students negotiate and orches-
trate artifacts and applications in their nomadic group work,
they discuss how constellations are made in use, and the pro-
cess of making the constellation work. They argue that a con-
stellation is unique to a particular group and that individuals
can use different applications within different groups. The
performative process of appropriating these artifacts (align-
ing constellations), happen in the interplay between the situ-
ation at hand (place, time and activity) and in negotiation be-
tween proposers and potential adopters within the group. A
particular constellation of a group emerges from the intersec-
tion of the multiple artifact ecologies of the individual group
members. Rossitto et al. describe how some of the artifacts
are sometimes negotiated in the beginning of a project, while
emergent needs (cf. an unsatisfactory state) can result in the
introduction of a new artifact. An individual might act as
a proposer (the more capable peer in Bødker & Klokmose’s
[13] activity theoretical vocabulary) and suggest a potential
artifact to the group – which then again might create tension
(cf. unsatisfactory state and excited state) in the intersection
between the ecologies and personal preferences of the partic-
ipating members.
To summarize, we have expanded the original concept of ar-
tifact ecologies to include a community aspect and we have
taken it to a new social setting, that of volunteer-based com-
munity work. We see a community artifact ecology as the
particular constellation of artifacts that a community owns,
has access to and uses in its activities. It is characterized by a
high degree of shared understanding of the core activities and
the role of the artifacts within the ecology. The community
artifact ecology emerges from the combination of the differ-
ent artifacts that key members introduce from their own per-
sonal ecology. It changes throughout the community lifetime

1144

SESSION: HACKING, MAKING, AND DISCOVERING

in response to community needs. This occurs both through
explicit negotiation and more subtle adoption of artifacts orig-
inating from the ecology of individual members, often more
capable peers. It is both dynamic, as it co-evolves with the
community, and stable beyond the individual member. While
particular artifacts may stem from individual members, they
are often adopted by the community and become part of the
community practices and shared history.
After presenting our research approach, we will look at how a
particular community, based on volunteer work, shapes its ar-
tifact ecology and how this ecology co-evolves with the com-
munity itself. We examine the different stages the community
and its artifact ecology go through, and the circumstances,
tensions and work involved in establishing and maintaining
the community artifact ecology.

RESEARCH APPROACH
In some of our previous work with volunteer-based commu-
nities [27], we began examining the different tools such com-
munities use. In order to better understand why and how com-
munities organize and work with multiple artifacts as part of
their practices, we now sought to study in depth a local or-
ganic food community in Aarhus, Denmark. We have ﬁrst
approached the community when one of the authors became
a member and started taking part in community activities.
Based on the initial insight and a review of the community
website and Facebook page, we began formulating our re-
search goals and tentative research questions.
In order to
understand what were the tools used by the community and
how the community actually developed the suite of digital
tools and aids that support the community activities, we ﬁrst
started with participant observations during community ac-
tivities and a series of interviews with core members. Af-
ter trust was gained, we got permission to go through the
recorded minutes from community meetings throughout its
lifetime and reviewed them.
The interviewees were recruited based on their knowledge of
the community and long-time membership in the community
and the core organization. The interviewees are between the
age of 25 and 45 and all have been long-time members of
and/or played a vital role in the formation of the community
and development of the community artifact ecology, see table
1. This include a founding members, the current developer of
the website, participants from core work groups (communi-
cations, shop, products and ordering), and a board member,
who is responsible for the contact with authorities. Four of
the participants have been members of the board and played
leading roles in core work groups.
We chose a semi-structured interview format and followed a
base guide in all the interviews. The interview touched upon
the respondents’ introduction to the community, their char-
acterization of the community and community space, tech-
nology and activities, and current challenges. The guide
was amended between the interviews to accommodate dif-
ferent roles, (see the ‘roles’ column in table 1). Two of the
interviewees were interviewed together1, and we conducted
one follow-up interview for clariﬁcation and elaboration with
one participant2. The names of the respondents have been

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Inspired by Jung et al.

changed for this publication.
[29]
and Cabrera et al.[17], we experimented with mapped events,
artifacts and people on a timeline together with two of the
participants3, in an attempt to capture the chronology and
key elements to aid us in our analysis of the interview data
(see ﬁgure 1). We used the mapping exercise with one of the
founders to establish the overarching chronology of the com-
munity and with the current developer in an attempt to map
the development of the website.
The primary data in the study is the transcribed interview
data. In addition, we have also used our observation notes
from 8 hours of participant observation, conducted during
packaging shifts at the community space at four occasions, as
well as minutes from the community meetings (open assem-
blies and working group meetings) from the last four years
(N=153), which are available in the members-only section of
the website (we were given permission to access them and
analyze them by the board members at a later stage). The two
maps from the interview sessions were used as supplement-
ing material throughout our internal analysis and to identify
key artifacts in the ecology.
Our analysis has focused on three aspects in the data, namely
establishing the elements of the ecology, its chronology and
how it developed, and examining the interplay between the
community activities and the ecology. The data was analysed
in two steps. First, we coded the transcriptions individually
using open codes to identify common themes, artifact, intro-
duction, change, collaboration, breakdown, software, chal-
lenges, activity, need, community etc., and then consolidated
these through comparison across the interviews. Second, we
used the themes to further identify central statements in the
interviews and compared these through meaning condensa-
tion (see [32]). The themes and focus are presented in the
analysis below.

Study limitations
Acknowledging the limitations of a single case study, we ﬁnd
Flyvbjerg’s [22] argument for the relevance of good case nar-
ratives valid in our case, which is further triangulated with

Name

Role(s)

Laura3

Founder
work group and board
member

Karen1 Work group and board

member

Membership

2010 – 2014

Interview
length
01:07:05

2012 – now

01:09:48

theoretical insights regarding artifact ecologies. He intro-
duces the idea of paradigmatic cases, “cases that highlight
more general characteristics of the societies in question” [22,
p.232] and allows researchers to develop a metaphor or a new
school of thought. Our study allows us to explore and ex-
amine how self-organized communities use and orchestrate
multiple artifacts as part of their practice. This in turn aids us
in further developing the existing theoretical conceptions of
artifact ecologies. The ﬁndings presented here are particular
to the speciﬁc case and cannot be generalised to any commu-
nity. We use the particular ﬁndings to start theorising on the
dynamics of artifact ecologies beyond the individual and how
communities orchestrate their particular artifact ecology. We
will return to the limitations in the study in the discussion.

CASE STUDY: THE ORGANIC FOOD COMMUNITY
The reported research is based on a case study of an organic
food community in Aarhus, Denmark, a city with a popu-
lation of around 300.000. The city is a university city with
a large percentage of younger people. This is also reﬂected
in the member composition of the community. The commu-
nity was started in late 2010 by two women wanting to ﬁnd
a cheaper and more sustainable alternative way to get fresh
local organic food, inspired by initiatives that were sprout-
ing worldwide. Both had worked with organic food produc-
tion and sustainability as part of their university studies. The
community has grown at high rate and has now around 900
registered members (and around 3000 likes on their Face-
book page). According to their own website (AOFF.dk), their
mission is to offer cheap, local organic fruits and vegeta-
bles, and through that spread information and awareness on
organic and sustainable food production in order to engage
members and locals in sustainable initiatives. Their manifesto
and founding principles reﬂect their core values, which relate
to a strong ideological stance on local organic and sustain-
able food production, collaboration and community, knowl-
edge sharing, and emphasizing a high degree of transparency
within the community organization and in the distribution
channel.

“Organic for all! The Aarhus Organic Food commu-
nity is a member-owned and operated cooperative food
community - an alternative to ordinary proﬁt-oriented
supermarket chains. We offer organic, tasty, locally pro-
duced and sustainable food in season for the lowest pos-
sible price. We offer a great selection of organic veg-
etables and fruits, and support sustainable farming.[...]
We want to set an example by educating ourselves and

Nadia1,2 Work group and board

member

2011 – now

Robert Work group and board

2011 – now

00:48:31
(01:09:48
follow up)
00:54:48

member
contact to authorities
Work group member
web developer

Paul3

2011 (active
2012) – now

01:02:19

Table 1: Interviews and respondents role within the com-
munity.

Figure 1: Overview map from interview with Laura

1145

others about food and health, collaboration and the en-
vironment.”
(Excerpt from the manifesto published on the commu-
nity website, translated to English by the authors)

While the community identiﬁes as a ‘fællesskab’ (literal:
community), creating a ‘forening’ (literal: association) is the
most common way to create a formal organization in the lo-
cal context. An association is a particular Danish organiza-
tion form and legal entity that provides some beneﬁts, e.g.
ﬁnancial support and use of public facilities, while also re-
quiring a board, by-laws and a yearly general assembly. The
organic food community is highly organized with a board and
seven working groups covering the tasks involved in manag-
ing the community, arranging events, coordinating with au-
thorities (permits and hygiene inspection), buying and coor-
dinating with the local farmers, and selling and distributing
the organic food goods to the ordinary members of the com-
munity. The board and the working group represent a sta-
ble core group of members of approximately 40 volunteers.
According to the website and our interviews, the community
organization has a ﬂat hierarchy and is open to all members,
with weekly meetings in the working groups, monthly com-
munity meetings and an annual general assembly, where the
board is elected. However, it is clear that the members in-
volved in the board and in the working groups constitute a
sub-group of particularly active individuals. Other members
are nonetheless expected to participate in the Thursday after-
noon activities and actively encouraged to join the monthly
community meetings via the community newsletter and the
Facebook page. Members pay a fee upon joining the com-
munity and they are required to volunteer with three hours of
work each month, coordinated through a scheduling tool on
the community website.

Community space and Thursday activities
The primary activity of the organic food community is the
distribution of the weekly bags of locally grown organic food
to the community members. Each Thursday, local farmers de-
liver the pre-ordered food goods outside the ‘residents house’
– a shared local community space close to the city center, af-
ter which volunteers work to pack and handout the bags to
the community members stopping by to pickup their order. A
typical Thursday starts around 12.30 at the community space,
where the members, who signed up for the packaging shift,
meet and start packaging. The ﬁrst tasks are to unpack the
packaging gear (bags, bowls, weights, gloves etc.), turn on the
refrigerator and put out the food-handling manuals and au-
thority reports which need to be visible to everyone as part of
the requirements for food-handling (in case of unannounced
inspections by the authorities). When the farmer(s) arrive, ev-
eryone helps unloading and starts weighing and packing the
goods into individual bags for members to pickup. Written
manuals (also available via the community website) contain
detailed instructions on how to setup and do the packaging
efﬁciently. After the packing is done, they clean the room
thoroughly and setup the community laptop and credit card
terminal so that it is ready for the next group. Packing usually
takes three hours and around 3.45 pm, two members of the
selling shift take over, handing out bags and taking orders for

1146

SESSION: HACKING, MAKING, AND DISCOVERING

the following week. Around 5.15 pm the second shift starts
and the two members handling the shop are replaced. The
community manuals contain detailed information on how to
setup the shop, keeping track on orders and payments, use the
credit card terminal and spatially organize the bags, tables, or-
der and payment area, etc. The shop is open for community
members from 4 pm until 6.30 pm. When the shop closes, the
late shift members pack, clean and close down the community
space. A typical Thursday ends around 7 pm.
Each week, members place orders for the following week and
based on the number of orders, members of the responsible
working group contact the local farmers to see what food
goods are available, and order the needed amount. The in-
coming orders from the members and the orders that go to
the farmers are currently collected and maintained in several
different Google spreadsheets. The contents of the bag for
the following week is the posted on the community website
and Facebook page, often together with recipes collected by
the recipe’s group. The bag of food goods is sold at a ﬁxed
price, which has gone unchanged throughout the community
lifespan. While there is a seasonal list on the website, and the
contents of the weekly bag is announced as soon as possible,
the members do not know exactly what is in the weekly bag
until the details are announced.
From our observations and interviews we see how sharing a
space on Thursday afternoons plays an important, yet subtle,
role in the way the community shapes itself. Having a place
to distribute the weekly bags of vegetables is a deﬁning trait
of the community and an integral part of its activities.

“So, as we grew and got a bit more established, we also
needed to [move]. But we also really wanted to have
own space where we could make it a little bit cozy.”
(Laura)

When asked, the interviewees emphasized the face-to-face
meeting, personal relationships and community activities as
the situations, where the community best comes to life:

“Well, it happens on Thursdays, it happens in person.
[...] We have a lot of followers on Facebook and we post
various things there, but I think everything community-
wise kind of happens in person, either like in the opening
hours or at the meetings.” (Karen)
“The community feeling is when I am actually at the
shop on Thursdays and when we have a meeting. And
you see people face-to-face. I dont feel that we have a
very strong community on Facebook or anywhere else,
virtually. It is more the personal relationship I have with
other members when we see each other.” (Robert)

The relationship to the community space is not only func-
tional, even though the residents’ house is a shared space. It
is part of the community identity and having some say over
how it is organized during the shifts on Thursdays is impor-
tant to the community members. The interviewees identify
the community with the activities happening every Thursday.
The website plays the role of closely supporting these activi-
ties, e.g. manning shifts, information on handling food goods,
and through the focus of the working groups. It is only possi-

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

ble to become a member by visiting the community on Thurs-
days. This is not by deliberate decision, but rather a result of a
member registration feature never being implemented on the
website.

COMMUNITY WORK AND THE ARTIFACT ECOLOGY
In the following section we analyze how the community and
its artifact ecology develop hand-in-hand. By studying the
practices of the community in question, its purposes, tools,
and places, we have identiﬁed three main conceptual stages in
the formation and establishment of the community and its ar-
tifact ecology: Becoming a community, everyday community
work, and building anew. These stages are characterized by
some (temporary) stability in terms of foci, concerns, artifact,
and activities, which are grounded in the empirical study. The
stages are used descriptively and conceptually, and should not
be read as prescriptive, a point we will return to in the discus-
sion.

Becoming a community and ﬁrst steps in shaping the
ecology
The two founders of the community were interested in ﬁnding
cheap and responsible models for getting local and seasonal
organic food. One of the women had heard of the Copen-
hagen organic food community while talking to people at the
UN Climate Conference (COP15) that was held in Copen-
hagen in 2009 and subsequently invited a representative from
Copenhagen over to learn more about how to start a local or-
ganic food community in their city. At that meeting he pre-
sented the basic requirements for starting a community simi-
lar to the one in Copenhagen:

“You need to have a farmer, you need to have around
20 members, so you can at least order 20 bags, because
otherwise the farmer is not gonna be able to deliver for
you. [...] And then we needed a place and some bags to
put the vegetables in.” (Laura)

They followed the advice and started a local initiative based
on the model from Copenhagen, which is an association
model; build around multiple working groups, volunteer work
and a community wiki as the primary organizational platform.
One night late in October 2010, the two founders, created a
logo (with the help of a graphic designer) and a Facebook
page to put, as one of interviewees said, something into the
world and see if there were similar initiatives and/or like-
minded people in their local area.
The Facebook page proved to be a very efﬁcient way of trig-
gering interest in the ideas of sustainability and in the am-
bitions to develop a local alternative to the existing ways of
buying local organic food. Facebook played a vital role in
the initial formation of the community. Within weeks the
founders were approached by a web developer, who offered
to develop a free website for the initiative, a representative
from a local youth wing of a political party, who offered the
community a meeting place, and a local farmer, who wanted
to supply organic vegetables to the community. According
to our interviews, they had all seen the initiative through the
Facebook page and offered their help and services, because

they sympathized with the initiative and shared parts of the
ideas related to organic food and sustainability.

“[...] there are so many different types of communities
and the visual impression that you give out is quite im-
portant to the target group who can feel like, they can
identify us” (Laura)

The community ofﬁcially became a registered association af-
ter the ﬁrst general assembly in January 2011 and active
members started to take orders and distribute weekly bags
of organic food to the then approximate 30 members.
Ini-
tially, the community adopted the concept, organization, reg-
ulations, and the use of a community wiki (Wikispaces.com)
from the initiative in Copenhagen. At the ﬁrst general assem-
bly, the founders presented the organization, comprised of a
board and a series of working groups, the founding principles
and manifesto, which emphasized a ﬂat, consensus-based or-
ganizational structure aa well as the aim to provide cheap or-
ganic food. The ambition was not just to create an association
that would offer cheap organic food (as a service), but as one
of the founding members put it:

“The idea of the association was also to create a com-
munity, like a sense of we have something in common
and share the ideas of organic production.” (Laura)

While the community at ﬁrst adopted the use of a wiki
from the established community in Copenhagen, and found it
somewhat useful in the beginning, they quickly started to see
problems in using this as a community platform. The issues
were both related to the functions and how the wiki reﬂected
the community identity and values. The founders wanted a
community platform that was easy identiﬁable, reﬂected the
community (i.e. sustainability and being well-organized) val-
ues and incorporated a more professional image (opposed to
other grassroots organizations as one interviewee put it). A
more functional concern was related to the openness of the
wiki format and the platform was assessed less user-friendly
than other tools.

“We also initiated a Wikispace, but we saw that the prob-
lem with Wikispaces was that everything is public. They
[the Copenhagen community] would put their schemes
for when people are working and have [their] emails and
contact information [public]. We saw that was a prob-
lem and this is why we wanted to create our own home-
page, where you login and then you can see the shifts.
Yes, and I also wanted to make it more user-friendly,
because I didnt think Wikispaces was so user-friendly.”
(Laura)

The issues with the wiki and the opportunity to have a
custom-made website motivated the community founders to
develop a wish list for the new website, e.g. a members’ sec-
tion, shift management, working group section, repository for
community documents, dedicated emails aliases, newsletters
and later online ordering and payment, essentially creating an
informal requirement list for the web developer, who volun-
teered to develop a new website for the community. As a way
of handling part of the transition to the new website, a found-
ing members introduced the use of Google Drive to handle

1147

Artifact

Facebook
page

Origin / Inspi-
ration
Founding mem-
bers

Wikispaces Copenhagen
community

Website
(v.1)

Google
Drive

Founding mem-
ber and volun-
teering web de-
veloper
Founding mem-
bers

Community
mail
(aliases)

Founding mem-
ber, managed by
web developer

Primary Role

External and internal commu-
nication
Visibility and recruitment
Internal and public informa-
tion
Internal
management
Initial community platform
Substitute Wikispaces as the
primary community platform

organization

and

Substitute the collaborative
and elements in Wikispaces
and supplement the website
Substitute Facebook for inter-
nal communication and con-
tact

Table 2: The community artifact ecology in the ﬁrst stage.

some of the tasks like managing lists in spreadsheets for or-
dering bags and deciding on the content of the bags based
on available food goods from the farmer. Google Drive was
introduced mainly as a collaborative tool to coordinate inter-
nally among the working groups, and was based on previous
experiences by the founding members:

“That was me who brought the idea about Google Drive
[...] because I had used it for something else. Then I
saw the potential of, it’s a good... because it was bet-
ter than Dropbox, because Dropbox has some problems
when you, when there are several users working on the
same document. Whereas Google Drive is working bet-
ter in that sense. And we needed something that was
more user-friendly.
It synchronizes all the time, even
though there are several users editing the same docu-
ment at the same time.” (Laura)

At ﬁrst, the community artifact ecology was strongly inﬂu-
enced by the model adopted from Copenhagen and included
elements introduced by the founding members. However, the
emergent functional and stated preference for a site that re-
ﬂected the community values in a more consistent and profes-
sional way, and the opportunity to get a community website
(for free) resulted in an early abandonment of the wiki as the
primary community platform. The community website was
launched in the spring of 2011. The community manifesto
was published there along with other practical information
regarding the community.
The core ‘trinity’ comprising of a Facebook page, various
Google Drive applications, and the community website, was
established very early in the community lifespan (around Oc-
tober 2010 to February 2011), in relatively short time, with
few resources and by a very selected group of people. We
have summarized the collection of artifacts in the table 2, as
it looked in the formative stage of the community.

1148

SESSION: HACKING, MAKING, AND DISCOVERING

Everyday community work, needs and workarounds
From early 2011 and onward, the core of the community
work took place around managing the community and the
weekly work of ordering, packing and selling the vegetables.
The process of getting volunteers for the individual working
groups, manning the shifts, composing the weekly bag and
introducing new organic products was the main focus.
Although the website was launched in the spring of 2011,
many features were not implemented yet. This created frus-
trations as well as gaps that had to be ﬁlled, in order to keep
up the community and management work. Some of these
frustrations were due to the slow pace of the website devel-
opment or the way the website was designed. The slow pace,
in turn, was also due to the volunteer developer’s choice to
no longer be active in the community. For instance, commu-
nication among the working groups, which had been set up
through a mailing system associated with the website, had to
be bypassed eventually and some of the working groups re-
sorted to a workaround:

“[...] through the website, we have some [the organi-
zation domain name] emails, and we can’t get access
those unless we get the code from him [the web devel-
oper/volunteer], and he is impossible to reach [...] I
ended up making a Gmail account for [one of the work
groups], because I simply couldn’t get the account trans-
ferred.” (Karen)

Thus, some of the groups deviated from the initial ambition to
have speciﬁc community email addresses for the core mem-
bers. Later, the group responsible for communication would
formulate a communication strategy in order to separate the
communication to the public from information suitable only
to members. They adopted an external email service to handle
newsletters and information for the members, while keeping
the Facebook page for more open and external communica-
tion. The communications group added a Twitter and Insta-
gram account to supplement Facebook.
There are also other examples of the creative ways in which
the community dealt with the difﬁculty of accessing the com-
munity website. The volunteer developer had chosen a CMS
that he was familiar with, and this created problems with
access to maintenance of website, once he withdrew. An-
other community member volunteered to take over, but with-
out proper access to the original website back-end, he had to
resort to a technical workaround in order to get e.g. a basic
community calendar working:

“On the front [of the website], there’s a [Google] calen-
dar. That is made through a hack, because I’ve got ac-
cess to the database, so I made a hack, where I went into
the database and put in an iframe as a content element
[...] so that’s not done through the CMS at all [...] [I]
injected some SQL into the database, which [enables]
the calendar feature.” (Paul)

As the community grew, it needed better facilities for pack-
aging and distributing, as well as a more established com-
munity space that would support the Thursday activities and
a stronger sense of community. To help the increasingly

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

complex task of taking orders, handling payment and man-
aging the distribution of the organic food each Thursday, the
community members discussed getting a community laptop
that could be used to keep track of the orders in the mul-
tiple Google spreadsheets. This was discussed at meetings
throughout 2012 and around December 2012 a community
member (Nadia) donated an old laptop. Besides being used
to manage the orders to some extent, the laptop is mainly used
to lookup member information and connecting a credit-card
terminal to the Internet via the community WiFi hotspot. The
introduction of the credit card terminal stems from early dis-
cussions at community meetings on having an online order-
ing and payment system, something that were on the wish list
for the ﬁrst website, as far back as early 2011. The credit-
card terminal was originally envisioned to be a backup for
the online payment system and was acquired together with
license for having an online payment system. This was initi-
ated around July 2011 and the credit-card terminal was ﬁnally
functional around June 2014, and, as the online payment sys-
tem has not yet been implemented on the website, the credit-
card terminal is for now at least a stable artifact in the com-
munity space (it might be abandoned if the online system is
eventually realised).
Through participatory observations one Thursday we saw ex-
amples of situated workarounds: The WiFi provided by the
residents’ house was down. There, spontaneously, one of
the community members, responsible for payments, shared
his own mobile Internet connection and connected the shared
credit card terminal to his own laptop, so that people could
pay by card. Similar acts of sharing one’s mobile Internet
connection and/or sharing one’s laptop were also reported in
the interviews.
While many of the artifacts introduced early in the commu-
nity lifespan still remain a part of the community artifact ecol-
ogy, they have undergone changes in the roles they played, as
new artifacts were introduced. The changes and introduction
of new artifacts appear to be a response to the change in focus
of the community activities as well as a means to overcome
frustration with existing tools. While the establishment of the
community, their practices and initial ecology was the focus
in the beginning, the growth of the community and stronger
focus on supporting the Thursday activities, is reﬂected in the
community artifact ecology. In table 3, we have summaries
the community artifact ecology as it is in the stage focusing
on the core community activities.

Growing pains and building anew
The design and development of the ﬁrst community website
had begun in late 2010 and an initial version was up during
Spring 2011.
In June 2011 the member section with login
was introduced and in November of the same year the com-
ponent to handle shift reservations. However, the website and
its functionality continued to be a recurring topic at commu-
nity meetings. Needs for new functionalities kept arising (e.g.
a possible online payment system and an online signing up
possibility for new members), and frustrations with existing
ones were expressed (e.g.
the inability to establish both an
easy way of communicating to all members via email and as-

Origin / Inspi-
ration
Founding mem-
bers
Communications
group
Communications
group
Copenhagen
community

Artifact

Facebook
page
Twitter

Instagram

Wikispace

Website
(v.2)

Founding mem-
ber and volun-
teering web de-
veloper
Founding mem-
bers
Communications
group

Google
Drive
Google
Mail
MailChimp Communications

group

Community
Laptop

Donated
member

by

Community
WiFi

Bought Novem-
ber 2015

Communications
group
Members

Credit-card
terminal
Ad-hoc
artifacts
used
members

by

Primary Role

External communication

External communication

External communication

Used by a few work groups
for minutes and information
up until September 2014
Primary community platform,
news and events, managing
shifts, community documents

the

community

Supporting the work related to
Thursday activities
Substitute
email alias’
Newsletter service for internal
communication to all mem-
bers
Used to access Google docu-
ments and community infor-
mation each Thursday
Used to access online services
with laptop and credit-card
terminal
Credit card payment
community space
Supplement community lap-
top
Alternative WiFi when com-
munity WiFi is down

in the

Table 3: The community artifact ecology in the second
stage.

sign email addresses to the work groups). As the community
grew, the burden of management increased and at the end of
2013 the situation with the website and the general manage-
ment of the community had resulted in frustrations within the
community work groups:

“Well, every week there are some practical problems
that we have to solve. Its just, its not fun. And this is
supposed to be fun, this is supposed to be something
[where] you put in your work because you want to do
it and you feel like you get something back. And for a
long time people have just been tired from doing all the
various tasks.” (Robert)

Getting the new website became an important priority for the
community throughout 2013 and 2014 and the decision to
build a new website was discussed and agreed upon at an
open community meeting late 2013. A decision was taken
that the community, as a legal association, would pay for one
of their members to develop the new website. Despite this be-
ing against their principles, this was decided. The new devel-
oper (Paul) was a long time member of the community; an IT
professional who had regularly stepped in to solve technical

1149

Artifact

Facebook
page
Twitter

Instagram

Website
(v.3)

Origin / Inspi-
ration
Founding mem-
bers
Communications
group
Communications
group
Community
work
groups,
board and vol-
unteering web
developer

Community
Laptop
Community
WiFi

by

Donated
member
Bought Novem-
ber 2015

Primary Role

External communication

External communication

External communication

Primary community platform,
news and events, newsletter
and member communication
(substitute Google mail and
MailChimp), managing shifts,
community documents, statis-
tics, member overview, on-
line web shop (Substitute pay-
ment and ordering at the com-
munity space), supporting the
work related to Thursday
activities (substitute Google
Drive)
Used to access community
website each Thursday
Used to access community
website each Thursday

Table 4: The community artifact ecology as it is
envisioned in the third stage.

issues. Shortly after discontinuing the collaboration with the
ﬁrst web developer, the new developer prioritized the features
for the new website and started developing it using a new
CMS, which he was accustomed to use in his professional
work. To the new web developer, the task seems straightfor-
ward and as a community member, he gave the impression
that he knew what is needed and what was most important.
He had also invited other members to take part in the work by
using an online project management system, ﬁrst as a more
participatory endeavor, and later as a way to assign tasks:

“It’s gonna be a waterfall model running because, there’s
no time for [...] you know the agile stage is over.” (Paul)

All our interviewees regard the new future website as the
long-awaited solution to many of their current problems. For
example, it would solve one of main struggles of the com-
munity, namely to get enough volunteers to take part in the
Thursday shifts.

“[...] the hope is, that when we get the new website, that
we’ll be able to, like nudge people to actually ﬁll in the
shifts.” (Robert)

It will also take out the frustrations of the working group by
introducing the possibility to automate the tedious and ‘un-
fun’ task:

“The more you can get those tasks done automatically,
then you don’t need to have a member to do this. Be-
cause people are working voluntarily and that is the hard-
est thing to get volunteers for. So the more you can clean
away of that, just run automatically, the better.” (Laura)

1150

SESSION: HACKING, MAKING, AND DISCOVERING

At this stage, there was a certain fatigue among the members,
and the concern was very much with the ‘drill’ or the run-
ning of the activities. In this current stage, the members are
starting to focus on making the existing management more
efﬁcient and easier, and on consolidating many of the small
practices and systems that were developed within the work
groups and across the community artifact ecology. The cur-
rent focus is on a vision that should make a lot of the existing
tools obsolete and/or an integrated part of the new website. In
table 4, we have summarized how the interviewees envision
how the community artifact ecology will look like once the
new website is operational.

FINDINGS: COMMUNITY ARTIFACT ECOLOGY
– MULTIPLE, DYNAMIC, AND NECESSARY
In order to further explore how artifact ecologies support the
community in question, this section looks in further detail at
some of the particularities of the community artifact ecology
through the theoretical framing outlined above. In particular,
the focus will be on the three research questions outlined in
the introduction: What is a community artifact ecology? How
is it shaped? And what role does it play in the development
of the community?

Multiple overlapping ecologies
As we have seen in our analysis, the community artifact ecol-
ogy of the particular community initially took shape from
the personal artifact ecologies of the founding members and
the elements ‘imported’ from the community in Copenhagen.
Later, as the community website was developed, this soon be-
came a central element of the community artifact ecology. As
the website caused both technical and practical challenges,
members of the working groups introduced new tools and
adapted elements of the existing in order to continue working.
All of this has lead to the community artifact ecology consist-
ing of several overlapping ecologies, with different historical
trajectories.
First, parts of the community artifact ecology were associated
with the different activities within the community, e.g., in the
very beginning, communication was handled via Facebook,
while later being separated to handle the need for internal
communication, both among the community members and to
the member base at large. Currently, external communication
is done via a subset of the artifact ecology, in particular so-
cial media and the front-page of the website, while internal
communication is handled via emails and newsletters to the
members. These groupings of artifacts, deﬁned partly by their
purpose, resemble what Jung et al. [29] found in relation to
personal ecologies. Grouping artifacts based on their purpose
and actively substituting or supplementing particular artifacts
as issues emerge, we see in multiple instances. Similarly, sub-
sets of the ecology are activated around particular activities.
The most obvious example is how the community members
setup the laptop, credit-card terminal, WiFi and spreadsheets
each Thursday to support the core community activity. This
resembles what Rositto et al. [47] refer to as aligned constel-
lations, i.e. a potential subset of the community artifact ecol-
ogy that is active depending upon the time, place and activity.
So while the community has a community artifact ecology, it

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

is not active at all the time for all members, yet there are ac-
knowledged and decided ways of setting up and doing certain
tasks, from publishing minutes in the members only section,
over handling the orders that go to the farmer, to setting up
the workspace each Thursday.
Second, the community artifact ecology is comprised of mul-
tiple overlapping ecologies, stemming both from individual
members, related communities and groups within the com-
munity. Key-individuals inﬂuence the community artifact
ecology by introducing artifacts from their personal ecology,
artifacts they have some familiarity and experience with from
elsewhere. As seen above, parts of the particular commu-
nity artifact ecology originate from a similar community in
Copenhagen, and table 3 indicates that the communication
group played an important role in inﬂuencing the community
ecology. This happened through the introduction of a com-
munication strategy, newsletter service, various social media
and the credit-card terminal. So, the idea of more capable
peers, introduced by Bødker & Klokmose [13], or Rositto et
al.s’ [47] proposers, can be expanded beyond individuals to
include more capable (or experienced) and related communi-
ties and active groups within the community itself. The most
prominent example is that of the founders and their inﬂuence
in shaping the ecology, while they established the community.
Other examples include deciding the underlying CMS system
for the website, based on personal, professional preferences,
or ﬁxing an unsatisfactory situation by introducing a different
email service. Artifacts from other ecologies got introduced
from other communities, here exempliﬁed by the initial adop-
tion of the Copenhagen Wikispace and speciﬁc parts of the or-
ganization introducing new tools to handle payment or com-
munication. This happened both slowly, with artifacts being
imported and adopted more permanently, through conscious
introduction from within the community, as well as through
on-the-spot quick reactions, such as when community mem-
bers invested their personal devices as a WiFi hotspot.
Third, bits and pieces of the artifact ecologies of other com-
munities or key-members got included into the artifact ecol-
ogy of the community. These would linger on, even after the
members became inactive or left the community. For exam-
ple, the Wikispace stayed in the ecology for as long as until
mid 2014 for a particular working group. Also, Facebook and
Google Drive, which were part of the personal ecology of the
founding members, are still part of the community ecology,
although these members have resigned from their position in
the board and working groups. Substitution has happened
when the different artifacts slowly transitioned and changed
role as other artifacts replaced part of their functionality, see
e.g. table 2 and 3. The artifact ecology thus has become stable
and established in the community practices and the commu-
nity space, in the same way as both Nardi & O’Day [42] and
Bell [5] talk about information ecologies, namely as places
and particular local cultures developed through participation
in and around practices. While individual members move on,
the artifacts become part of the community, as a shared un-
derstanding of the community and their practices. Nardi &
O’Day go as far as saying that an information ecology has a

place – it is a particular habitat identiﬁable by the inhabitants,
here the community members.

Shaping and changing a particular ecology
In our case study we have identiﬁed multiple examples of dif-
ferent ways in which community members engage in shap-
ing the community artifact ecology, in relation to or as part
of the core community activities. Shaping the ecology has
taken place through a combination of on-the-spot reactions
and workarounds and longer-term strategies, depending on
the situation at hand and the members involved. From the
empirical data we learned that despite being a very open com-
munity, it has nonetheless been a small percentage of mem-
bers who are and were actively involved. This also translates
into their involvement in shaping the artifact ecology. Some
of the more casual members, whose involvement extended
to taking part in the Thursday shifts, have resorted to tactic-
like workarounds, such as connecting the credit card terminal
to their own laptops and mobile Internet connections. How-
ever, it is the smaller percentage of members, active in work-
ing groups and organizational boards that were more strongly
inﬂuencing the community artifact ecology. They were di-
rectly inﬂuencing what tools were adopted in the working
groups, and they usually participated in the community meet-
ings, where bigger IT-related decisions were taken (e.g. re-
garding the new website).
Other inﬂuential members were naturally the founders who
got a big say over the initial constituents of the artifact ecol-
ogy, as with the design of the ﬁrst website and the introduc-
tion of Google Drive, where personal preferences such as ease
of use played an important role. These personal preferences
went beyond functional ones, to include more reﬂective val-
ues, such as being more user-friendly or giving a more pro-
fessional and coherent image, as also noted by Jung et al.
[29]. Second, the skilled ‘IT guys’ played a deﬁning role with
regard to the website. While the founders had a privileged
position, the web developers each had a privileged position
in shaping the ecology through their proﬁciency and abil-
ity to develop a tailor-made solution. Personal preferences
still played an important role for that, albeit on a different
level. While the rest of the core members knew the applica-
tions quite well in terms of general role and functionality, the
IT-guys knew the software and applications on a more tech-
nical level, as software components, application interfaces
and code. Here, the personal preferences were present as fa-
voring one CMS system over another, based on familiarity
with one system over the other. The founders stood out as
very capable of assessing and working with a variety of on-
line tools, whereas the two IT-guys additionally introduced
a ﬁner-grained level of operating technology, at the level of
software code, as one additional way of shaping the ecology.

‘A farmer, a place and at least 20 members’ and a working
artifact ecology
The advice given by the Copenhagen organic food commu-
nity representative, to ﬁnd a farmer, a place, and at least 20
members, made it possible to start an organic food commu-
nity. The two women who wanted to found a similar commu-
nity in their city followed this advice, and it worked for them

1151

too. However, from the very beginning, they also worked on
establishing a working artifact ecology. It was by establishing
this initial ecology (a Facebook page, Google Drive, a wiki,
and their own website) that they got in contact with a farmer,
started organizing the orders, and got a place to distribute the
food, as well as interested members to join.
The artifact ecology then went into a continuous process of
evolution, and it still is, today; a deﬁning trait of a healthy
ecology as Nardi & O’Day argue. The road has been ﬁlled
with many frustrations, related to things not working or fea-
tures not being implemented. By resorting to new additions
and workarounds, the artifact ecology eventually reached sta-
ble situations where it supported the various activities of the
community; maybe not in an ideal ways, but as getting things
going and enabling the community to continue what it does
and what it needs to do to get fresh local organic food at a
cheap price, through collaborative volunteer work.
At the same time, the vision of a new website has always been
there, even acting as a pacifying ﬁlter to existing tensions and
frustrations. When the concrete development work started
with the second volunteering web developer, it also pulled the
community together in the joint effort of deciding on features
and speciﬁcations. The second volunteering web developer,
who is now developing the new website, has been a mem-
ber of the community for several years and has been doing
patching-up work to the artifact ecology. With this rooting,
the shared vision of the new website became an instrument of
the process of shaping the community itself. This is parallel
to the way the community comes together on Thursday after-
noons to make the space at the residents’ house look like the
organic food community space: Members, volunteering for
shifts, try to make the space feel cozy, clean and inviting; the
recipe working groups sometimes brings in goods that they
have prepared, etc.
The process of envisioning, designing, and developing the
new website thus became an important element in shaping
the community, just as the process of creating the initial logo,
a Facebook page and the ﬁrst website was an important part
of creating the community in the ﬁrst place. The fact that
it could be tailor-made, made the vision reﬂect the way at
least key community members viewed their community, and
it provided a vision for where they wanted the community
to be (easy to order, user-friendly interfaces, efﬁcient to man-
age and even make community management ‘fun’ again), and
how ultimately they would get rid of some of the mess of the
current more ad-hoc artifact ecology. However, the vision of
the new website is not the ‘holy grail’. The process of the
community coming together around the vision of the shared
website was made possible by the stabilized working artifact
ecology. Things neither needed to come to a hold because ev-
erything was not working perfectly, nor because a new web-
site was being developed, yet the vision of the new, more per-
fect solution made the current situation endurable somehow.
The artifact ecology was and is patched together, and the tem-
porary aspect, and the temporality as such, of the patching
up, are accepted, because a new solution is being worked on.
Just as Nardi & O’Day [42] note that there is never a per-

1152

SESSION: HACKING, MAKING, AND DISCOVERING

fect ﬁt, Bødker & Klokmose [13] outline never ending move-
ments between the unsatisfactory, exited and stable state, and
Rositto et al.s’ point to the performative nature of making
constellations work, so does our study indicate, that the com-
munity artifact ecology is in equilibrium, yet dynamic and
always the object of some community work. It may even be
a fundamental condition of collaborating in a self-organized
community that is based on volunteer work and scarce re-
sources.

DISCUSSION
As the community grew, so did the effort that had to be put
into managing and supporting the weekly activities. The work
of maintaining the community artifact ecology grew as the
community grew. This is not unlike the work that goes into
maintaining any organizational infrastructure [44], and table
3 and 4 indicate some division between external communi-
cation, community management and the artifacts used each
Thursday. While we do not see community artifact ecologies
as infrastructure per se, they do contain elements of infras-
tructure (e.g. WiFi) and artifacts that exhibit infrastructure
characteristics, e.g. by being standardized and multi-sited,
such as email and calendars. Community artifact ecologies
are dynamic and very particular to a speciﬁc community, in
contrast to how infrastructure is viewed. They spring out of
a complex historical mix of inﬂuences from multiple other
ecologies, co-evolved with the practices of the community,
bound by both culture and place. Still, the work that goes into
making the ecology work (cf. [15, 47]) could be described as
infrastructuring, with local adaptations of familiar artifacts,
introduction of new, inertia and tensions as fundamental con-
ditions for community work. Issues may rise between the pri-
mary activities and managing the community artifact ecology,
as we have seen with the fatigue reported above. Whether this
is a consequence of having multiple artifacts in play or the is-
sues are introduced by the dynamic trait of ecologies (cf. [42,
13]) is an open question.
In our presentation of the case we outlined three stages in the
formation of the community and its artifact ecology: Becom-
ing a community, everyday community work, and building
anew. These stages are meant to be use descriptively, not
prescriptively, and they cover the time from the initiation of
the community until writing this publication. However, our
studies indicate that a large part of community artifact ecol-
ogy is established in the initial stage of the community, and
often co-created with the community, by the few founding
members. Accordingly, paying attention to what and how
the initial ecology is negotiated and decided upon when the
community is formed, is important if one wants to understand
how the community artifact ecology and the community co-
evolves as well as some of the implications introduced in this
early stage. The initial creation of the community artifact
ecology by the founding members, resemble the performative
act of aligning a particular groups constellation as described
by Rossitti et al. [47]. Once the community is established
and the primary activities are stabilized (in our case ordering
and distributing organic food), the states presented by Bødker
& Klokmose [13] may be more descriptive of what happens
around particular activities and situations, and the subset of

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

artifacts involved. The different states become more visible
in and around well-established activities. The unsatisfactory
state of internal communication is one example, and the stable
state of artifacts that make up the workspace each Thursday
is another. The states do not cover the whole of the com-
munity artifact ecology, rather, they emerge around speciﬁc
activates and artifacts within the ecology. This may create
tensions that, over time, propagate to involve the entire com-
munity artifact ecology, as members become frustrated with a
larger and larger subset of the community artifact ecology, as
we have seen in our study. The frustration with multiple arti-
facts and an increasing prevalent idea, that a new consolidated
community platform would mitigate the frustrations and over-
head involved in managing the community, created a tension
that resulted in paying a community member to develop a
new website (and challenging the volunteering characteris-
tic of community). Understanding the dynamics and states
introduced by Bødker & Klomose, on a community level is
an important part of understanding how such a community
artifact ecology evolve.
The setting we present here is that of ‘CSCW in the wild.’
[19]. We are well aware that studying CSCW in the wild and
in particular when studying a single community, results in a
similar particular and partial picture of the community arti-
fact ecology, it’s genealogy and role within the community.
The ﬁndings outlined above, the particular constellation of
artifacts and ’stages’ of the ecology, pertain to this particu-
lar community and can not be generalised to all communities.
We do try to argue for a more abstracted contribution in theo-
rizing on the concept of community artifact ecologies and the
intersections between the personal artifact ecology and the
share and more common artifact ecology. Whereas much fo-
cus is usually placed on understanding the way CSCW takes
place through the use of particular technologies, or how tech-
nologies should be set up to support collaborative communi-
ties, our analysis and ﬁndings show that much can be learned
from observing communities shaping themselves their own
collaborative environment – here with the emphasis on shap-
ing rather that just using: Communities with little resources
are creative in shaping their artifact ecology, making use of
existing mundane tools, but also creating speciﬁcations for
software they need and ﬁnding ways to ﬁnance their develop-
ment. However, our example also shows that these solutions
can strain communities, as they require their own share of
volunteer work. This places this kind of research in a some-
what challenging position, especially concerning our role as
CSCW researchers and designers. We have chosen to under-
take our research using the concept of artifact ecology be-
cause it provides a solid framing for exploring the interaction
that a community has with and through a multitude of tools.
Many of our ﬁndings, however, also echo the current discus-
sion on infrastructuring, as it is taking place e.g. in the ﬁeld
of CSCW and participatory design (PD). Whereas the more
recent discussions within PD tend to place the role of (pro-
fessional) designers in prime position, so as to discuss their
action possibilities, methods and responsibilities (e.g. [34])
older work such as that of Karasti & Syrjnen [30] has empha-
sized the design work of communities themselves, pointing
more directly to the appropriation of artifacts and the devel-

opment of resources by the community. This points to a dif-
ferent role for the researcher (who is engaging with a commu-
nity through action research and participatory design) rather
than the moral commitment to ‘ﬁx’ community problems (see
[10]).

CONCLUSION
Our case study shows an example of how a self-organizing
volunteer-based community uses a collection of tools to both
manage the community and their primary activities related
to ordering and selling local organic food to the community
members.
Our ﬁndings have shown that the artifact ecology of a volunteer-
based community is multifaceted, consisting of overlapping
ecologies, and is shaped by key members, related commu-
nities and internal work groups throughout the community
lifespan. The community artifact ecology co-evolves with the
community and is shaped by changing needs, while also cre-
ating tensions within and straining the community.
In this
speciﬁc case the community artifact ecology did support the
community in their work, while also being the source of both
frustrations and requiring work to make the community arti-
fact ecology work. Work we hypnotize is a fundamental con-
dition of collaborating in this type of communities. Based on
the case study and existing research on artifact ecologies, we
propose the theoretical concept of community artifact ecolo-
gies as the particular constellation of artifacts that a com-
munity owns, has access to and uses in its activities.
It is
characterized by a high degree of shared understanding of the
core activities and the role of the artifacts within the ecology.
It changes throughout the community lifetime in response to
community needs. This occurs both through explicit negotia-
tion and more subtle adoption of artifacts originating from the
ecology of individual members, often more capable peers. It
is both dynamic, as it co-evolves with the community, and sta-
ble beyond the individual member. While particular artifacts
may stem from individual members, they are often adopted
by the community and become part of the community prac-
tices and shared history.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Aarhus Organic Food Community and
the participants for allowing us to conduct research on their
community. The research is funded through the Aarhus Uni-
versity interdisciplinary centre PIT.

REFERENCES
1. Mark S Ackerman, Christine A Halverson, Thomas
Erickson, and Wendy A Kellogg. 2007. Resources,
co-evolution and artifacts: Theory in CSCW. Springer
Science & Business Media.

2. Gabriela Avram. 2013. Starting a Garden, Caring for It,

Growing with It-a Study on Collective Practices in
Urban Gardening. ECSCW 2013 Adjunct Proceedings
(2013), 8.

3. Liam J Bannon and Kjeld Schmidt. 1989. CSCW-four
characters in search of a context. DAIMI Report Series
18, 289 (1989).

1153

4. Jakob E Bardram and Claus Bossen. 2005. A web of
coordinative artifacts: collaborative work at a hospital
ward. In Proceedings of the 2005 international ACM
SIGGROUP conference on Supporting group work.
ACM, 168–176.

5. Genevieve Bell. 2002. Making sense of museums: The

museum as’ cultural ecology’. Intel Labs 1 (2002).

6. Victoria ME Bellotti, Sara Cambridge, Karen Hoy,

Patrick C Shih, Lisa Renery Handalian, Kyungsik Han,
and John M Carroll. 2014. Towards community-centered
support for peer-to-peer service exchange: rethinking
the timebanking metaphor. In Proceedings of the 32nd
annual ACM conference on Human factors in computing
systems. ACM, 2975–2984.

7. Olav Wedege Bertelsen and Susanne Bødker. 2002.

Interaction through multi-artifacts. In European
Conference on Cognitive Ergonomics. ECCE 11.

8. Susanne Bødker. 1991. Through the interface. (1991).

9. Susanne Bødker. 2006. When second wave HCI meets
third wave challenges. In Proceedings of the 4th Nordic
conference on Human-computer interaction: changing
roles. ACM, 1–8.

10. Susanne Bødker. 2015. Using IT to do goodin

communities? The Journal of Community Informatics
11, 2 (2015).

11. Susanne Bødker, Pelle Ehn, Joergen Knudsen, Morten
Kyng, and Kim Madsen. 1988. Computer support for
cooperative design. In Proceedings of the 1988 ACM
conference on Computer-supported cooperative work.
ACM, 377–394.

12. Susanne Bødker and Clemens Nylandsted Klokmose.

2011. The human–artifact model: An activity theoretical
approach to artifact ecologies. Human–Computer
Interaction 26, 4 (2011), 315–371.

13. Susanne Bødker and Clemens Nylandsted Klokmose.

2012. Dynamics in artifact ecologies. In Proceedings of
the 7th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer
Interaction: Making Sense Through Design. ACM,
448–457.

14. Nikolaj Gandrup Borchorst and Susanne Bødker. 2011.

You probably shouldnt give them too much
information–Supporting Citizen-Government
Collaboration. In ECSCW 2011: Proceedings of the 12th
European Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work, 24-28 September 2011, Aarhus
Denmark. Springer, 173–192.

15. John Bowers. 1994. The Work to Make a Network

Work: Studying CSCW in Action. In Proceedings of the
1994 ACM Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work (CSCW ’94). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 287–298. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/192844.193030

1154

SESSION: HACKING, MAKING, AND DISCOVERING

16. Susan L. Bryant, Andrea Forte, and Amy Bruckman.

2005. Becoming Wikipedian: Transformation of
Participation in a Collaborative Online Encyclopedia. In
Proceedings of the 2005 International ACM SIGGROUP
Conference on Supporting Group Work (GROUP ’05).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1–10. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1099203.1099205

17. Andrea Botero Cabrera, Anne Naukkarinen, and Joanna
Saad-Sulonen. 2008. Mapping social practices through
collaborative exercises and visualizations. In
Proceedings of the 5th Nordic conference on
Human-computer interaction: building bridges. ACM,
419–422.

18. John M Carroll. 2001. Community computing as

human-computer interaction. Behaviour & Information
Technology 20, 5 (2001), 307–314.

19. John M Carroll and Mary Beth Rosson. 2013. Wild at

home: the neighborhood as a living laboratory for HCI.
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction
(TOCHI) 20, 3 (2013), 16.

20. Jaz Hee-jeong Choi and Eli Blevis. 2010. HCI &
sustainable food culture: a design framework for
engagement. In Proceedings of the 6th Nordic
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Extending
Boundaries. ACM, 112–117.

21. Carl DiSalvo, Phoebe Sengers, and Hr¨onn

Brynjarsd´ottir. 2010. Mapping the landscape of
sustainable HCI. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM, 1975–1984.

22. Bent Flyvbjerg. 2006. Five misunderstandings about
case-study research. Qualitative inquiry 12, 2 (2006),
219–245.

23. Eva Ganglbauer, Geraldine Fitzpatrick, ¨Ozge Subasi,
and Florian G¨uldenpfennig. 2014. Think globally, act
locally: a case study of a free food sharing community
and social networking. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM
conference on Computer supported cooperative work &
social computing. ACM, 911–921.

24. Joseph A Gonzales, Casey Fiesler, and Amy Bruckman.

2015. Towards an Appropriable CSCW Tool Ecology:
Lessons from the Greatest International Scavenger Hunt
the World Has Ever Seen. In Proceedings of the 18th
ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work & Social Computing. ACM, 946–957.

25. David Goodman. 2003. The quality turnand alternative
food practices: reﬂections and agenda. Journal of rural
studies 19, 1 (2003), 1–7.

26. Christine A Halverson, Thomas Erickson, and Mark S
Ackerman. 2004. Behind the help desk: evolution of a
knowledge management system in a large organization.
In Proceedings of the 2004 ACM conference on
Computer supported cooperative work. ACM, 304–313.

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

27. Liisa Horelli, Joanna Saad-Sulonen, Sirkku Wallin, and

Andrea Botero. 2015. When Self-Organization
Intersects with Urban Planning: Two Cases from
Helsinki. Planning Practice & Research 30, 3 (2015),
286–302. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02697459.2015.1052941

28. Julie S Hui, Michael D Greenberg, and Elizabeth M

Gerber. 2014. Understanding the role of community in
crowdfunding work. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM
conference on Computer supported cooperative work &
social computing. ACM, 62–74.

29. Heekyoung Jung, Erik Stolterman, Will Ryan, Tonya

Thompson, and Marty Siegel. 2008. Toward a
Framework for Ecologies of Artifacts: How Are Digital
Artifacts Interconnected Within a Personal Life?. In
Proceedings of the 5th Nordic Conference on
Human-computer Interaction: Building Bridges
(NordiCHI ’08). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 201–210.
30. Helena Karasti and Anna-Liisa Syrj¨anen. 2004. Artful

infrastructuring in two cases of community PD. In
Proceedings of the eighth conference on Participatory
design: Artful integration: interweaving media,
materials and practices-Volume 1. ACM, 20–30.

31. Klaus Krippendorff. 1989. On the essential contexts of

artifacts or on the proposition that” design is making
sense (of things)”. Design Issues (1989), 9–39.

32. Steinar Kvale. 2008. Doing interviews. Sage.
33. Jean Lave and Etienne Wenger. 1991. Situated learning:

Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge
university press.

34. Christopher A Le Dantec and Carl DiSalvo. 2013.

Infrastructuring and the formation of publics in
participatory design. Social Studies of Science 43, 2
(2013), 241–264.

35. Gilly Leshed, Maria Hkansson, and Joseph’Joﬁsh’

Kaye. 2014. Our life is the farm and farming is our life:
home-work coordination in organic farm families. In
Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer
supported cooperative work & social computing. ACM,
487–498.

36. Peter Lyle, Jaz Hee-jeong Choi, and Marcus Foth. 2015.

Growing Food in the City: Design Ideations for Urban
Residential Gardeners. In Proceedings of the 7th
International Conference on Communities and
Technologies (C&#38;T ’15). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 89–97. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2768545.2768549

38. Ezio Manzini and Rachel Coad. 2015. Design, When

Everybody Designs: An Introduction to Design for
Social Innovation. MIT Press.

39. Tara Matthews, Steve Whittaker, Hernan Badenes, and

Barton Smith. 2014. Beyond end user content to
collaborative knowledge mapping: Interrelations among
community social tools. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM
conference on Computer supported cooperative work &
social computing. ACM, 900–910.

40. Gabriel Mugar, Carsten Østerlund, Katie DeVries

Hassman, Kevin Crowston, and Corey Brian Jackson.
2014. Planet hunters and seaﬂoor explorers: legitimate
peripheral participation through practice proxies in
online citizen science. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM
conference on Computer supported cooperative work &
social computing. ACM, 109–119.

41. Elizabeth D Mynatt, Vicki L O’Day, Annette Adler, and

Mizuko Ito. 1998. Network Communities: Something
Old, Something New, Something Borrowed... Computer
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) 7, 1-2 (1998),
123–156.

42. Bonnie A. Nardi and Vicki L. O’Day. 1999. Information

Ecologies: Using Technology with Heart. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, USA.

43. Antti Oulasvirta and Lauri Sumari. 2007. Mobile kits
and laptop trays: managing multiple devices in mobile
information work. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human factors in computing systems.
ACM, 1127–1136.

44. Volkmar Pipek and Volker Wulf. 2009. Infrastructuring:
Toward an integrated perspective on the design and use
of information technology. Journal of the Association
for Information Systems 10, 5 (2009), 1.

45. Jenny Preece, Diane Maloney-Krichmar, and Chadia

Abras. 2003. History of online communities.
Encyclopedia of community 3 (2003), 1023–1027.

46. Henk Renting, Markus Schermer, and Ada Rossi. 2012.

Building food democracy: exploring civic food
networks and newly emerging forms of food citizenship.
International. Journal of Sociology of Agriculture and
Food 19, 3 (2012), 289–307.

47. Chiara Rossitto, Cristian Bogdan, and Kerstin

Severinson-Eklundh. 2014. Understanding
Constellations of Technologies in Use in a Collaborative
Nomadic Setting. Computer Supported Cooperative
Work (CSCW) 23, 2 (2014), 137–161.

48. Kjeld Schmidt. 2011. The concept of workin CSCW.

Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) 20, 4-5
(2011), 341–401.

37. Lone Malmborg, Ann Light, Geraldine Fitzpatrick,

Victoria Bellotti, and Margot Brereton. 2015. Designing
for Sharing in Local Communities. In Proceedings of the
33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM,
2357–2360.

49. Henrik Sørensen, Dimitrios Raptis, Jesper Kjeldskov,

and Mikael B. Skov. 2014. The 4C Framework:
Principles of Interaction in Digital Ecosystems. In
Proceedings of the 2014 ACM International Joint
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing
(UbiComp ’14). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 87–97.

1155

SESSION: HACKING, MAKING, AND DISCOVERING

50. Susan Leigh Star and Karen Ruhleder. 1994. Steps

towards an ecology of infrastructure: complex problems
in design and access for large-scale collaborative
systems. In Proceedings of the 1994 ACM conference on
Computer supported cooperative work. ACM, 253–264.

51. Oliver Stickel and Thomas Ludwig. 2014. Computer

supported urban gardening. In Proceedings of the 2014
companion publication on Designing interactive
systems. ACM, 77–80.

52. Anna-Liisa Syrj¨anen and Kari Kuutti. 2011. From

system development toward work improvement:
developmental work research as a potential partner
method for EUD. In End-User Development. Springer,
123–138.

53. Amy Voida, Zheng Yao, and Matthias Korn. 2015.

(Infra) structures of Volunteering. In Proceedings of the
18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported

Cooperative Work & Social Computing. ACM,
1704–1716.

54. Xiaolan Wang, Ron Wakkary, Carman Neustaedter, and

Audrey Desjardins. 2015. Information Sharing,
Scheduling, and Awareness in Community Gardening
Collaboration. In Proceedings of the 7th International
Conference on Communities and Technologies
(C&#38;T ’15). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 79–88.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2768545.2768556

55. Joanne I. White, Leysia Palen, and Kenneth M.

Anderson. 2014. Digital Mobilization in Disaster
Response: The Work & Self-organization of On-line Pet
Advocates in Response to Hurricane Sandy. In
Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing
(CSCW ’14). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 866–876.

1156

