CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Infrastructuring and the Challenge of Dynamic Seams in 

Mobile Knowledge Work 

Ingrid Erickson 
Rutgers University 

New Brunswick, NJ USA 
ingrid.erickson@rutgers.edu 

time 

technological  exclusion  and 

ABSTRACT 
Highly mobile knowledge workers spend a large portion of 
their 
traversing  within  and  among  different 
infrastructural  configurations  as  they  move  through  space. 
These  dynamic  configurations  are  experienced  as  either 
technological  or  contextual  constraints,  which  range  from 
forms  of 
infrastructural 
disconnection  to  divides  caused  by  both  spatial  and 
organizational  boundaries.  The  workaday  nature  of  these 
constrained  environments  force  mobile  workers  to  engage 
in a type of articulation work that involves the construction 
of  bridging,  assembling,  or  circumventing  solutions  to 
repeatedly negotiate these impediments. Engaging in these 
‘infrastructuring’  practices  requires  that  workers  develop 
‘infrastructural competence’—knowledge of the generative 
possibilities of infrastructural seams. In effect, this renders 
mobile workers as infrastructural bricoleurs. We discuss the 
implications  of  this  required  competence  and  speculate 
regarding its origin, maintenance, and differentiation among 
professions. 
Author Keywords 
Knowledge  work;  mobile 
ubiquitous computing; sociotechnical 
ACM Classification Keywords 
K.4.3  Organizational 
collaborative work 
INTRODUCTION 
It is no longer notable to claim that a vast majority of work 
practices  are  mediated  by  information  and  communication 
technologies (ICT)  [54]. Nor it is contested that  the Great 
Recession and an expanded global economy had a hand in 
establishing  the  increasingly  modular  and  project-based 
characterization  of  most  work  today  [2,61].  What  is  also 

Impacts:  Computer-supported 

infrastructure; 

technology; 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for 
components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from 
Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW ‘16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to 
ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819931 
 

Mohammad Hossein Jarrahi 
University of North Carolina 

Chapel Hill, NC USA 

jarrahi@unc.edu 

obvious,  though  less  fully  explored  in  the  discourses  of 
work  and  technology,  is  fact  that  there  is  an  increased 
physical dynamism in today’s work styles—people can be, 
or  must  be,  mobile  whether  within  their  large  office 
complexes, their client regions, or other types of work sites 
[65].  Today’s  white-collar  workers  are  rarely  fixed  to  a 
particular  location  by  virtue  of  task  or  technology,  rather 
they  have  begun  to  approximate  professional  satellites, 
using  mobile  infrastructures  and  tools  to  orbit  around 
clients  and  co-workers  across  paths  that  expand  and 
traverse  multiple  temporal  and  spatial  zones.  A  recent 
survey  by  Forrester  Research  confirms  this  fact:  between 
2001  and  2012  across  Europe  and  the  United  States  the 
population of mobile knowledge workers grew from 15% to 
29% of employees [9]. 
Historically,  work  was  defined  primarily  by  its  “atom”  or 
manufacturing  nature  [3],  identified  by  its  processing  and 
production  of  large-scale  physical  items;  now,  the  United 
States  is  fast  being  defined  by  its  dominance  in  “bit”  or 
knowledge work--the creation and manipulation of ideas or 
data [54].  
Knowledge work differs from its earlier, more mechanistic 
sibling  in  several  notable  ways.  First,  it  is  an  inherently 
cognitive  (as  opposed  to  physical)  type  of  labor  that 
generates  information  or  knowledge  as  its  primary  output 
[6,23].  Second,  it  is  often  project-  rather  than  function-
based [2,31,61],  a  characteristic  that  affects  not  only  who 
involved in it (i.e., specialists vs. generalists), but also how 
long  it  typically  lasts  (i.e.,  terminal  vs.  ongoing  work). 
Third,  as  with  many  other  developments  of  late,  it  is 
increasingly  digital  or  computational  in  its  character 
[1,15,17,45]. Finally, because knowledge work is typically 
untethered 
(e.g., 
factories),  it  easily  dislocated  and  allows  for  ‘anywhere, 
anytime’ production patterns [20].  
As the rise physical mobility as a part of knowledge work is 
occurring across many industries and professional domains, 
the  analyst  must  delimit  their  focus  not  by  professional 
jurisdiction  but  at  the  level  of  practice.  Previous  research 
has employed this approach in investigations of offroaders 
[29],  on-site-movers  [49],  and  digital  nomads  [18]. 
‘Nomadic’  practices  have  been  particularly  well  studied 
within 
[13,17,70],  providing 
foundational  details  about  how  workers 
long 
distances,  work  without  stable  workplaces  or  fixed 

the  CSCW  community 

specific  material  conditions 

travel 

from 

 

1323

 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

visible 

challenges 

infrastructural 

in  a  constantly  changing 

‘nomadic  worker’ 
active 

organizational  anchors,  and  manage  a  kit  of  resources 
during their time on the move [21,58].  
Of  these  empirical  insights,  one  particularly  important 
strand  of  the  conversation  is  the  contention  that  the 
increased  dynamism  of  work  via  physical  mobility 
introduces 
for  workers. 
Infrastructure  here  refers  both  to  large-scale  systems  such 
as electricity and transportation [33], as well as knowledge 
and information infrastructures that variably comprise many 
knowledge  work  domains  [34].  As  Su  and  Mark  [70] 
suggest,  mobility  puts  a 
into  a 
persistently 
relationship  with 
and 
infrastructural  arrangements  because  the  likelihood  of  a 
breakdown, either in workflow (i.e., social) or technological 
connectivity,  is  heightened  by  the  continuous  encounter 
with  barriers  and  boundaries  as  he  or  she  moves.  For 
example,  employees  using  mobile  devices  are  regularly 
frustrated in their attempts to securely access, store, scan, or 
print information because of an incompatibility with foreign 
print  drivers,  borrowed  network  access  rights,  and  other 
localized  protocols  [55].  Beyond  access,  workers  also 
become  dependent  on  specific  devices  and  applications, 
which can become difficult when mobility forces the need 
for non-preferred or non-integrated use patterns [21,74].  
In short, to be mobile, particularly as a professional, is to be 
to 
engaged 
infrastructure.  Because  different 
are 
typically  less  than  ideally,  if  at  all,  integrated  with  one 
another,  workers  must  constantly  focus  their  attention  on 
identifying,  managing,  and  working  through  or  across 
infrastructural gaps  and disconnects [25]. Mobility, in this 
sense,  is  synonymous  with  a  lack  of  access  to  centrally 
organized  resource-allocation  mechanisms  (prevalent  in 
stationary forms of work) and a concomitant requirement to 
navigate multiple installed bases of situated infrastructures, 
nearly all of which are organized independently [71]. This 
said,  we  acknowledge  the  increasing  role  that  cloud 
services  play  in  allowing  workers  to  bring  together 
disparate  parts  of  an  infrastructural  ecosystem  to  address 
the contingencies of a particular work situation.  
Folding  all  these  pieces  together  yields  a  setting  for 
computer-supported  work 
is  both  dynamically 
changing and, as of yet, not well understood. To pursue this 
gap  in  knowledge,  we  draw  on  work  by  pioneering 
cyberinfrastructural 
(e.g.,  57,  58,  69], 
particularly research on ‘infrastructuring practices’ [52,67], 
to explain the empirical phenomena we see out in the field. 
As Vertesi [73] showcases the artful dexterity of scientists, 
we  document  the  ‘infrastructural  competence’  [25]  of 
mobile  knowledge  workers  as  they  successfully  (and 
usually 
concatenate  multiple 
infrastructures  to  accomplish  their  work.  In  so  doing,  we 
seek,  like  an  evolving  infrastructure  itself,  to  graft  [59] 
ourselves  to  the  larger  conversation  within  infrastructure 
studies  with  new  data  and,  potentially,  new  insights.  Our 

relationship 
infrastructures 

researchers 

that 

rapidly) 

adjust 

and 

to 

first, 

extend  knowledge 

transmitting  knowledge,  2) 

contribution 
the  conversation  will  extend  prior 
infrastructural  thinking  into  new  empirical  domains  and 
simultaneously expand our understanding of infrastructural 
practices  when  these  practices  are  not  dominated  by  the 
(creative)  use  of  a  single  installed  base  common  in 
scientific settings [30, 73].  
RELATED LITERATURE 
This  paper  is  situated  at  the  nexus  of  two  streams  of 
scholarship: 
the  discussion  of  how  mobile 
technologies  are  influencing  and  changing  the  way  that 
modern workers do their work, and second, the discussion 
of  how  users/workers  engage  in  workaround  practices  to 
bridge  or 
infrastructures  when 
infrastructural  design(s)  constrains  desired  usages  or 
activities. We consider the extant research in each of these 
discussions  briefly  before  turning  to  the  mainstay  of  our 
study. 
Mobility Practices in Knowledge Work 
The  1960s  has  been  identified  as  the  moment  when 
knowledge work began to define the future character of the 
American economy [39,76]. Indeed, as mentioned, much of 
the work that is popular today (e.g., software engineering, 
data science, design, etc.) springs from this initial root and, 
in  so  doing,  bears  certain  recognizable  characteristics:  1) 
producing  and 
involving 
intellectual  skill  and  manipulation  of  abstractions,  3) 
requiring  problem  solving 
to  creativity,  or  4) 
necessitating  theoretical  and  technical  knowledge,  formal 
education  and  continuous  on-the  job  learning  [20,53,62]. 
This  emphasis  on  intellectual  endeavors  makes  it  clear  to 
see  how  easily  knowledge  professions  can  be  decoupled 
from specific locations or times [51]—so long as a network 
connection is available.  
CHI and CSCW researchers have been on the forefront of 
documenting how ubiquitous networks and mobile devices 
have  begun  to  shape  the  extension  and  expansion  of 
knowledge  work  over  the  last  quarter  century  [e.g., 
17,50,70].  Popular  themes  in  this  collective  body  of  work 
include, only as a small example, the assembling of tools or 
‘kits’ for professional nomadism [e.g., 14], the extension of 
work into the home environment [e.g., 17], heterogeneity of 
technological resources that enable mobility of work across 
several  locations  [e.g.,  21],  and  the  effects  that  constant 
availability  by  way  of  mobile  devices  have  on  the 
identification  and  psychological  well-being  of  modern 
professionals  [e.g.,  16,40,41].  Complementary  work  of 
note, but of less central concern to our thesis herein, centers 
on the use of mobile devices to attend to emergencies [e.g., 
32,38] and health care maintenance [e.g., 4,12]. This paper 
seeks  to  be  in  conversation  with  this  cumulative  body  of 
scholarship in presenting another grounded example of the 
integrated sociotechnical nature of mobile practices for the 
consideration of both researchers and designers alike.  

tied 

1324

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA
 

infrastructure 

Infrastructures and Seams 
Knowledge workers’ increased dynamism, as noted above, 
is  made  possible  by  a  combination  of  expanded  ICT 
networks,  the  development  and  adoption  of  mobile  device 
systems designed to support enterprise tasks, and the social 
evolution  of  mobility  as  an  integral,  if  not  normative, 
component  of  both  individual  and  organizational  identity 
[54,61]. This set of sociotechnical arrangements comprises 
what  we  consider  a  knowledge 
[24]. 
Knowledge infrastructures can be described as comprising 
multiple,  heterogeneous  sub-infrastructures  that  have  been 
grafted [59] or merged [56] together to achieve a particular 
professional  or  scientific  end.  Infrastructures  grow  in  an 
evolutionary manner, beginning as a primary installed base 
[30] and morphing across time with the introduction of new 
participants  and  tasks  to  accommodate  additional  features, 
capabilities, and arrangements. 
As  an  infrastructure  takes  shape  as  a  collection  of 
technological  systems,  devices,  and  interfaces,  it  also 
facilitates  and  is  facilitated  by  people’s  relationships  with 
and  around  these  artifacts  [34].  Thus,  to  be  understood 
completely,  an  infrastructure  must  include  the  human 
habits,  norms,  politics,  standards,  and  temporal  rhythms 
that animate and surround it. This sociotechnical nature is 
what  enables  infrastructure  to  evolve  into  the  immutable 
ecosystem  we  typically  recognize  it  to  be  [34]—an 
arrangement that is long-lasting and highly durable [34,42]. 
Because  of  this  evolutionary  characteristic,  Hughes  [33] 
once  famously  suggested  that  the  study  of  infrastructural 
ecosystems  should  span  across  time  and  space  rather  than 
focus on narrow, isolated instances of  technologies in use. 
Infrastructure  is  also  typically  invisible  and  transparent  in 
the  background;  to  experience  infrastructure  knowingly,  it 
has  often  been  said,  is  to  experience  it  when  it  is  not 
working [57,72]. This framing aligns with Weiser’s original 
conception  of  ubiquitous  computing,  in  which  users  were 
envisioned  to  move  across  a  space  without  technological 
breakdown  or  disruption—‘seamlessly’  [75].  For  Weiser, 
seams,  or  recognized  gaps  or  points  of  breakdown, 
represented a failure on the part of infrastructure designers 
because  they  force  users  to  become  cognizant  of  and 
engaged  with  the  design  limitations  of  the  infrastructural 
environment.  
infrastructure  studies  scholarship  presents  a 
Recent 
different  take  on  infrastructural  seams,  however.  Dourish 
and  Bell  [22,  p.  29],  for  instance,  acknowledge  that 
“…<seeing>  infrastructure  as  stable,  uniform,  seamless, 
and  universally  available  is  clearly  problematic.”  Vertesi 
[73],  in  a  similar  spirit,  claims  that  seams,  while  not 
necessarily  welcome,  provide  opportunities  for  actors  to 
perform 
bridge 
gaps 
infrastructural  workarounds 
the 
sociotechnical  relationship(s)  present  at  any  one  seam’s 
edge. These acts of infrastructural alignment and navigation 
are  called  ‘infrastructuring’  [7,36,37,52]  and  occur  when 

‘artfully’, 
that 

infrastructural 

accord  with 

to 

1325

the 

impart 

insight 

the 

they 

illuminate 

interests 

sociotechnical 

for  analysis  because 

infrastructures.  Our 

actors  construct—either  individually  or  collectively—a 
bricolage of material, mental, social, and cultural resources 
to adapt to seamful situations and advance accordingly.  
Infrastructuring  is  nearly  always  needed  because  the 
complex,  messy,  and  unevenly  distributed  nature  of 
infrastructure  requires  that  individuals  be  in  continuous 
negotiation  with  it  [22],  such  as  in  .response  to  an 
infrastructural impediment or at a moment of infrastructural 
breakdown [57]. These sites of engagement are particularly 
appealing 
the 
dependencies  among  the  comprised  components  (or  the 
lack thereof [44]) as well as the competence or ingenuity of 
actors. Thus, seams, in addition to outlining a more accurate 
technical  configuration  of  an 
understanding  of 
infrastructure,  also 
into  our  ongoing 
negotiations with it [22]. 
RESEARCH STUDY 
We  report  on  the  infrastructuring  practices  of  mobile 
knowledge workers as part of a larger study that centers on 
exploring 
relationship(s)  between 
workers  and  digital 
in 
conducting this research are exploratory—we are striving to 
inductively identify new types of practices and data patterns 
by which to classify workers and infrastructural ecosystems 
in  the  service  of  organizational  scholarship  and  design 
research. This is not, nor has ever intended to be, a study 
that  looks  at  a  particular  set  of  workers,  a  particular 
industry context, or a particular set of infrastructural tools 
in an evaluative manner. As such, it should be considered as 
a prelude to more targeted investigations in the future. 
Theoretical Framework  
The theoretical framework we bring to this work is practice 
theory—an  analytical  lens  that  draws  on  Orlikowsi’s 
investigations  of  technology-in-use  in  organizations  [48]. 
Practice is defined as a ‘recurrent, materially bounded and 
situated  action  engaged  in  by  members  of  a  community’ 
[48,  p.  256].  Central  to  a  practice  lens  is  the  notion  that 
social  life,  including  its  sociotechnical  components,  is  an 
ongoing production; in this vein, researchers focus on when 
and  how  actors  engage  in  repeated  patterns  of  activity  as 
well  as  why  certain  activities  are  produced  and  reinforced 
the  way  that  they  are  [26].  For  example,  Orlikowski  [47] 
famously  showed  that  the  practices  of  consultants  in  a 
multinational consulting firm revealed a different usage and 
different  intention  of  use  for  Lotus  Notes  than  did  the 
practices  of  the  technologists  within  the  same  firm—an 
insight  that  helped  to  usher  in  a  constructionist  era  of 
technology analysis, especially within workplace studies.  
Practice theorists [e.g., 43,47]—like infrastructure scholars 
[e.g.,  44,57]—often  focus  on  moments  of  breakdown  or 
challenge because these help to reveal otherwise transparent 
activities or institutionalized values and norms; waves on an 
otherwise  calm  sea  of  activity  create  an  opportunity  to 
contrast  the  new  with  the  given,  the  odd  with  the  normal. 
We  adopt  a  similar  orientation  in  our  examination  of 

 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

physically mobile knowledge work, namely seeking insight 
into the practices and motivations these workers by looking 
at how they address challenging or unknown events in the 
course of their work. 
 
Data and Analysis 
The  data  that  informs  this  analysis  is  comprised  of 
interviews and observation fieldwork. Eight interviews and 
10 hours of observation (with one subject) were conducted 
in  person  by  the  first  author  in  New  York  City  between 
January  2014  and  June  2014;  sixteen  interviews  were 
conducted (11 in person; 5 remotely) by the second author 
between February 2014 and March 2015, primarily in and 
around Research Triangle Park, North Carolina. Interview 
subjects  were  identified  in  one  of  two  manners:  via 
snowball  sampling  using  email  and  social  media  or  via 
cold-calling  nomadic  workers  who  publically  identified 
themselves online. The initial snowball sample was seeded 
from the personal networks of each of the authors.  
Subjects  were  selected  for  inclusion  in  the  study  on  the 
basis  of 
their  professional  engagement  with  digital 
infrastructures:  1)  they  were  required  to  be  engaged  in 
knowledge  work  of  some  kind,  2)  be  more 
than 
occasionally  mobile  (i.e.,  physical  mobility  was  a  core 
component  of  their  working  practice,  not  something  that 
occurred  rarely),  and  3)  possess  the  agency  to  handle  a 
disruption  or  challenge  on  their  own  (i.e.,  their  use  of 
infrastructure  had  room  for  customization  and  was  not 
prescribed  totally  by  their  organization).  Of  the  total 
twenty-four  subjects,  12  were  women  and  12  were  men. 
While we did not collect specific demographic information 
per subject, it is fair to generalize the sample as ranging in 
age from mid-twenties to mid-sixties. All subjects shared a 
technical competence that enabled them to maneuver ably 
throughout a physical space while maintaining a sufficient 
type  of  connection  to  their  work.  Individual  variations  in 
this  competency  will  not  be  discussed  here,  but  form  the 
basis of a separate study that is currently underway. 
Participants  represented  a  range  of  knowledge  work 
domains: 
(5); 
architecture/workplace  design  (4);  higher  education  (3); 
web  design  (3);  communication  and  content  management 
(2); IT support (2); event planning (2); real estate (2); and 
legal  services  (1).  They  came  from  large  firms  (4),  small 
firms (14), and, in some cases, were freelancers (6). They 
also  exhibited  different  forms  of  physical  mobility: 
individuals  who  work  on  one  site,  but  move  around 
frequently  (e.g.  IT  support  staff)  (1);  those  who  alternate 
between working at two fixed locations (e.g. management 
consultants)  (9),  and  those  who  work  in  a  number  of 
different  places  and  are  constantly  moving  amongst  them 
(e.g., real estate agents) (14). 
Each  researcher  used  the  same  protocol  to  conduct  their 
interviews,  which  was  jointly  designed  by  the  pair  with 

consulting 

business 

and 

strategy 

input from a third collaborator involved in the larger study. 
The interview protocol was developed to address three core 
areas  related  to  knowledge  work  and  infrastructure:  (1) 
interviewees’  professional  background,  working  situation 
and,  work  arrangements;  (2)  the  nature  and  structure  of 
their mobility (e.g., spatial and temporal mobility); and (3) 
the  way  that  different  technological  infrastructures  (e.g., 
Internet  connection,  devices,  and  applications)  and 
infrastructural workarounds play a role in a subject’s work. 
Questions  included  the  following:  1)  Describe  a  typical 
workday. 2) Can you describe where you do your work? 3) 
Tell me about the devices you use regularly. 4) How do you 
get online when on the go? 5) May I take a picture of the 
contents  of  your  bag/briefcase?  While  all  interviews  were 
similarly organized by the shared protocol, in practice each 
was  conducted  as  open-ended  conversation 
lasting 
approximately  60  minutes.  All  interviews  were  audio 
recorded and subsequently transcribed. 
the  first  author  by 
Observation  was  conducted  by 
shadowing  one  subject  (S1)  throughout  the  whole  of  her 
day, beginning with her arrival at Grand Central Station by 
train and continuing as she traveled across New York City 
for a set of appointments, eventually ending at a coworking 
office in the Financial District where she regularly conducts 
her work. Data was collected by taking extensive field notes 
and  by  taking  photographs  to  capture  details  about  the 
participant’s practices, context, and organizational scheme. 
Minimal  contact  occurred  between  the  researcher  and  the 
subject  other  than  to  confirm  travel  and  location  details 
between meetings. 
the 
Data  analysis  was  wholly 
established, iterative protocols of grounded theory building 
[69]. Between July 2014 and May 2015, the two researchers 
engaged in successive rounds of transcript reading, memo 
writing, and extended conversation to become familiar with 
the  collected  data  and  to  collaboratively  ‘sensemake’  to 
produce the initial insights on display herein. Formal in vivo 
coding  was  not  conducted  on  each  interview  transcript  at 
the  time  of  this  writing,  but  is  currently  underway  in 
support of the larger study.  
FINDINGS 
The analysis we present here might be considered as a pair 
of  stair  steps—our  first  insight  regarding  infrastructural 
challenges  yielded  a  new  set  of  questions  that,  through 
successive  analysis,  produced  our  findings  on  workers’ 
infrastructuring  practices.  Reaching  the  second  step  was 
dependent  on  discovering 
the 
implications of the first step.  
Step 1: Seams on the Go 
As noted, the practices of being a mobile knowledge worker 
involves  a  successive  series  of  dynamic  interactions  with 
infrastructure(s)  by  virtue  of  interaction  with  an  expanded 
set  of  geographical,  organizational,  and  technological 
boundaries.  Throughout  their  respective  work  practices, 
interviewees note that they interact with multiple layers of 

and  understanding 

inductive, 

following 

1326

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA
 

have 

curated 

characteristics 

that 

intentional 

digital infrastructure, including networks, hardware devices, 
software  applications,  and  combinations  thereof.  Some  of 
these  layers  are  experienced  as  customized  ecosystems 
developed  by  IT  providers  such  as  Google  and  Microsoft, 
others 
reflect 
organizational/enterprise  mandates,  and  yet  others  are 
wholly  assembled  or  created  by  users  in  response  to 
immediate needs or preferences. 
Throughout  the  collected  interviews,  interviewees  reveal 
that  they  experience  seams,  gaps,  and  breakdowns  within 
and  among  these  varying  infrastructure(s)  as  a  type  of 
constraint  on  an 
task  or  practice.  These 
comments about constraint led us to look for and categorize 
instances across the entire dataset—a process that induced a 
key  distinction  between  two  metatypes:  technological  vs. 
contextual constraints (see Table 1).  
We  identify  technological  constraints  as  those  primarily 
rooted  in  the  material  properties  of  technologies  and 
contextual  constraints  as  those  relating  to  impactful,  yet 
non-technological, 
particular 
organizational policy or the characteristics of certain room 
or  work  setting.  The  identification  of  this  dyad  provoked 
additional  analysis,  which  produced  two  sets  of  additional 
distinctions 
Interviewees  note  a 
difference  between  multiple  (competing  and/or  non-
compatible) 
call 
‘technological  exclusion’—and  the  need  to  negotiate  a 
solution  to  extend  or  bridge  an  infrastructure  beyond  its 
designed  capacity—a  condition  we  call  ‘infrastructural 
disconnect’.  
Technological 
Constraints 
Technological Exclusion 
Infrastructural Disconnect   Organizational Boundaries 

Contextual Constraints 

for  each  category. 

Spatial Boundaries 

infrastructures—a 

stressors 

such 

as 

a 

condition  we 

Table 1. Typology of Infrastructural Seams. 

types: 

In parallel, the fixed challenges related to context break into 
‘spatial  boundaries’—when  workers  are 
two 
challenged by an aspect of their geographic location—and 
‘organizational  constraints’—a  more  fluid  set  of  dynamic 
social challenges. We develop each of these four quadrants 
in  greater  detail  below  to  prepare  for  our  secondary 
discussion on infrastructuring. 
Technological Constraint: Technological Exclusion  
Mobile  knowledge  workers  encounter 
technological 
exclusion  when  heterogeneous  infrastructures  cannot  be 
made  to  support  mobile  practices;  another  way  of  saying 
this  is  that  technological  exclusion  reveals  the  limits  of 
what an infrastructure is designed to enable. For example, 
one of our interviewees shows the limit of his Mac laptop’s 
connectivity: “I still haven’t figured out why they don’t put 
wireless  cards  in  Macs  yet.    It  would  just  make  so  much 
more sense, we are always in places where we could use 4G 

1327

but  we  cannot  yet  (P13).”  As  a  Mac  user,  this  man  is 
excluded  from  using  4G  networks  while  mobile  because 
there  is  a  technological  gap  in  a  key  piece  of  his 
infrastructural  ecosystem—his 
laptop--that  cannot  be 
bridged. A worker experiencing technological exclusion has 
reached a dead end.  
Network  speed  and  coverage  is  another  area  in  which 
workers  report  experiencing  technological  exclusion.  A 
reliable Internet connection is considered fundamental and 
often  drives  where  workers  choose  to  work:  “I  work  in 
coffee  shops;  I  work  wherever  I  can  get  an  Internet 
connection”  (P3)”  says  a  business  consultant.  Often, 
however,  the  connection  is  not  strong  enough  to  support 
video  conferencing,  a  common  activity  in  this  profession. 
As  a  result,  this  woman  is  excluded,  technologically 
speaking,  from  progressing  toward  her  professional  goal 
(i.e., conferencing with a client). For her, this technological 
constraint manifests itself as an impasse. In a similar vein, 
another  participant  points  to  the  infrastructural  exclusions 
present  in  planes,  despite  their  new  capacities  to  support 
Wi-Fi.  Says  this  IT  consultant  of  his  time  in  flight:  “It’s 
very  limited  what  you  can  do.  Remote  access  works,  no 
problem.  Skype  for  example,  would  not  work,  because 
streaming [challenges] on that type of Wi-Fi connection is 
terrible (P8).”  
Interviewees also continuously referenced one of the most 
fundamental technological exclusions of all—power.  Even 
though the battery capacity of mobile devices is increasing 
steadily,  it  still  does  not  keep  up  with  the  job  demand  of 
most  mobile  workers  with  a  high  level  of  mobility.  For 
example, P14, a realtor, recounts the travails of this form of 
technological constraint, “I tried to buy a phone that has a 
battery that will last, but even that won’t fill up the full day; 
so  when  you’re  in  a  home  and  we  rely  on  to  get  like 
specialized  notes  about  the  home,  we  actually  rely  on  the 
app as well, so if your battery dies halfway through a home 
tour  that’s  pretty  devastating.  So  you  have  to  try  and 
address that challenge but you really can’t because you’re 
using  the  same  phone  that  you  need  to  save  battery  on 
pretty heavily.” Workers’ abilities are stymied, often to the 
point of exclusion, by the technological constraint of short 
battery life. 
Technological Constraint: Infrastructural Disconnect   
A  second,  distinct  form  of  technological  constraint  is  an 
infrastructural  disconnect.  This  notion  builds  on  Vertesi’s 
[73]  conceptualization  of  ‘multi-infrastructural  torque’, 
itself a reference to Bowker and Star’s [8] description of the 
way  that  categorical  inclusions  and  exclusions  enable  or 
constrain  work  practice.  In  recounting  the  story  of  a 
scientist  studying  the  Mars  Rover  mission,  Vertesi  details 
how  a  scientist,  caught  between  multiple  incompatible 
device  ecologies,  experienced  a  technological  disconnect 
when  incompatibilities  between  Mac  and  PC  systems 
prevented him from using PowerPoint seamlessly to display 
important scientific visualizations to other members of his 

 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

they 

just  didn’t  play  well 

team [73: 276]. A disconnect in this case has exclusionary 
properties—he  was  indeed  stopped  in  his  goal—but  can 
more accurately be described as a gap in otherwise properly 
functioning  systems.  PowerPoint  on  the  OSX  operating 
system  worked  fine  as  it  did  on  the  Windows  operating 
system; 
together,  which 
highlighted  a  chasm  between  means  and  end  for  this 
scientist.  
Many of our interviewees shared similar frustrations about 
infrastructural  disconnects  that  impeded  their  own  work. 
P3,  a  consultant,  found  it  challenging  to  use  Microsoft 
Outlook on her Android phone, “I actually have problems 
with  calendaring  right  now,  because  I’m  having  trouble 
with  making  all  the  technologies  work.  [Android  phone] 
wants  Google  Calendar  to  be  your  calendar.  Google 
Calendar doesn’t work well for me... I started getting really 
frustrated with how Google was taking over my data, and I 
just  stopped.”  Infrastructural  disconnect,  in  this  sense, 
occurs  when  it  becomes  difficult  or  challenging  to  create 
the  device  ecology  of  your  choice  based  on  multiple 
infrastructural  choices  or  automated  integration.  Platforms 
(e.g.,  Microsoft  Outlook)  often  reinforce  and  impose  the 
use  of  other  components  (e.g.,  mobile  operating  system) 
from  the  same  technology  provider.  P6,  a  technology 
columnist, underscores the same issue, which also happens 
to be centered on calendar use: “I do use Google Calendar. 
Because  [the  name  of  his  company]  is  standardized  on 
Outlook--which  I  hate--I  use  Outlook.  But,  and  this  is 
something else that I’m gonna have to bite the bullet on, I 
am doing all my appointments in Google Calendar. I asked 
how  I  can  import  Gmail  Calendar  into  Outlook  so  I  have 
one calendar, and they said, sorry, we can’t help you, we 
don’t  support  Gmail  Calendar.  So  I  haven’t  quite  figured 
out how to do it.”   
Infrastructural  disconnect  can  also  be  manifest  when  an 
application  is  optimally  designed  for  a  computer  and 
therefore does not perform well on a mobile device. P14, a 
real estate agent, explains how difficult it is to use the MLS 
(Multiple Listing Service) database—the industry standard 
and an imperative piece of infrastructure in realty—on his 
smartphone:  “.  .  .  the  biggest  challenge  is  just  not  having 
easy  access  through  mobile  devices  to  the  databases  we 
need...the  MLS  application  runs  best  on  a  computer...it’s 
really, really hard to look at that when you’re out and on 
the go. It loads like ten times and you got to zoom in.” The 
disconnect present here is not technological incompatibility 
but  a  development  design  choice  that  renders  a  piece  of 
infrastructure  relatively  unusable 
in  a  ‘non-standard’ 
situation. 
Contextual Constraint: Spatial Boundaries 
A second type of constraint relates to workers’ geographic 
and social context. Regarding the first of these, Brown and 
O’Hara 
locales  provide 
affordances that both constrain and enable work activities. 
It is the dividing line between the possible and the restricted 

[10]  concur 

that  workers’ 

regarding  cellular  data  networks.  Despite 

that forms the boundary in our label. Spatial boundaries can 
be seen most clearly in our data regarding the intersection 
of technology and transport. Although the rising ubiquity of 
wireless networks has increased the range in which people 
can  maintain  a  network  connection  these  days,  it  doesn’t 
mean  that  individuals  can  be  constantly  connected.  For 
example, P3, P7 and P8—all consultants—regularly spend 
several hours every day driving to client locations in order 
to deliver their services. Driving and mobile screens do not 
go  well  together,  however.  P3  notes  that  most  of  today’s 
mobile  tools  are  “screen-obsessed”  meaning  that  they 
require near constant visual attention. As such, they are not 
designed to be used (and cannot be used effectively) during 
long hours of driving.   
Other contextual challenges for mobile knowledge workers 
begin  to  blur  the  spatial  and  the  organizational—as  is  the 
the 
case 
availability  of  cellular  networks,  many 
interviewees 
reported that they were not able to rely on them exclusively 
because  of  the  relatively  high  cost  of  cellular  data.  Real 
estate  agent  P14  consumes  almost  8GB  of  cellular  data 
every  month  because  of  his  heavy  use  of  the  MLS 
application.  Since  this  expense  is  not  reimbursed  by  his 
organization, he restricts his use of cellular data towards the 
end  of  month  and  instead  uses  public  Wi-Fi  networks  as 
much as possible: “Most of the time if I have the time I will 
like pull over at a Burger King or something like that and 
hit their Wi-Fi to go in, but obviously if you don’t have time 
you have got to fork it through on the phone again.”  
Contextual Constraint: Organizational Boundaries   
By far and away the most impinging contextual constraints 
for  our  interviewees  were  those  set  in  motion  because  of 
organizational  rules,  policies,  or  mandates.  These  rules 
create  boundaries  between  the  possible  and  the  restricted 
that  affect  how  workers  can  access,  process,  and  arrange 
infrastructures to meet their aims and goals. This inductive 
insight from our empirical data mirrors prior research [e.g., 
35]  that  evidences  various  ways  organizational  constraints 
in  the  forms  of  rules  or  policies  restrict  the  flexible 
enactment of technological practices, adversely influencing 
the mobilization of technological resources across time and 
space.  
Organizational  boundaries  can  be  particularly  pronounced 
when  people  are  reliant  on  infrastructures  owned  by  third 
parties—almost  a  constant 
the  world  of  mobile 
knowledge  workers.  Take  the  example  of  P2,  a  web 
developer, who regularly meets her clients in public places. 
She  recounts  the  constraints  put  in  place  by  some  of  the 
restaurants  she  frequents  for  these  meetings,  “Places  like 
Panera  Bread  have  Wi-Fi,  but  they  kick  you  off  after  30 
minutes sometimes for the day, because they’re too busy so 
they  don’t  want  people  hanging  around  there.”  The 
challenge  of  maintaining  an  online  connection  for  this 
mobile  worker  is  not  at  all  about  technological  feasibility 
and every thing to do with organizational policy.  

in 

1328

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA
 

integration  protocols 

Other  constraints  are  revealed  when  workers  want  to 
information  across  multiple  organizations’ 
transfer 
jurisdictional  boundaries.  P11,  a  business  intelligence 
developer, explains the way that his organization’s security 
measures  limit  access  to  the  resources  of  clients  from 
different  places:  “You  have  situations  where  companies 
have set up constraints that  . . . I couldn’t connect to their 
site right here, right now if I wanted to. There are places 
that have some higher level of security clearances down to 
a  point  where  they  need  to  know  what  IP  your  request  is 
coming from” (P11). Workers feel these policy implications 
as  infrastructural  disconnects,  but  their  origin  is  more 
obviously  found  at  the  level  of  rules  and  regulations  than 
technical 
(which,  upon  closer 
inspection  are  also  forms  of  organizational  constraint,  but 
this is a story for another time).  
Together, technological and contextual constraints create a 
playing  field  for  mobile  workers  that  is  highly  variable, 
unpredictable  and—simply  speaking—challenging.  Unlike 
workers in fixed office settings, mobile knowledge workers 
do  not  always  know  where  their  internet  connection  will 
come from, how much it will cost, or when it will be shut 
down due to external protocols. Moreover, because they are 
highly  mobile  and,  thus,  must  rely  on  portable  tools  with 
less  customizable  features,  smaller  interfaces,  and  limited 
power  capacities,  they  are  positioned  within  a  constrained 
infrastructural ecosystem that forces them to either address 
these challenges or fail to progress at all. How these mobile 
knowledge workers take on these challenges is the topic we 
turn to next. 
Step 2: Infrastructuring as Strategic Mobile Practice  
As  we  have  just  detailed,  technological  and  contextual 
constraints overtly pervade the daily working environments 
of  mobile  knowledge  workers.  What  is  less  obvious  to 
them,  however,  is  the  way  that  they  engage  in  a  series  of 
strategic  infrastructuring  practices  to  right  or  remedy  the 
technological,  geographic,  and  organizational  challenges 
that  they  regularly  confront.  Using  a  practice  theoretical 
lens, we identified three primary patterns that comprise the 
strategies  employed  by  our  participants:  bridging, 
assembling,  and  circumventing.  Each  of  these  practices 
enables workers to ‘artfully’ deal with infrastructural seams 
thereby presenting the necessary semblance of seamlessness 
that  allows  them  to  maintain  an  adequate  professional 
identity, 
interaction  profile.  Before 
describing each of these practices in detail, it is important to 
note  that  our  findings  are  nascent  and,  as  such,  do  not 
represent a universal overview of mobile knowledge worker 
practices. Even so, we hope that this initial typology begins 
to detail how the situated actions of mobile workers might 
help  to  develop  our  thinking  regarding  infrastructural 
dynamics in a new, if yet incomplete, direction.   
Bridging Work 
Bridging  is  an  infrastructuring  practice  in  which  mobile 
knowledge  workers  attempt  to  bridge  incompatible  digital 

rhythm  and/or 

1329

than  making 

two 

recognizes 

the  possibility 

infrastructures (e.g., brand ecologies) by introducing some 
form  of  aligning  intervention.  This  work  is  necessary 
whenever  there  is  an  infrastructural  disconnect  or  when 
organizational constraints impede the ready construction of 
a  desired  infrastructural  configuration.  The  practice  of 
bridging can be seen as similar to what Bietz, Baumer, and 
Lee [5] refer to as ‘aligning’, which brings together already-
existing  entities  rather  than  developing  new  ones  from 
scratch.  The  outcome  of  such  process  is  a  synergistic 
alignment of infrastructures.  
In our data we see instances in which bridging is done by 
manual  intervention  and  we  also  see  evidence  of  bridging 
done by actors strategically utilizing gateway technologies1. 
An  example  of  the  first  form  of  bridging  can  be  found  in 
our interview with P6, the technology columnist. Recall that 
he  grapples with  an infrastructural disconnect  between his 
organization’s  calendaring  system  and  his  personal 
calendar. He bridges this gap by manually synchronizing a 
calendar invite with his preferred calendaring environment 
(aka,  not  Outlook):  “Whenever  anyone  invites  me  to  a 
meeting  via  Outlook,  I  have  to  manually  synchronize  that 
with  Gmail.”  Rather 
incompatible 
infrastructures  (i.e.,  Outlook  and  Gmail)  work  together  by 
hacking 
together  a  software  path,  P6  undertakes  a 
duplication-based  bridging  strategy  to  achieve  his  desired 
goal.  Notably,  P6 
for  a 
workaround that enables him to construct a working bridge 
and  enacts  it;  he  knows  enough  to  know  that  the 
infrastructural disconnect can be dealt with somehow.  
P10, a partner at a law firm, achieves a similar end by using 
a  gateway 
to  bridge  an 
infrastructural disconnect in the calendaring system he must 
use  for  work.  Key  to  P10’s  bridging  strategy  is  his 
knowledge  that  this  maneuver  will  deliver  necessary 
information automatically to his mobile device, “If we have 
a deadline, it gets entered into Clio, which then gets pushed 
to the Google Calendar, then gets pushed to mobile devices 
or computers. So it shows up on my calendar on my iPhone 
or  iPad—all  nicely  integrated.  People  have  multiple 
calendars,  so  I’ve  got  my  law  firm  calendar,  my  [the  2nd 
firm’s  name]  calendar;  I’ve  got  a  family  calendar,  and 
those  are  Google  oriented,  so  they  all  tie  together  nicely, 
and  I  can  access  those  from  any  device.”  Not  only  does 
Clio  assist  in  preparing  P10  for  his  frequent  periods  of 
mobility,  it  has  the  ancillary  benefit  of  integrating  other 
components  of  the  larger  infrastructural  environment  into 
alignment with one another automatically. 
Another  form  of  bridging  work—now  an  increasingly 
common practice—occurs when mobile knowledge workers 
maintain their network connection by using a smart phone 
                                                             
1Gateway 
large  class  of  ‘minor’  
technological  innovations    that  enable  users  to    integrate  
diverse  and rival sub-systems  into  an  enlarged production  
system or  extended  network [19]. 

technology  called  Clio 

technologies  are  a 

 

to create a hotspot for their entire device ecosystem: “If I’m 
in area that doesn’t have Wi-Fi, I can turn the iPhone on to 
make  a  hot  spot,  and  then  I  have  it  for  the  laptop  or  the 
tablet. The laptop goes with me on the road, and I need my 
laptop to write and I write most days (P9).” Faced with the 
prospect  of  exclusion  or  the  need  to  work  with  a 
constrained  set  of  affordances,  workers 
like  P9,  a 
conference  speaker/catalyst,  form  a  bridge  among  devices 
that  allows  them  to  maintain  their  preferred  professional 
orientation  to  the  task  at  hand—in  this  case,  utilizing  the 
laptop for writing while maintaining a network connection. 
In this way, brokering and bridging seams perpetuates the 
need for continued personalization or customization in the 
way(s) that an infrastructure is managed and used in situ. 
Assembling  
Beyond bridging, mobile knowledge workers also engage in 
the  even  more  creative  practice  of  ‘assembling’2,  or 
customizing infrastructural solutions from various disparate 
parts.  As  Vertesi  describes  in  her  work  with  NASA 
scientists [73], assembling requires knowledge and acumen 
on the part of the knowledge worker; they must be able to 
see, first, how various technological design affordances can 
be integrated with one another and, second, how an newly 
fashioned  solution  relates  and  upholds  requisite  tasks  and 
situations.  
One of the key areas in which mobile knowledge workers 
engage in assembling work is to maintain power. As noted 
earlier, limited battery life is a major challenge so it is not 
surprising that several participants assemble relevant device 
ecologies to enable as extended an amount of work time as 
possible.  P13’s  assembling  solution  involves  the  use  of  a 
dedicated backup battery while he, a web developer, is on 
the  move:  “[the  backup  battery]  helps  you  get  a  second 
charge of your iPhone 5S ... So when you’re using an outlet 
it charges the phone first and then charges the battery, and 
you get basically a whole full life on the battery afterwards.  
I also have something else for my Mac that’s called Battery 
Box,  and  it’s  a  whole  full  extra  charge.  Those  two  things 
are  super  useful  for  people  working  remotely.  There’s  no 
way I’m not going to find an outlet in two full charges of my 
devices  (P13).”  P13’s  use  of  the  backup  battery  and  the 
Battery Box are not that novel on the surface of things, but 
what  is  more  important  is  the  ecosystemic  knowledge 
represented  in  his  characterization  of  this  solution.  There 
are  various  noted  parts  here  (i.e.,  backup  battery,  Battery 
Box,  electrical  grid)  being  brought  to  bear  in  a  temporal 
sequence.  He  is  aware  that  the  rhythm  of  his  power  grid-
excluded mobile periods is likely not more than 2 battery-
life  cycles  of  an  iPhone  5S—likely  8-10  hours  depending 

                                                             
2 We utilize the word ‘assembling’ cautiously here knowing 
that  is  has  other  problematic  connotations.  That  said,  we 
seek  to  stress  the  constructed,  fabricated  nature  of  this 
practice  and  the  ways  that  workers  put  disparate  pieces 
together to form a functioning whole. 

1330

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

on  the  usage  pattern  of  the  device.  Importantly,  his 
assembled  solution  does  not  attempt  to  be  more  complex 
than  it  needs  to  be;  he  is  aware  that  he  will  find  a  power 
outlet at some point every 10-12 hours or so and can adjust 
accordingly.  But  he  is  always  at  the  ready—he  has 
assembled a complementary infrastructure to accommodate 
the  likely  reality  that  he  will  not  have  access  to  grounded 
power at any point during any one day. 
We also see other forms of assembled redundancy in play 
by several of our interviewees. P3, one of the consultants, 
has  4  cell  phone  chargers  geographically  distributed  to 
accommodate her typical mobile path: one in her car, one in 
her house, one at a co-working space that she frequents, and 
one  at  a  client  location.  Similarly,  P4,  another  of  the 
consultants,  always  travels  with  two  laptops  to  extend  his 
working capacity, “I’ve been taking my personal laptop and 
my  work  laptop,  because  typically  when  I’m  traveling  for 
work, I constantly have to go to the East Coast, which is a 
long flight, so for just for battery life sake, I’ll bring both” 
(P4). These contrived solutions go beyond simple bridging 
in most cases, showcasing a constructed set of technologies 
or an overarching logic to the assembled pieces that belies 
their strategic natures. 
We  see  a  completely  different  example  of  assembling 
drawn  from  our  observation  of  a  designer  in  New  York 
City. Given the visual nature of her work, S1 often has to 
avail  herself  of  drawings  and  other  forms  of  visual 
information.  Because  of  this,  she  has  adopted  a  particular 
assembling strategy, beginning with the mobile device that 
she uses—the most recent Nexus smartphone complete with 
a large screen (See Figure 1 below).  

 
Figure  1.  An  example  of  an  assembled  infrastructure  to 
support mobile access to hand-written information. 

like 

or 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA
 

lies 

among 

alternate 

to  accomplish 

This  device  choice  embeds  S1  rather  neatly  within  the 
Google  Android  platform,  which  she  uses  to  her  best 
advantage more notably; however, her assembling practice 
involves  the  daily  scanning  and  uploading  of  any  written 
notes  or  drawings  in  her  notebook  to  a  specified  project 
folder  in  Google  Drive.  Completing  circuit,  she  is  able  to 
access these written notes or rendered visualizations as she 
moves  through  the  city  meeting  with  various  clients.  Her 
large-screen  device  allows  her  to  present  this  information 
with  requisite  fidelity  to  those  she  is  meeting  with,  or  to 
refer  to  them  as  she  creates  a  new  set  of  notes  from  the 
day’s  meeting(s).  This  strategy,  again,  is  not  novel  for  its 
technical complexity, but rather for the strategic thinking it 
involves to contrive a constellation of pieces that enable her 
to  have  the  right  resources  in  the  right  place  at  the  right 
time. 
Circumventing 
The third infrastructuring practice that we discovered in our 
data  refers  to  the  ways  that  mobile  knowledge  workers 
circumvent  technological  and  contextual  constraints  in 
order 
their  work.  Like  bridging  and 
assembling,  circumventing  is  a  form  of  improvisational 
intervention  that  relies  on  a  worker’s  knowledge  of  an 
infrastructural  landscape,  particularly  where  functional 
equivalence 
technologies  or 
technological processes.  
A  small  example  of  circumventing  work  showcases  one 
mobile  knowledge  worker’s  strategy  for  overcoming  an 
organization  boundary.  P4’s  organizational  regulations 
restrict  him  from  using  specific  software  such  as  Google 
applications on his work laptop, so he carries out his work 
on two parallel laptops—one personal and one work-issued. 
This  issue  sometimes  comes  to  a  head  when  he  needs  to 
transfer data to use a restricted software application, such as 
Photoshop. Like many before him, P4 uses email to transfer 
the  needed  files,  because  both  cloud  storage  services  and 
external  drives  are  restricted  on  his  work  computer.  He 
comments  about  this  strategy,  “When  I  email  something 
from  my  work  email  to  Gmail,  I  get  this  popup  that  says, 
you know, you are about to send an email to an untrusted 
source,  blah,  blah,  blah,  do  you  wanna  proceed.  Because 
technically we’re not supposed to, and I’ll always override 
it and say yes. I’m not working with anything that serious 
that  you  know  that  much.”  Though  this  example  may  be 
quite  mundane, 
it  exemplifies  a  genre  of  strategic 
infrastructuring  actions  that  mobile  knowledge  workers 
undertake all the time to fashion functional circumventions 
in the face of both technological and social constraints. 
Improvisational  practices  are  not  only  directed  at 
organizational boundaries, however. Our interviewees also 
report 
infrastructural  seams  by 
hacking  systems  when  they  can.  On  flights,  for  example, 
P13,  a  web  developer,  found  a  way  to  utilize  the  Internet 
connection without having to pay for it: “I love when planes 
have  in  flight  Wi-Fi  because  I  don’t  actually  pay  for  it. 

they  circumvent 

that 

1331

their 

those 

in 

ingenuity  while 

What’s  really  funny  is  that  when  I’m  developing  [web 
applications], it’s happening locally on my computer. Well 
we  still  have  to  make  calls,  like  API  calls  out  to  other 
services.  All 
flight  Wi-Fi  services  redirect 
continually  to  this  page,  which  is  where  you  get  to  pay; 
that’s  all  it  does  over  and  over  again.    You  still  have  an 
internet connection so the calls from my local website that 
I’m  hosting  still  get  on  perfectly  fine  so  I  can  run  our 
website  on  my  laptop  100%  just  like  I  would  if  I  was  at 
home  or  at  a  co-work  space.  So  I  can  develop  with 
absolutely  no  hindrance  on  the  flight  without  paying  any 
money.”  The  workaround  here, 
the  example 
immediately preceding it, shows the creative way that these 
workers  achieve  their  goals—i.e.,  usage  of  a  preferred 
application on a preferred operating system, maintaining a 
network connection without having to pay for it, etc. This 
circumvention  work  allows  the  actors  in  our  sample  to 
showcase 
also  maintaining 
professional progress.  
These examples merely scratch the surface of the inventive 
practices  regularly  undertaken  by  the  subjects  in  our 
sample. They are meant to underscore not the sophistication 
of  the  bridging,  assembling,  or  circumventing  solution  in 
play,  but  rather  the  bricoleur3    orientation  that  mobile 
knowledge workers appear to inhabit on a perpetual basis. 
We  develop  this  idea,  as  well  as  the  implications  of  the 
mobile  knowledge  worker  as  bricoleur,  in  the  following 
section. 
DISCUSSION 
In each of the infrastructuring practices highlighted above, 
mobile  knowledge  workers  engage  their  knowledge  to 
strategically 
an 
infrastructural  seam  as  discovered  in  situ.  While  others 
rightly  describe  these  sets  of  practices  as  forms  of 
infrastructuring  [e.g.,  7,52,67],  we  draw  forward  two 
additional points for further discussion here.  
First,  we  consider  infrastructuring  as  an  important  type  of 
articulation  work  [28,63,67]—work  that  is  less  evident,  if 
not  totally  absent,  in  the  case  of  stationary  knowledge 
workers.  Strauss  [68]  defines  articulation  work  as  the 
“extraneous” activities beyond core work tasks that must be 
performed to account for contingencies. As we have shown, 
for  mobile 
infrastructural 
contingencies  are  part  and  parcel  of  the  job.  Because 
infrastructures are more often platforms for rather than core 
components  of  primary  work  tasks  for  mobile  knowledge 
workers, 
be 
distinguished from prior descriptions of infrastructuring for 
                                                             
3 The Oxford English Dictionary [46] defines a bricoleur as 
“A  person  (esp.  an  artist,  writer,  etc.)  who  constructs  or 
creates  something  from  a  diverse  range  or  materials  or 
sources; the creator of a bricolage.” Original credit for this 
term is attributed to the French anthropologist Claude Levi-
Strauss in his book La Pensée Sauvage (1962). 

knowledge  workers, 

infrastructuring 

circumvent 

assemble, 

practices 

bridge, 

their 

can 

 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

systems 

to  make 

to 

ready/align 

sociotechnical 

infrastructure(s) 

this articulation work aspect. Akin to Gerson’s formulation 
of  articulation  work  [27],  the  form  of  infrastructuring  we 
showcase  here ensures  that  infrastructural  resources  are  in 
place and functioning cohesively across different locales for 
our  study  participants.  In  order  to  accomplish  their  core 
work tasks across time and space and establish a “common 
field of work” [60], the mobile knowledge workers in our 
study  must  overcome 
technological  and  contextual 
constraints  by  engaging  in  this  extra  layer  of  articulation 
work 
into  productive 
configurations.  The  infrastructural  aspects  of  articulation 
effort  are  in  effect  synergizing  activities  that  knit  together 
divergent 
them 
interoperable [64], in the end generating a larger combined 
effect that would have been possibly without the synthesis 
[5].  This  hidden  layer  of  infrastructure,  accomplished  by 
way of articulation work, can often effectively explain why 
some systems work and some do not [66]. 
Our  second  point  of  discussion  involves  the  insight  that 
mobile  knowledge  workers  must  have  to  engage  in  this 
form  of  articulated  infrastructuring,  to  be  infrastructural 
bricoleurs.  Drawing  on  the  notion  of  literacy,  we  refer  to 
this actionable infrastructural knowledge as infrastructural 
competence [25]. To have infrastructural competence is to 
be able to recognize where infrastructural seams may have 
generative, rather than exclusionary, properties and then to 
draw  upon  this  sociotechnical  insight  to  fashion  and 
implement  an  infrastructural  strategy  to  achieve  a  desired 
goal.  This  competence  is  the  hallmark  of  an  agile  mobile 
knowledge worker.  
Notably, our interviewees frequently report that proprietary 
seams hinder their ability to integrate multiple brand-based 
platforms, applications, and devices. Often these ecosystem 
exclusivities (e.g. Microsoft vs. Apple) bury the ability to 
detect  generative  seams  by  automating  integration  (e.g., 
Google or Apple automatically backing up data into their 
own  cloud  storage  service:  Google  Drive  or  iCloud). 
Ironically,  this  designed  ‘seamlessness’  a  la  Weiser  puts 
workers in the position not only of bridging, assembling, or 
circumventing when necessary, but also—increasingly—of 
detecting potential seams (aka, sites of intervention) in the 
first place. Here we can come back to Dourish and Bell’s  
[22]  and  also  Chalmers’  and  colleagues’  [11].wise  words 
about the generativity of seams—in this case a recognized 
ingredient of sociotechnical agency.  
A  future  agenda  for  our  research  involves  understanding 
how infrastructural competence is developed and sustained 
by  different 
the 
improvisational nature mobile work, even the most routine 
forms  of  infrastructuring  require  a  dynamic,  constantly 
evolving,  set  of  knowledge.  We  recognize  that  different 
types 
infrastructural 
engagements, 
there  are  professional  or 
jurisdictional  variations  in  how  infrastructuring  practices 

types  of  workers.  Because  of 

of  work 
so 

demand 
likely 

different 

1332

time 

are developed. This subject is a key animating focus for our 
ongoing research. 
Interestingly, there may also be a move—seen often in the 
context  of  smaller,  startup  organizations—to  leverage 
proprietary  ecosystems  to  their  full  advantage  for  reasons 
less  driven  by  task  goals  and  more  by  client  aims  or 
preferences  (e.g.,  conducting  all  work  within  Google 
Drive).  In  our  studies  to  date,  this  choice  appears  no  less 
strategic than the other types of articulated infrastructuring, 
typically expressing core sociotechnical insights as to how 
relationships  can  best  be  managed 
through  specific 
infrastructural  configurations.  When  and  under  what 
professional conditions these types of ‘non-infrastructuring’ 
choices  occur,  and  concomitantly  what  variant  types  of 
infrastructural  competence  these  decisions  express,  are 
questions we are currently investigating. 
CONCLUSION 
The rising integration of mobile technologies and practices 
into  knowledge  work  has  created  a  new 
type  of 
professional—the  mobile  knowledge  worker.  Independent 
of any need to remain in a singular place to carry out their 
work, mobile knowledge workers spend a large portion of 
their 
traversing  within  and  among  different 
infrastructural  configurations  as  they  move  through  space. 
These  dynamic  configurations  are  experienced  as  either 
technological  or  contextual  constraints,  which 
force 
workers to engage in a type of articulation work to identify, 
adopt,  and  configure  infrastructural  solutions—a  form  of 
infrastructuring practice—to overcome these constraints. In 
effect, these practices, which we identify as either bridging, 
assembling,  or  circumventing  enable  a  mobile  knowledge 
worker  to  transition  smoothly  across  multiple  boundaries, 
whether  they  be  temporal,  spatial,  social,  institutional,  or 
digital. 
Navigating  through  mutable  contexts  characterized  by  a 
multiplicity of competing installed bases and organizational 
protocols requires a great deal of knowledge—or what we 
call 
Infrastructural 
competence embodies the knowledgeable recognition of the 
generative  or  standardized  points  of  connection  within 
various infrastructures in order that constituent parts can be 
swapped  in  and  out  to  leverage  structural  similarities  and 
functional equivalences. To be infrastructurally competent, 
in this sense, is to know the particular, likely situated, sets 
of  infrastructural  arrangements  that  can  be  pulled  together 
to effectively and efficiently achieve an immediate goal. 
While these insights seek to profitably enhance the already 
rich  discourse  underway  within  the  infrastructure  studies 
community,  we  are  quick  to  acknowledge  its  limitations. 
Data  upon  which  our  ideas  rest  currently  originate  from  a 
very  limited  context—the  American  Northeast  and  Mid-
Atlantic regions. As such, our claims should be understood 
to  reflect  only  specific  regional  practices  at  this  point, 
possibly  illuminating  but  not  confirming  anything  more 
categorical or conclusive. Moreover, we draw primarily on 

infrastructural 

competence 

[25]. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA
 

practice descriptions (i.e., interviewee recounts) rather than 
a  cache  of  qualitative  observations  or  quantitative  trace 
data,  which,  when  eventually  collected,  will  yield  new 
evidence  that  will  likely  alter  the  current  theses  expressed 
herein.  Nevertheless,  we  hope  that  this  initial  research 
piques the interest of both scholars and designers to further 
investigate  mobile  knowledge  work  and  its  infrastructural 
relations  as  a  rising  domain  of  computer-supported 
cooperative work.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We  thank  our  interviewees  for  telling  us  their  stories  of 
travel  and  (sometimes)  travail;  we  are  equally  grateful  for 
the  opportunities  provided  to  tag  along  as  they  traversed 
cities  and  regions.  Additional  acknowledgments  to  our 
collaborators  Steven  Sawyer,  Stephen  Voida,  Christine 
Halverson,  and  Leslie  Thomson  for 
their  formative 
assistance  in  developing  the  ideas  expressed  herein.  This 
work  has  been  supported  by  an  NSF  EAGER  grant 
#1346550. 
REFERENCES 
1. Mark S Ackerman, Christine A Halverson, Thomas 

Erickson, and Wendy A Kellogg. 2007. Resources, co-
evolution and artifacts: Theory in CSCW. Springer 
Science & Business Media. 

2. Stephen R Barley and Gideon Kunda. 2006. Contracting: 

A new form of professional practice. The Academy of 
Management Perspectives. 20, 1, 45-66. 

3. Stephen R. Barley. 1986. Technology as an occasion for 
structuring: Evidence from observations of CT scanners 
and the social order of radiology departments. 
Administrative science quarterly. 31, 1, 78-108. 

4. Eric P Baumer, et al. 2012. Prescriptive persuasion and 

open-ended social awareness: expanding the design 
space of mobile health. In Proceedings of the ACM 
2012 conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work, 475-484. 

5. Matthew J Bietz, Eric P Baumer, and Charlotte P Lee. 

2010. Synergizing in cyberinfrastructure development. 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW). 19, 3-
4, 245-281. 

6. Frank Blackler. 1995. Knowledge, knowledge work and 

organizations: An overview and interpretation. 
Organization Studies. 16, 6, 1021-1046. 
7. Claus Bossen and Randi Markussen. 2010. 

Infrastructuring and ordering devices in health care: 
Medication plans and practices on a hospital ward. 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW). 19, 6, 
615-637. 

8. Geoffrey C Bowker and Susan Leigh Star. 2000. Sorting 

things out: Classification and its consequences. MIT 
press. 

9. Jon Brodkin 2013. How mobile technology created a 

workforce that never stops working. 

1333

10. Barry Brown and Kenton O Hara. 2003. Place as a 

practical concern of mobile workers. Environment and 
planning A. 35, 9, 1565-1588. 

11. Matthew Chalmers, Marek Bell, Barry Brown, Malcolm 
Hall, Scott Sherwood, and Paul Tennent. 2005. Gaming 
on the edge: using seams in ubicomp games. In 
Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGCHI International 
Conference on Advances in computer entertainment 
technology, 306-309. 

12. Alan Chamberlain, et al. 2015. Moving Beyond e-

Health and the Quantified Self: The Role of CSCW in 
Collaboration, Community and Practice for 
Technologically-Supported Proactive Health and 
Wellbeing. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference 
Companion on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
& Social Computing, 273-276. 

13. Leida Chen and Ravi Nath. 2008. A socio-technical 

perspective of mobile work. Information, Knowledge, 
Systems Management. 7, 1, 41-60. 

14. Luigina Ciolfi and Aparecido Fabiano Pinatti De 

Carvalho. 2014. Work Practices, Nomadicity and the 
Mediational Role of Technology. Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work (CSCW). 23, 2, 119-136. 

15. Jana Costas. 2013. Problematizing mobility: A 

metaphor of stickiness, non-places and the kinetic elite. 
Organization Studies. 34, 10, 1467-1485. 

16. Anna L Cox, Jon Bird, Natasha Mauthner, Susan Dray, 
Anicia Peters, and Emily Collins. 2014. Socio-technical 
practices and work-home boundaries. In Proceedings of 
the 16th international conference on Human-computer 
interaction with mobile devices & services, 581-584. 

17. Barbara Czarniawska. 2014. Nomadic work as life-story 

plot. Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW). 
23, 2, 205-221. 

18. Filippo Dal Fiore, Patricia L Mokhtarian, Ilan Salomon, 

and Matan E Singer. 2014. “Nomads at last”? A set of 
perspectives on how mobile technology may affect 
travel. Journal of Transport Geography. 41, 97-106. 

19. Paul A David and Julie Ann Bunn. 1988. The 

economics of gateway technologies and network 
evolution: Lessons from electricity supply history. 
Information economics and policy. 3, 2, 165-202. 

20. Gordon Davis. 2002. Anytime/anyplace computing and 
the future of knowledge work. Communications of the. 
45, 12, 67-73. 

21. Aparecido Fp. De Carvalho, Luigina. Ciolfi, and Breda. 

Gray. 2011. The Making of Nomadic Work: 
Understanding the Mediational Role of ICTs. In 
Handbook of Research on Mobility and Computing: 
Evolving Technologies and Ubiquitous Impacts, M. 
Cruz-Cunha and F. Moreira (eds.). IGI Global, 381-396. 

 

22. Paul Dourish and Genevieve Bell. 2011. Divining a 

digital future: Mess and mythology in ubiquitous 
computing. MIT Press. 

23. Peter Drucker. 1999. Knowledge-worker productivity. 

California Management Review. 41, 2, 79-94. 
24. Paul N Edwards, Steven J Jackson, Melissa K 

Chalmers, Geoffrey C Bowker, Christine L Borgman, 
David Ribes, Matt Burton, and Scout Calvert. 2013. 
Knowledge infrastructures: Intellectual frameworks and 
research challenges. Ann Arbor, MI: Deep Blue. 
25. Ingrid Erickson, Mohammad H. Jarrahi, Leslie 

Thomson, and Steve Sawyer. 2014. More than nomads: 
Mobility, knowledge work, and infrastructure. In 
Proceedings of the the European Group for 
Organizational Studies Colloquium (Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands2014). 

26. Martha S Feldman and Wanda J Orlikowski. 2011. 

Theorizing practice and practicing theory. Organization 
science. 22, 5, 1240-1253. 

27. Elihu M. Gerson. 2008. Reach, bracket, and the limits 

of rationalized coordination: Some challenges for 
CSCW. In Resources, Co-Evolution and Artifacts: 
Theory in CSCW M. Ackerman, C. Halverson, T. 
Erickson and W. Kellogg (eds.). Springer. 

28. Rebecca E. Grinter. 1996. Supporting articulation work 

using software configuration management systems. 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW). 5, 4, 
447-465. 

29. Brian M. Harmer and David J. Pauleen. 2012. Attitude, 

aptitude, ability and autonomy: the emergence of 
‘offroaders’, a special class of nomadic worker. 
Behaviour & Information Technology. 31, 5, 439-451. 

30. Ola Henfridsson and Bendik Bygstad. 2013. The 
generative mechanisms of digital infrastructure 
evolution. Mis Quarterly. 37, 3, 907-931. 

31. James D Herbsleb. 2007. Global software engineering: 

The future of socio-technical coordination. In 2007 
Future of Software Engineering IEEE Computer 
Society, 188-198. 

32. Amanda L Hughes, Lise Aa St Denis, Leysia Palen, and 

Kenneth M Anderson. 2014. Online public 
communications by police & fire services during the 
2012 Hurricane Sandy. In Proceedings of the 32nd 
annual ACM conference on Human factors in 
computing systems, 1505-1514. 

33. Thomas P. Hughes. 1993. Networks of power: 

electrification in Western society, 1880-1930. JHU 
Press. 

34. Steven J. Jackson, Paul N. Edwards, Geoffrey C. 

Bowker, and Cory P. Knobel. 2007. Understanding 
infrastructure: History, heuristics and 
cyberinfrastructure policy. First Monday. 12, 6. 

1334

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

35. Mohammad H. Jarrahi and Steve Sawyer. 2015. 

Theorizing on the take-up of social technologies, 
knowledge-sharing practices. Journal of the Association 

organizational policies and norms, and consultants' 

for Information Science and Technology. 66, 1, 162-
179. 

36. Helena Karasti, Karen S Baker, and Eija Halkola. 2006. 
Enriching the notion of data curation in e-science: data 
managing and information infrastructuring in the long 
term ecological research (LTER) network. Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW). 15, 4, 321-358. 

37. Christopher A Le Dantec and Carl Disalvo. 2013. 

Infrastructuring and the formation of publics in 
participatory design. Social Studies of Science. 43, 2, 
241-264. 

38. Richard Ling, Leysia Palen, Pål Sundsøy, Geoff 

Canright, Johannes Bjelland, and Kenth Engø-Monsen. 
2014. Safety, Sensemaking & Solidarity: Mobile 
Communication in the Immediate Aftermath of the 22 
July 2011 Oslo Bombing. Anthropological Quarterly. 

39. Fritz Machlup. 1962. The production and distribution of 

knowledge in the United States. Princeton university 
press. 

40. Melissa Mazmanian and Ingrid Erickson. 2014. The 
product of availability: understanding the economic 
underpinnings of constant connectivity. In Proceedings 
of the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors 
in computing systems, 263-272. 

41. Melissa Mazmanian, Wanda J. Orlikowski, and Joanne 
Yates. 2013. The autonomy paradox: The implications 
of mobile email devices for knowledge professionals. 
Organization science. 24, 5, 1337-1357. 

42. Eric Monteiro, Neil Pollock, and Robin Williams. 2014. 
Innovation in Information Infrastructures: Introduction 
to the Special Issue. Journal of the Association for 
Information Systems. 15, 4, IX. 

43. Davide Nicolini, Silvia Gherardi, and Dvora Yanow. 
2003. Toward a practice-based view of knowing and 
learning in organizations. In Knowing in Organizations: 
A Practice-based Approach, D. Nicolini, Gherardi, S. 
and D. Yanow (eds.). ME Sharpe. 

44. David E Nye. 2010. When the lights went out: a history 

of blackouts in America. Mit Press. 

45. Judith S. Olson and Gary M. Olson. 2014. How to make 

distance work work. interactions. 21, 2, 28-35. 

46. Oed Online. 2015. bricoleur, Oxford University Press.  
47. Wanda J. Orlikowski. 2000. Using technology and 
constituting structures: A practice lens for studying 
technology in organizations. Organization science. 11, 
4, 404-428. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA
 

48. Wanda J. Orlikowski. 2002. Knowing in practice: 

Enacting a collective capability in distributed 
organizing. Organization science. 13, 3, 249-273. 
49. Pearnkandola. 2007. A Study: Understanding and 
Managing the Mobile Workforce. Cisco Systems. 
Retrieved 11 July, 2015 from 
http://newsroom.cisco.com/dlls/2007/eKits/MobileWor
kforce_071807.pdf   

50. Mark Perry. 2007. Enabling nomadic work: developing 
the concept of ‘Mobilisation Work’. In Proceedings of 
the ECSCW 2007 Workshop: Beyond Mobility: Studying 
Nomadic Work (Limerick, Ireland 2007). 

51. María Pilar De Luis Carnicer, Angel Martínez Sánchez, 

Manuela Pérez Pérez, and María José Vela Jiménez. 
2004. Work-family conflict in a southern European 
country: The influence of job-related and non-related 
factors. Journal of Managerial Psychology. 19, 5, 466-
489. 

52. Volkmar Pipek and Volker Wulf. 2009. 

Infrastructuring: Toward an integrated perspective on 
the design and use of information technology. Journal 
of the Association for Information Systems. 10, 5, 1. 
53. Pasi Pyöriä. 2005. The concept of knowledge work 
revisited. Journal of Knowledge Management. 9, 3, 
116-127. 

54. Harrison. Rainie and Barry. Wellman. 2012. 

Networked: The new social operating system. MIT 
Press. 

55. Reuters. 2012. Ricoh tackles the challenge of mobile 
worker productivity. Retrieved 11 October, 2015 from 
https://www.ricoh-
usa.com/news/news_release.aspx?prid=870&alnv=pr 

56. David Ribes. 2014. The kernel of a research 

infrastructure. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM 
conference on Computer supported cooperative work & 
social computing, 574-587. 

57. David Ribes and Charlotte P Lee. 2010. Sociotechnical 

studies of cyberinfrastructure and e-research: current 
themes and future trajectories. Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work (CSCW). 19, 3-4, 231-244. 

58. Chiara Rossitto and Kerstin Severinson Eklundh. 2007. 
Managing work at several places: a case of project work 
in a nomadic group of students. In Proceedings of the 
14th European conference on Cognitive ergonomics: 
invent! explore!, 45-51. 

59. Terje Aksel Sanner, Tiwonge Davis Manda, and Petter 

Nielsen. 2014. Grafting: Balancing Control and 
Cultivation in Information Infrastructure Innovation. 
Journal of the Association for Information Systems. 15, 
4, 220-243. 

60. Kjeld Schmidt and Carla Simonee. 1996. Coordination 

mechanisms: Towards a conceptual foundation of 

CSCW systems design. Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work (CSCW). 5, 2-3, 155-200. 
61. Ulrike Schultze and Richard J. Boland. 2000. 
Knowledge management technology and the 
reproduction of knowledge work practices. The Journal 
of Strategic Information Systems. 9, 2, 193-212. 

62. Ulrike. Schultze. 2000. A confessional account of an 

ethnography about knowledge work. MIS quarterly. 24, 
1, 3-41. 

63. Carla Simone, Monica Divitini, and Kjeld Schmidt. 

1995. A notation for malleable and interoperable 
coordination mechanisms for CSCW systems. In 
Proceedings of conference on Organizational 
computing systems, 44-54. 

64. Carla Simone, Gloria Mark, and Dario Giubbilei. 1999. 

Interoperability as a means of articulation work. In 
ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering Notes, 39-48. 

65. Clay Spinuzzi. 2007. Guest editor's introduction: 
Technical communication in the age of distributed 
work. Technical Communication Quarterly. 16, 3, 265-
277. 

66. Susan Leigh Star. 1999. The ethnography of 

infrastructure. American behavioral scientist. 43, 3, 
377-391. 

67. Susan Leigh Star and Geoffrey C Bowker. 2002. How 

to infrastructure. In Handbook of new media: Social 
shaping and social consequences of ICTs, L. Lievrouw 
and S. Livingstone (eds.). Sage, 230-245. 

68. Anselm Strauss. 1988. The articulation of project work: 
An organizational process. The Sociological Quarterly. 
29, 2, 163-178. 

69. Anselm Strauss and Juliet M Corbin. 1990. Basics of 

qualitative research: Grounded theory procedures and 
techniques. Sage. 

70. Norman. Su and Gloria. Mark. 2008. Designing for 

nomadic work. In The 7th ACM conference on 
Designing interactive systems, 305-314. 

71. Leslie. Thomson and Mohammad H. Jarrahi. 2015. 

Information Practices in the Broader ‘Deportment’ of 
Mobile Knowledge Work. In ASIST'15 American 
Society for Information Science and Technology. 

72. David Tilson, Kalle Lyytinen, and Carsten Sørensen. 

2010. Research commentary-digital infrastructures: the 
missing IS research agenda. Information systems 
research. 21, 4, 748-759. 

73. Janet Vertesi. 2014. Seamful Spaces: Heterogeneous 
Infrastructures in Interaction.  Science, Technology & 
Human Values.  39, 2. 264-284. 

74. Amy Voida, Judith S Olson, and Gary M Olson. 2013. 

Turbulence in the clouds: Challenges of cloud-based 
information work. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 

1335

 

Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
2273-2282. 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

75. Mark Weiser. 1993. Some computer science issues in 
ubiquitous computing. Communications of the ACM. 
36, 7, 75-84. 

76. Edward N Wolff. 2005. The growth of information 
workers in the US economy. Communications of the 
ACM. 48, 10, 37-42. 

 

1336

