CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Policy as Embedded Generativity: A Case Study of the 

Emergence and Evolution of HathiTrust

University of Michigan, School of Information

University of Toronto, Faculties of Law & Information

Alissa Centivany

Ann Arbor, USA

Toronto, Canada

acentiva@umich.edu

ABSTRACT 
The traditional core of CSCW focuses on the relationships, 
tensions,  and  gaps  between  technical  systems  and  social 
activity.  Policy  orbits  around  this  core  as  a  persistent  but 
marginally  represented  presence.
In  the  last  few  years, 
however,  CSCW  has  witnessed  an  upsurge  of  interest  in 
(re)integrating policy more explicitly and meaningfully into 
research  and  practice.  For  example,  recent  scholarship 
stressed the mutually constitutive and interconnected threads 
of design, practice, and policy [31]. This paper expands upon 
those motivations through a qualitative case study of the role 
of  policy  in  library  mass  digitization  work  and  the 
subsequent  emergence  and  evolution  of  the  HathiTrust 
cooperative partnership.  By tracing the origins and impacts 
of  early  policy  decisions  in  this  context,  this  research 
contributes  to  understandings  of  how  and  why  policy  can 
both close and open spaces of social practice and technical 
design, functioning as a source of embedded generativity in 
complex sociotechnical systems.  
Author Keywords 
Policy;  design;  practice; generativity;  digitization;  digital 
library; digital scholarship.
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.3.5 Online Information Services; H.3.7. Digital Libraries; 
H.5.3  Group  and  Organization  Interfaces;  K.4.1  Public 
Policy  Issues;  K.4.3  Organizational  Impacts;  K.5.m  Legal 
Aspects of Computing. 
INTRODUCTION
The relationship between technical design and social practice 
has  long  been  a  chief  concern  of  CSCW  researchers  and 
practitioners. The (sometimes collision-prone) intersections 
between technological change and social change have been 
fertile  grounds  for  cultivating  insights  and  understandings 
Permission  to  make  digital  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.    Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  the  author(s)  must  be 
honored.    Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.    To  copy  otherwise,  or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific 
permission and/or a fee.  Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW’16, February 27 - March 2 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA
Copyright is  held  by  the  owner/author(s).    Publication  rights  licensed to 
ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820069

926

to 

enabled 

illustrate  how  policy 

into  processes  of  mutual  readjustment  and  co-evolution  in 
sociotechnical systems [1, 38, 40].
In recent years, these core CSCW concerns have benefitted 
from  research  that  focuses  on  and  integrates  the  ethical, 
legal, and policy dimensions of sociotechnical systems [19, 
20,  49,  50,  18,  31]. This  paper  carries  forward  those 
motivations  by  undertaking  an 
in-depth  qualitative 
interview-based case study into the role of policy in library 
digitization  work  and  the  subsequent  emergence  and 
evolution  of  the  HathiTrust  cooperative  partnership.  This 
research  explores  collaborative  computing  technologies  at 
the level of institutions and infrastructures and, in particular, 
identifies  and  traces  the  origins  and  impacts  of  a  single, 
seemingly-unobtrusive clause in the cooperative agreement 
between  the  University  of  Michigan  and  Google  (§4.4.2) 
[55] 
important 
reconfigurations  in  the  legal,  technical,  and  organizational 
ecology of academic research libraries.
This research goes beyond previous related work by arguing 
that policy can function as a source of embedded generativity 
in sociotechnical systems.  In the context of this research, 
generativity  can  be  understood  as  “a  technology’s  overall 
capacity  to  produce  unprompted  change  driven  by  large, 
varied,  and  uncoordinated  audiences”  [70:1980]  while 
embedded is meant to signal that generativity may become 
an 
inseparable  part  of  a  broader,  more  complex 
sociotechnical system through non-technical means, such as 
policies. Policy is often conceptualize as a mechanisms for 
channeling 
and 
technological design choices, but this research suggests that 
policy can also function as an important  safeguard for the 
emergence  of  new,  often  anticipated  innovations  and 
transformations in technical and social spheres. Approaching 
policy  as  a  potential  source  of  embedded  generativity  can 
benefit  CSCW  researchers  and  practitioners  working  on  a 
broad range of issues and challenges.  
This  paper  begins  with  a  literature  review  that  surveys 
relevant  research  on  the  relationships  among  policy, 
technical design, and social practice, focusing in particular 
on potential synergies with generativity and value-sensitive 
design research. The paper then provides a description of the 
methods  used  and  the  case,  including  the  §4.4.2  of  the 
University  of  Michigan-Google  Cooperative  Agreement. 

social  practice 

and/or 

regulating 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Next, a brief historical perspective on large-scale digitization 
efforts is introduced to signal some of the key challenges and 
tensions  that  plagued  precursors  to  the  mass  digitization 
project (“MDP”) and which, in turn, may have influenced the 
drafting of §4.4.2.  Focus then turns to the empirical pieces 
of  this  research.    Interview  data  is  used  to  identify  key 
interpretations,  points  of  resistance  and  contestation,  and 
trace impacts of  §4.4.2 through the subsequent emergence 
and evolution of HathiTrust.  Finally, the paper returns to the 
notion  of  policy  as  embedded  generativity,  drawing  again 
upon interview data to argue that, in addition to bridging gaps 
or  forming  entanglements  between  technical  design  and 
social practice, early policy decisions can also open spaces 
of social practice and technical design and these decisions 
are  often  simultaneously  value-driven  and  function  as 
sources  as  unanticipated  innovation  and  sociotechnical 
transformation.  
POLICY  KNOTS,  GENERATIVITY,  AND  VALUE-
SENSITIVE DESIGN 
At its founding, policy  was among the chief concerns and 
interests of CSCW researchers.  Scholars associated with the 
Irvine  School,  for  example,  regarded  policy  as  having  an 
integral role in the complex relationships between technical 
design and social activity [36, 37, 38, 39, 40].  
Despite its early showing, in the last few decades policy has 
more  or  less  faded  into  the  background  of  much  CSCW 
research and practice. When it does appear, policy tends to 
be  unfairly  conceptualized  as  trailing  behind  design  and 
practice, tacked on as an addendum to some other research 
inquiry. Policy, and privacy in particular, has been identified 
in CSCW research in relation to aspects of user experience, 
social computing applications, scientific collaboration, data 
sharing, and infrastructure development [4, 7, 17, 35, 42, 53, 
65, 66, 67].  While this is not an unsubstantial showing, this 
work  constitutes  a  microscopic  slice  of  CSCW  work  in 
general  and  tends  neither  to  regard  policy  as  a  first-order 
concern  nor  recognize  its  generativity  with  respect  to 
technical design and social practices.  The implication that 
policy concerns are inconsequential and/or invisible to the 
core CSCW constituency is somewhat ironic since CSCW, 
perhaps  more so than other information science venues, is 
deeply  aware  of  and  sensitive  to  the  subtle,  nuanced,  and 
often  invisible  forces  that  shape  and  are  shaped  by 
sociotechnical systems.      
In  the  last  few  years,  however,  a  proto-constituency  of 
policy-oriented scholars has emerged to take up the mantle 
of explicitly reintegrating policy back into CSCW research 
and  work.    For  purposes  of  clarity,  Policy  includes  public 
laws  that  regulate  technology  design  and  use  as  well  as 
private rules, agreements, and express philosophies (such as 
corporate policy statements).  Policy may also channel and 
constrain 
technology  use  by,  for,  and  within  firms, 
organizations, 
their  various 
customers,  members,  and  constituencies.    These  scholars 
have argued that the analytic range of CSCW must expand 

institutions  and  among 

927

to take on the complex interplay between policy, technical 
systems development, and social practice if it is to maintain 
credibility and relevance, and continue making meaningful 
contributions  to  social  computing  and  computer-supported 
collaborative work [31].  For example, researchers recently 
made the case that the relationships among design, practice, 
and policy are deeply intertwined, mutually constitutive, co-
productive,  and  dynamically  bound  and 
therefore 
understanding  the  processes  of  change  and  innovation  in 
social computing and work assemblages, will require CSCW 
(and  information  science  research  more  generally)  to 
recognize  and  experiment  with  the  policy  threads  that  are 
invariably interwoven in social computing practice [31]. 
Despite the growing promise of policy as a research site and 
modality of inquiry within CSCW, barriers to its integration 
remain. For example, the lack of domain expertise on issues 
of ethics, policy and law within the CSCW community may 
stifle deep engagement with policy-based issues.  Despite a 
growing recognition that law, technology, and social practice 
are inextricably intertwined, relatively few scholars are able 
to engage on a rigorous and nuanced level with the legal and 
policy  complexities  of 
technical  change  and  social 
transformation.    A  recent  CSCW  paper  that  successfully 
integrated comprehensive discussions of copyright law and 
social norms in web-based content creation [18] provides a 
glimmer  of  hope  that  this  obstacle  may  also  be  slowly 
dissolving  as  information  science,  computing,  and  social 
science programs enhance law, policy, and ethics training, 
and  collaborations  across  disciplines  find  institutional 
support.  
Beyond  cultivating  new  areas  of  expertise  within  CSCW, 
there  are  a  number  of  still  relatively  unexplored  areas  of 
potential  synergy  between  existing  CSCW  research  and 
technology  law  and  policy  literature  around  questions  and 
theories  of  generativity  and  values.    In  recent  years, 
generativity has been discussed in the context of healthcare 
infrastructure [6], and scientific collaboration and metadata 
platforms  [41].    The  concept  has  also  been  developed  in 
technology law and policy literature including most notably 
Jonathan  Zittrain’s  work  on  open  innovation  and  internet 
governance [70, 71, 72] and provided a framework that was 
adopted, expanded, and/or modified by researchers studying 
remixing  [28],  fair  use  [47]  and  computer  ethics  [29].  
Zittrain  defined  generativity  as  a  “technology’s  overall 
capacity  to  produce  unprompted  change  driven  by  large, 
varied, 
[70:1980]. 
Generativity itself may be understood as a value promoted 
(or a tradeoff considered [28]) through deliberative technical 
design.  
The  work  of  Batya  Friedman  and  colleagues  have  made 
enormous strides toward recognizing and capitalizing on the 
potential  of  technical  systems  design  to  account  for  and 
promote particular human values.   Rather than ignoring or 
pushing aside the political or ethical aspects of technologies 
and  information  systems,  these  researchers  promote  a 

uncoordinated 

and 

audiences” 

approaches 

policy-oriented 

technological  design 

important  shared  human  values. 

responsible approach to design and implementation that not 
only  avoids  the  creation  of  social  harms  but  actively 
promotes 
  Public 
deliberation [8], user autonomy [19], freedom from bias [19], 
informed consent in online interactions [20], and anticipatory 
ethics research [48, 49, 50] are just a few of the areas value-
sensitive design researchers and anticipatory design ethicists 
have sought to promote through technical interventions and 
implementation. 
While generativity, value-sensitive design, and anticipatory 
ethics  approaches  tend  to  be  rooted  in  the  more  design-
oriented strands of CSCW research, they offers lessons that 
could  easily  be  imputed  to  policy-oriented  approaches.  
Engaging  with 
in  a  systematic, 
principled, and deliberative way  with  full consideration of 
human values, morals, and ethics is a point of kinship and 
convergence  with 
to 
sociotechnical transformation.  Even where technical design 
elements are not the primary focus of the research, as is the 
case  in  this  paper,  value-sensitive  design  sensibilities  and 
methodologies  can  offer  important  clues  about  broader 
processes  of  sociotechnical  readjustment  and  change  and 
meaningfully inform prescriptive, value-driven policies like 
§4.4.2. 
In  combination  with  the  recognition  that  policy,  technical 
design, and social practice are deeply intertwined, mutually 
constitutive, co-productive, and dynamically bound, I argue 
that  value-sensitive  design  and  anticipatory  ethics 
approaches,  and  research  on  generativity  can  extend  the 
analytic  range  of  policy-oriented  CSCW  work  to  help  us 
better  understand  and  experiment  with  the  processes  of 
change,  innovation,  and  transformation  in  sociotechnical 
systems.  Policies like §4.4.2 discussed herein can function 
as  a  locale  and  modality  of  value-sensitive  organizational 
design and embedded generativity.   
RESEARCH METHODS 
This  research  seeks  to  contribute  to  understandings  of  the 
role  of  policy  in  reconfiguring  the  ecology  of  technical 
design  and  social  practice  in  the  context  library  mass 
digitization and the subsequent emergence and evolution of 
HathiTrust.  The research referred to in this paper reflect one 
part of a much larger and more comprehensive study of the 
interplay between law, emerging technologies, and processes 
of social transformation.    
For purposes of this paper, my central research question was: 

How  did  policy  (specifically  §4.4.2  of  the  UM-
Google  Cooperative  Agreement)  impact  social 
practices  and  technical  design  choices  within  the 
academic 
and,  more 
specifically, in the development of HathiTrust?     

community 

research 

To answer this question, I adopted a qualitative case study 
approach  drawing  upon  documentary  evidence  and  data 
generated 
interviews.  
Documentary  evidence  included  contracts,  press  releases, 

semi-structured 

in-depth 

from 

928

SESSION: ETHICS AND POLICY

and 

interpersonal 

news  articles,  published  interviews,  court  filings  and 
opinions, 
communications.  
Notwithstanding this trove of documentary data, interviews 
were the primary source of data for this study.  Interviewee 
recruitment  used  a  purposive  sampling  approach  that 
targeted  current  and  former  architects,  employees,  and 
advisors of HathiTrust as well as persons engaged in parallel 
and competing digitization projects.  During data collection, 
several  participants  emerged  as  gatekeepers,  facilitating 
access to additional participants and suggesting trajectories 
for the supplemental snowball recruitment strategy that was 
used.   
Thirty-one  participants  from  thirteen  different  institutions 
were interviewed for this study.  Interviews generally lasted 
one  hour  and  took  place  face-to-face  or  over  the  phone.  
Many participants were interviewed on multiple occasions. 
All interviews were recorded with the informed consent of 
participants and recordings  were transcribed by the author 
and/or Scribie, a professional transcription service.  
Institutional  capacities  and  roles  varied  across  the  pool  of 
participants.    Current  and  former  provosts,  university 
librarians,  chief  information  officers,  HathiTrust  advisors, 
employees, and members constituted the bulk of participants.  
In addition, founders, architects, and employees of other (i.e. 
non-HathiTrust  and  non-Google)  parallel  or  competing 
digitization projects were interviewed.  Finally, an external 
expert with specialized knowledge of the legal and technical 
aspects of library mass digitization was also consulted.   
Several gaps existed in my interview data collection.  While 
I had informal, off-the-record conversations with individuals 
from Google and university general counsels’ offices, those 
individuals  declined  to  participate  in  this  study  citing  the 
active litigations pending in the fall of 2014, when most data 
collection  took  place.    To  the  extent  the  (reasonable) 
reluctance of these individuals  left  holes in the research, I 
attempted  to  compensate  by  triangulating  the  accounts  of 
participants  with  relevant  documentary  evidence  to  bridge 
the  gaps.    Furthermore,  the  caution,  risk  aversion,  and/or 
secrecy of these parties may contribute to a research finding 
in a future project.       
Designing  the  study  around  qualitative  interview  data 
enabled  me 
to  develop  detailed  and  richly  holistic 
descriptions,  integrate  multiple  (sometimes  conflicting) 
perspectives, learn how events and policies are interpreted, 
describe  and  explain  process  and  enactment,  and  bridge 
inter-subjectivities. 
  Working  within  a  constructivist 
paradigm,  my  goal  was  verstehen  --  understanding  the 
meaning and role of §4.4.2, and policy more generally, in the 
context of the MDP and HathiTrust from  my participants’ 
points  of  view  [68].    Especially  important  when  tracing 
policymaking  and  its  impacts,  this  approach  remains 
sensitive to the fact that individuals and organizations do not 
operate in relation to an external, static policy environment 
but rather continuously create, sustain, and revise images of 
policy  through  a  process  of  rationalizing  and  reorganizing 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

evolving interpretations over time [69].  Therefore, although 
policy may be represented by a fairly static expression (i.e. 
§4.4.2),  the  lived  experience  of  policy  suggests  that  a  far 
more dynamic, evolving, and relational understanding may 
be required. 
Data analysis and coding began with the first data collected 
and continued throughout the analytic process.  An iterative, 
inductive,  open  coding  approach  was  used.  Themes  were 
extracted  from  the  data  by  memoing  and  coding  passages 
relevant to my research questions, and the themes were then 
organized  into  categories.    Early  analysis  enabled  me  to 
refine and reformulate subsequent interview questions and 
test theories and narrative.  In addition, a process of member 
checking was used to reorganize and refine themes, patterns, 
and findings as they emerged.  Coding and cross-coding of 
interview transcripts and other artifacts were done by hand.     
Drawing upon diverse and rich sources of data enabled me 
to  explore  the  role  of  policy  in  the  emergence  and 
development  of  HathiTrust  using  a  lens  with  adjustable 
analytic  aperture.  I  examined  policy  threads  at  a  granular 
level  and  studied 
their  entanglement  with  complex 
organizational  processes  operating  within  fluctuating  real-
world contexts.   
Description of the Case and §4.4.2 
HathiTrust  was  officially  launched  in  2008  by  thirteen 
research  institutions:  the  members  of  the  Committee  for 
Institutional Cooperation (CIC) and University of California 
system  [25].  Originally  conceived  of  as  a  shared  digital 
repository,  it  has  since  evolved  in  depth,  breadth,  and 
significance.  Today HathiTrust is a partnership of over one 
hundred  research  institutions  working  cooperatively  to 
contribute “to the common good by collecting, organizing, 
preserving, communicating, and sharing the record of human 
knowledge”  [27].  It  has  also evolved  into  a  digital  library 
comprised  of  over  thirteen  million  digital  volumes  (the 
majority  of  which  resulted  from  the  MDP)  and  a research 
center facilitating non-consumptive computational research 
across the corpus [26].  HathiTrust is a collectively governed 
organization  with  an  executive  director,  employees, 
committees, and a voting membership [26].  It is also part of 
an institution: as a legal entity HathiTrust is owned by  its 
progenitor, the University of Michigan (UM) [26].  Finally, 
until  early  2015,  HathiTrust  was  a  defendant  in  a  major 
copyright  infringement  lawsuit;  its  victory  in  court  has 
successfully expanded the bounds of fair use to include mass 
digitization  for  facilitating  full-text  search  and  expanding 
access for print disabled patrons [14].   
This  image  reflects  the  way  we  see  and  understand 
HathiTrust  today  but  it  does  not  necessarily  reveal  much 
about how or why it came to be, and came to become this 
HathiTrust.  Answering these questions requires untangling 
the  technical,  social,  and  policy  threads  of  HathiTrust’s 
story.  This process of untangling necessarily requires that 
we trace the origins of HathiTrust back into its dark history, 
the formative stage prior to its public reveal.  In so doing, we 

929

discover  that  HathiTrust’s  origins  are  closely  linked  to  a 
single provision, § 4.4.2, in the 2004 University of Michigan-
Google cooperative agreement: 

 4.4.2 Use of U of M Digital Copy in Cooperative 
Web Services.  U of M shall have to right to use the 
U of M Digital Copy, in whole or in part at U of M’s 
sole  discretion,  as  part  of  services  offered  in 
cooperation with partner research libraries such as 
the institutions in the Digital Library Federation.        

IN 

HISTORICAL 

DIGITIZATION 

this  work  will  describe 

Subsequent  sections  of 
the 
foundational  role  this  policy  played  in  the  MDP  and  the 
emergence and evolution of HathiTrust.  Before shifting to a 
more detailed description of its significance, however, I will 
contextualize the MDP within the broader historical context 
of large-scale digitization efforts.  
 
LARGE-SCALE 
PERSPECTIVE  
This section argues that, while the MDP was a technically 
impressive  feat  of  engineering  throughput,  and  the  sheer 
scale and speed of the project provided enough momentum 
to surpass some of the obstacles that had plagued previous 
digitization  efforts,  the  technical  design  elements  of  the 
MDP and the existing organizational infrastructure of  the 
academic  research  library  community  alone  could  not 
account for the transformative impact the MDP had on the 
practices  of  the  academic  research  library  world.    This 
section illustrates that a fundamental contribution of §4.4.2 
was  that  it  enabled  the  mass  digitization  technology  to  be 
leveraged for collective action around the digitized corpus.  
Binding  together  technical  feasibility  and  organizational 
feasibility through policy was an essential and determining 
factor in the ultimate success of the MDP for its partners in 
higher education.  This brief account of the MDP precursors 
and the dark history of HathiTrust illustrates the central role 
policy  §4.4.2  played  in  the  emergence  of  this  important 
instance of computer-supported cooperative work.  
Early Efforts 
Large-scale retrospective digitization efforts were underway 
long  before  Google  embarked  on  its  MDP  in  2004.  
Beginning  in  1978,  when  the  scanner  first  entered  the 
commercial market, early adopters of digitization tended to 
come  from paper-laden industries and agencies  with fairly 
predictable  workflows,  viewing  digitization  as  a  way  to 
simplify and streamline print distribution channels [15].  By 
the early 1980s, the  Library  of Congress and the National 
Library  of  Medicine  began  experimenting  with  digital 
document  delivery,  envisioned  at  the  time  as  a  sort  of 
streamlined interlibrary loan program [16].  In addition, by 
the mid-1980s, the National Archives became interested in 
digital  preservation  standards  and  provided  two  million 
dollars  in  funding  to  explore  technical  standards  for 
digitization  through  the  Optical  Digital  Imaging  Storage 
System (ODISS) project. 

The technology ODISS used at the time was state-of-the-art 
but,  like  so  many  of  these  early  efforts,  was  nevertheless 
prone  to  rapid  obsolescence.    Near  the  end  of  the  ODISS 
project,  for  example,  after  the  bulk  of  the  project’s  two 
million  dollars  of  funding  had  been  spent,  14  inch  optical 
plates were no longer a viable storage medium.  The world 
was moving on to CD-ROMs and CD writable disks.  A lead 
archivist working on ODISS reflected: 

“We no longer had equipment to make use of the 
large  optical  scans.    I  discovered  a  bridging 
technology  at  the  Bush  Presidential  Library  in 
Texas that we could use to format shift the content 
to CD-ROMs.  The whole thing was going to cost an 
additional $125,000.  But then we figured, if we did 
this what would we end up with except for a bunch 
of  200  dpi  scanned 
images?  We  ultimately 
concluded it wasn’t worth the extra money.  All of 
the scans and indexing from that $2 million project 
were thrown away.”   

A few key observations can be made about these early forays 
into  digitization  such  as  ODISS.    First,  they  tended  to  be 
project-based  one-off  efforts  due  to  technical  limitations 
(retrospective  conversion  of  print  materials  was  time-
consuming and produced low quality results) and financial 
limitations  (projects  tended  to  be  costly  and  resource 
intensive).    Second,  there  was  a  tremendous  amount  of 
innovation and change underway in digitization technologies 
and information technologies more generally.  The practical 
implication  for  many  of  these  early  efforts  was  that  rapid 
innovation forced rapid obsolescence and technologists had 
little  incentive  for  providing  interoperability  or  continued 
technical  support. 
  Third,  policy  considerations  were 
conspicuously absent from many of these early efforts.  The 
focus  was  squarely  on  bridging  the  sociotechnical  gap, 
figuring  out  how  to  design  technical  solutions  for  social 
challenges  and  problems.    This  is  not  to  suggest  that  the 
absence of policy had a determinative effect on the outcome 
of  these  early  large-scale  digitization  efforts.    Rather  the 
observation  may  suggest  that,  as  digitization  technologies 
and efforts developed and evolved over time, so too did the 
role of policy become more visible, significant, and in the 
case of HathiTrust, more generative.  
Networked Precursors 
The emergence of the World Wide Web in the  mid-1990s 
was a major turning point in the development of large-scale, 
collaborative digitization projects. One of the first significant 
efforts was the Making of America project, launched in 1995 
as  a  joint  effort  of  Cornell  University  and  the  UM.    Its 
primary  goal  was  to  digitize  and  make  accessible  primary 
source materials related to the development of United States 
infrastructure, 
through 
reconstruction.  By 2007, when UM’s Making of America 
website was last updated (it had been largely subsumed by 
the MDP), its collection consisted of approximately 10,000 
books and 50,000 journal articles [58].  Cornell University 

the  antebellum  period 

from 

SESSION: ETHICS AND POLICY

environment, 

safeguarding 

continued to grow its collection through at least 2012 when 
its  collection  included  267  monograph  volumes  and  over 
100,000 journal articles with 19th century imprints [11].  
A secondary aim of the Making of America Project was to 
engage the broader research and institutional community on 
standards-setting for digital preservation.  Cornell University 
Library, which now employed a former ODISS project lead, 
worked toward developing common protocols and consensus 
on  the  selection,  conversion,  storage,  retrieval,  and  use  of 
digitized materials on a large distributed scale. The focus on 
standards  was,  in  part,  a  response  to  the  challenges  and 
obstacles that had plagued earlier digitization efforts.  Here 
again  we see the sociotechnical gap in effect: the interests 
and  needs  of  technology  developers  and  the  interests  and 
needs of research and institutional community were divided.  
The architects of the Making of America Project viewed the 
establishment of  norms, technical standards and protocols, 
and  techniques  around  digitization  as  opportunities  to 
introduce much-needed sources of stability into the rapidly 
changing  digital 
against 
obsolescence  and  the  risk  that  the  scans  might  be  thrown 
away. 
There were a number of other efforts undertaken alongside 
the Making of America Project.  For example, the Million 
Books Project, led by Raj Reddy and colleagues at Carnegie 
Mellon  University,  sought 
free-to-read, 
searchable  collection  of  one  million  books,  available  to 
everyone over the Internet [45].  In addition, the University 
of California system had established the California Digital 
Library to link its community of users to digital information 
culled from its various campus libraries [57].   
Perhaps  the  most  successful,  persistent,  and  concerted 
digitization work carried out during this period was led by 
the Internet Archive.  Founded in 1996, the Internet Archive 
started out as a web-archiving service, expanding in 1999 to 
digitizing  and  making  accessible  the  ephemeral  films 
contained  in  the  Prelinger  Archive,  before  moving  on  to 
digitizing  print  texts  in  the  mid-2000s  [30].  The  Internet 
Archive’s print digitization efforts were motivated, in part, 
by  the  “secret  murmurings”  between  Google  and  some 
members of  the  research  library community.    At this time 
there  was  a  growing  sense,  and  for  the  Internet  Archive  a 
growing concern, that a Google-led MDP would produce a 
closed  system,  potentially  locking  up  or  corporatizing  our 
shared cultural record.  In an attempt to call attention to these 
risks, Internet Archive’s founder made a bold move to head 
off the suspected Google MDP: 

to  create  a 

“I was receiving an award at a library conference, 
the Coalition for Networked Information, so I got to 
make  a  speech  and  I  used  it  as  an  opportunity  to 
basically ask:  ‘If we build it will you come?  If we 
make it so you can digitize a book for ten cents per 
page will you support this?’”   

930

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

This  speech  was  essentially  a  call-to-arms  (or  a  call-to-
books)  for  the  research  library  community.    Tapping  into 
principles,  norms,  and  practices  that  libraries  had  thrived 
upon  for  centuries,  the  Internet  Archive  proposed  a 
collaborative  print  digitization  project  made  freely  and 
openly accessible for all.  Several key library and funding 
partners joined the Internet Archive including the Microsoft 
Corporation, which provided approximately $10 million in 
funding  between  2006  and  2008,  and  the  University  of 
Toronto  [62].  Through  these  partnerships,  the  Internet 
Archive digitized and made publicly available virtually all of 
the University of Toronto’s public domain materials via its 
website,  www.internetarchive.org.    The  Internet  Archive 
continues  to  supply  technical  and  human  support  to  run 
dozens of scanning centers in five different countries.   
The extensive network of partners affiliated with the Internet 
Archive’s  print  digitization  efforts  ultimately  adopted  a 
unique identifier: the Open Content Alliance.  This was done, 
in part, out of respect for the contributions of the network’s 
various members.  While the Internet Archive played a major 
role  in  the  project,  there  was  a  desire  to  shift  ownership, 
responsibility,  and  governance  of  the  endeavor  to  a  more 
representative  body.    Ultimately,  however,  some  members 
noted the resistance or difficulty in making the transition:  

“The  Open  Content  Alliance  was  defined  as  an 
alliance  of  organizations  but  it  never  really 
developed  any  organizational  infrastructure  and  I 
think that was somewhat frustrating to many of the 
libraries that were part of the initiative.  Many of us 
wanted to form some organizational infrastructure 
around  the  partnership  and  that  was  challenging 
with  the  Internet  Archive  because  it’s  a  very 
different  sort  of  organization.    It’s  led  by  one 
brilliant  individual;  it  was  not  founded  as  a  true 
collaborative organization.  Efforts to turn it into a 
more 
not 
successful  (and  as  a  result)  the  Open  Content 
Alliance didn’t really exist organizationally.  It was 
just a series of funded activities that were  loosely 
connected,  primarily  by 
funding  source 
(Microsoft Corporation) and by the Internet Archive 
as a galvanizing force.”  

organization  were 

collaborative 

the 

The  examples  in  this  section  lead  to  a  couple  of  key 
observations.  First,  technical advances not only  improved 
the  outputs  of  digitization  and  reduced  costs  (or  made  the 
costs  easier  to  justify)  but,  even  more  importantly,  made 
cooperation  more  feasible  and  productive.    The  potential 
benefits of digitization expanded beyond streamlining print 
reproduction  and  improving  interlibrary  loan  processes.  
Participants  now  began  to  recognize  the  potential  of 
digitization  to  transform  access  in  terms  of  readability, 
discoverability,  and  reduced  information  fragmentation.  
And these benefits were transferrable and shareable amongst 
all participants. 

931

technical 

observed, 

infrastructure 

Second,  through  these  examples  we  begin  to  see  policy 
appear in more obvious ways.  The policies tend to reflect 
particular  principles  or  norms:    technical  standards  are 
important for sustainability so we should develop a policy to 
on  standards-setting;  preservation  of  cultural  heritage  is 
important so we should develop a preservation policy; open 
access  is  important  so  we  should  develop  a  policy  of 
cooperative  engagement  toward  this  goal.    As  the  Open 
Content  Alliance  example  illustrated,  however,  policies 
around collective organizational or institutional governance 
were still lacking full buy-in.  
Third, the sociotechnical gap still persisted although it was 
seeming less and less oriented around the technical design 
aspects of digitization and more and more oriented around 
the  social  or  organizational  aspects.    While  the  Internet 
Archive and its partners were successful in overcoming or 
managing some of the technical and financial challenges of 
large-scale digitization, problems persisted at the  social or 
organizational  level.    As  the  Open  Content  Alliance 
and 
participant 
organizational  infrastructure  are  both  requirements  for 
success. The Open Content Alliance, in the view of some of 
its members, lacked institutional and infrastructural support 
for the value of collectivism expected by its partners.   
This paper now shifts to the MDP which emerged roughly 
contemporaneously  with  efforts  of  the  Open  Content 
Alliance.    Through  the  MDP,  we  begin  to  see  how  an 
overarching  policy  approach  provides  some  of 
the 
organizational infrastructure that had been lacking in those 
earlier  efforts.    In  addition,  I  discuss  how  a  particular 
provision, § 4.4.2 of the UM-Google contract, functioned as 
a  binding  force  for  the  technical  and  social  aspects  of 
digitization  and  primed  the  way  for  the  emergence  of 
HathiTrust.  
GOOGLE’S MASS DIGITIZATION PROJECT 
Overview of the Google MDP 
Google’s Library Project, part of Google Book Search, got 
underway  in  2004  when  Google  entered  into  digitization 
agreements with the five institutions now referenced as the 
“Google 5.”  Since it first began roughly a decade ago, the 
MDP has digitized upwards of twenty million volumes.  The 
precise  scope  of  the  MDP,  however,  remains  somewhat 
uncertain due to strict non-disclosure agreements.  Google’s 
website,  for  example,  indicates  that  it  has  over  40  partner 
libraries from around the world but it does not provide an 
exhaustive list of its partners [22].  A reasonably thorough 
investigation managed to uncover roughly half of its partners 
(21  out  of  40).    (Table  1)    Moreover,  of  the  21  known 
partnerships, only 4 of the contracts are publically available. 
(Table 1)  The result  is that information about the precise 
terms and scope of the MDP is fairly scant.  We are still, to 
some extent, forced to rely upon “secret murmurings” rather 
than hard facts. 

That said, there are several additional sources of information 
about  the  MDP.    The  first  is  Google’s  website  which 
provides some clues about the basic features of the project: 
Google  scans  and  indexes  some  portion  of  the  partner 
libraries’  print  collection;  Google  makes  the  full-text  of 
public  domain  works  available  for  browsing  and  reading 
through Google Books Search; Google makes “snippets” (a 
few sentences of text around the search term) of in-copyright 
works  available  through  Google  Book  Search;  Google 
provides basic bibliographic information about the work, as 
well as relevant information regarding bookstore and library 
holdings;  and,  perhaps  most  significantly,  Google  covers 
virtually all of the costs associated with the digitization.  

Institution 

U. Mich. [59]* 
Harvard [24] 
NYPL [44] 
Oxford [60] 
Stanford [51] 
U. Cal. [56]* 
U. Madrid [%] 
U. Wisc. [64] 
U. Virginia [63] 
U. Texas-Austin 

[61]* 

Catalonia [54] 
Princeton [43] 

Bavarian State [5] 

Lausanne [22] 

Ghent [22] 
CIC [10]* 
Keio [34] 
Cornell [12] 
Columbia [%] 

Date 
12/2004 
12/2004 
12/2004 
12/2004 
12/2004 
8/2006 
9/2006 
10/2006 
11/2006 

1/2007 

1/2007** 
2/2007 
3/2007 
5/2007 
5/2007 
6/2007 
7/2007 
8/2007 
12/2007 

Austrian Nat’l [3] 

** 

Lyon [2] 

7/2008** 

Scope 
PD & © 

PD 
PD 
PD 

PD (pre-1964) then © 

PD 
PD 

PD & univ.-owned 

PD & © 

PD & © 

PD 
PD 
PD 
PD 
PD 

PD & © 

PD 

PD & © 

PD 
PD 
PD* 

Table 1. Overview of MDP partners and scope based on press 
releases and publicly available contracts keyed to join date.     

* Agreement is publicly available. ** Some degree of 

uncertainty in data. 

Additional facts about the MDP have trickled out over time 
as  a  result  of  the  copyright  infringement  lawsuits.  (The 
lawsuit  against  Google  is  still  pending  [13,  46]  while  the 
lawsuit against HathiTrust has reached final resolution [14].) 
For  example,  during  oral  arguments  before  the  Second 
Circuit  Court  of  Appeals  in  December,  2014,  Google’s 

932

SESSION: ETHICS AND POLICY

counsel  stated  the  company’s  total  expenditures  on  the 
project were approximately one hundred and twenty million 
dollars  to  date.    In  addition,  Google  acknowledged  that 
Stanford  University,  whose  agreement  is  still  confidential, 
had not only permitted the digitization of in-copyright works 
but was also making the full-text of those works available to 
its  patrons;  that  Stanford  had  been  granting  this  level  of 
access was a shocking revelation for many in the copyright 
and library worlds [46].   
Finally,  with  respect  to  the  institutions  whose  agreements 
have been made public under state freedom of information 
laws, (Table 1) we can glean information about the MDP, 
and sensemaking around the MDP, from those contracts and, 
in  the  case  of  this  research,  from  interviews  with  those 
involved  in  the  project.    Through  these  agreements  and 
interviews,  we  begin  to  see  the  important  and  central  role 
policy played in the MDP.  
The Role of Policy in the MDP  
The MDP was groundbreaking in terms of its scale, speed, 
and innovative deviance -- its willingness to creatively push 
against  the  boundaries  of  existing  copyright  laws  to 
accomplish the overriding goal of copyright [9]. While large-
scale library digitization efforts had been ongoing for at least 
a decade prior to the MDP, none of those precursors touched 
the scale and magnitude of the Google Library Project.  To 
put it in perspective, a participant from Cornell University – 
one of the early leaders in library digitization – noted: “In 
the first week, Google scanned an amount of material equal 
to  what  we  had  scanned  in  the  previous  decade.”    An 
endeavor like this had never before been undertaken; it was 
full of potential and rife with uncertainty. 
By  any  account,  the  MDP  was  an  impressive  feat  of 
engineering 
specific 
technological  innovations  (Google  redesigned  the  library 
book cart, for example, to facilitate the transport of books via 
truck), it may be somewhat misleading to view the MDP as 
a  primarily 
  The  social  and 
organizational  aspects  of  digitization  were  equally  as 
important as the technical ones.   
Policy  and  policymaking  played  a  central  role  in  defining 
and  navigating 
technical  and  social 
environments of mass digitization. Perhaps by virtue of its 
scale,  speed,  and  concomitant  copyright  risk,  the  MDP 
generated an overarching web of policies around digitization 
that  had  been  largely  absent  or  uncoordinated  in  previous 
large-scale digitization efforts.  As earlier described, those 
precursors  tended  to  be  one-off,  relatively  short-lived, 
resource-restricted  endeavors  with  limited  organizational 
infrastructure and support.  Copyright, for example, did not 
rise  to  predominate  the  policy  landscape  because  libraries 
tended  to  digitize  the  relatively  uncontroversial,  low-risk, 
public domain materials first and, due to resource restriction, 
never  made  much  headway  concerning 
in-copyright 
materials.  

technological  story. 

throughput  and 

the  emerging 

led 

to 

some 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Policy  was  significant  in  the  MDP  for  at  least  4  reasons.  
First, policy was functional. The agreements were designed 
and intended to mitigate uncertainty and provide a safety net 
against  some  of  the  potential  risks  (copyright  and  other) 
associated with digitization.   
Second,  policy  was  important  in  terms  of  internal  and 
external sensemaking around the MDP.  Policymaking, and 
contracting  in  particular,  operates  as  a  behavioral  channel 
[21].  It forces parties to slow down, deliberate about, and 
generate  prospective  justifications  for  their  decisions  and 
proposed activities.  It also signals to the outside world that 
a meaningful agreement exists and, as will be discussed in 
the next section, can become self-affirming as it is repeated 
and imitated in future sensemaking and decision making.  In 
particular, an overarching policy schema can create  useful 
pathways capable of resolving some of tensions previously 
discussed with respect to the sociotechnical pitfalls of large-
scale collaborative digitization.   
Third,  as  the  next  section  describes,  policy  can  become  a 
powerful value lever for transformative social change.  The 
next  section  describes  how  a  specific  clause  in  the  UM-
Google agreement, § 4.4.2, empowered the UM to leverage 
the MDP for collective action in the research library world. 
Finally, as will be discussed later, policy can open and close 
spaces of social practice and technical design.  In this way, 
we can think of policy as providing a source of embedded 
generativity to enable new, innovative, often unanticipated, 
potentially transformative changes to occur (or to block the 
same)  at  the  intersections  of  social  practice  and  technical 
design. 
UM-Google Cooperative Agreement 
The UM was one of the first to join the MDP.  In addition, 
the UM-Google agreement is one of the few that have been 
made  public 
invocation  of  freedom  of 
information laws.  Using the agreement itself and interview 
data generated from architects of that agreement, this section 
explains  the  role  of  policy  in  the  localized  and  granular 
context  of  the  MDP  and  in  the  subsequent  emergence  of 
HathiTrust. 
The  UM-Google  agreement  contains  several  significant 
terms. First, we learn that UM was the first institution (and 
remains  one  of  the  few)  that  permitted  Google  to  scan  its 
entire collection -- public domain and in-copyright materials.    
Second, we learn that UM retained ownership of its digital 
copies whereas many other MDP partners refused ownership 
(presumably to reduce exposure to  copyright liability).  In 
isolation, these two details are significant but in combination 
their significance grows.   
UM assumed a higher level of risk through its participation 
relative to the other Google partners but it also assumed a 
greater  willingness  capitalize  on  the  potential  of  Google’s 
offer.  Through the MDP, UM created what was essentially 
a back-up copy of its entire print collection, approximately 
six million volumes. 

through 

the 

Although its significance emerged in the years that followed, 
arguably  the  single  most  important  provision  in  the  UM-
Google agreement was the one permitting UM to share its 
copies with other institutions and use them in the provision 
of cooperative web-based services, §4.4.2.        
The importance of this provision is perhaps best described 
by the individual who crafted it: 

library  digitization  effort, 

“I wanted to make sure we had a provision that we 
could use to take what we believed to be the only 
comprehensive 
the 
Michigan one, and leverage it for collective action 
around  print  management,  management  of  the 
collective  collection.    §4.4.2  gave  Michigan  the 
right to use its copies as part of services offered in 
cooperation  with  partner  research 
libraries.  
Michigan  was  the  only  institution  that  negotiated 
this  clause  and  this  is  the  clause  that  made 
HathiTrust possible.” 

Absent §4.4.2, it was doubtful that research libraries would 
have been legally permitted to share or collaborate around 
the digital corpus.  We would have ended up with Google’s 
range of services and up to forty siloed back-up copies (one 
for each participating library).  While such digital siloes are 
not  without  value,  it  is  the  capacity  of  the  libraries  to 
cooperate  and  collaborate  around  this  material,  and  build 
something by, of, and for the academic research world that 
was so potentially transformational.  Without §4.4.2, there 
would have been no HathiTrust, no collective action around 
the collective collection. 
After  the  UM-Google  agreement  was  disclosed,  and  other 
institutions  recognized  §4.4.2,  interviewees  noted  that 
Google  shifted  its  approach  by  preemptively  including 
§4.4.2-like  privileges 
in  all  subsequent  agreements.  
Similarly, based on interview data, pre-existing agreements 
were  amended  to  also  include  the  clause  although  there 
remain  some  questions  about  the  legal  effect  of  those 
revisions: 

“Many of the libraries’ amended agreements with 
Google  were  dependent  on  the  Google  Books 
Settlement going through.  When the court rejected 
the Google Books settlement, the libraries’ amended 
agreements with Google were also rejected.” 

This  would  suggest  that  the  terms  of  the  original  library-
Google  agreements  would  still  control  however,  as  a 
practical matter, Google has discretion to enforce the terms 
of those agreements and has shown no indication that they 
intend  to  restrict  library  collaboration  consistent  with  the 
understood meaning of  §4.4.2. 
It can be tempting, in retrospect, to normalize the evolution 
of  new  sociotechnical  forms.    In  hindsight,  the  MDP,  its 
policies,  and  the  subsequent  emergence  of  HathiTrust  can 
seem like a logical, linear follow-on to previous large-scale 
digitization  efforts.    This  research  reveals  how  tenuous, 

933

its  potential  was 

conflicted,  and  emergent  these  development  were.    With 
respect to §4.4.2 in particular, this study reveals its inclusion 
in the UM agreement was largely value-driven.  Participants 
at  UM  appreciated  the  potential  power  of  the  resources 
generated by the MDP -- a digital back-up copy of its entire 
library  --  but 
largely  aspirational.  
Participants were not exactly sure what they would or could 
do with the content, but they knew they wanted to be able to 
decide collectively.  §4.4.2  was a policy safeguard  for the 
value of collectivism and for the MDP’s inchoate potential. 
Due  in  part  to  its  questionable,  uncertain,  and/or  murky 
purpose,  negotiations  around  the  inclusion  of  §4.4.2  were 
somewhat contentious.  Some representatives from Google, 
particularly those who were invested in the technical design 
elements of the MDP, viewed the policy as a potential weak 
link in its still-emerging business plan.  UM’s lead architect 
of the provision described the negotiations in the following 
way: 

“I got very close to the person responsible for the 
digitization  effort  at  Google  and  I  can  recall  a 
number  of  conversations  with  them  where  they 
would essentially say:  ‘What the fuck did we do?  I 
think we just gave away our business here!’  And I 
would say: ‘No, no, you did not at all.  Google will 
find  ways  to  capitalize  on  this  that  will  not  be 
undermined by another copy being out there.’ And 
then  they  would  say:  ‘But  what  is  this  ‘Digital 
Library Federation?!’ And I would say: ‘No, no, it’s 
just ‘like’ the Digital Library Federation.  Don’t get 
distracted  by  that.’    The  fact  that  we  were  also 
dealing  with  Larry  Page  and  with  the  General 
Counsel – they had a bigger picture view and were 
not troubled at all by this the way that some product 
managers were.”     

Google was contributing significant resources to the MDP; 
they  needed  the  libraries  to  provide  access  to  the  print 
materials but they wanted to avoid inadvertently creating a 
competitor in the provision of web-based services around the 
digital corpus.   
Although  representatives  of  Google  declined 
to  be 
interviewed for this study, citing on-going litigation around 
the  MDP  [13],  one  can  speculate  as  to  the  reasons  the 
company’s co-founder and general counsel were not overly 
concerned.  Interviewees were quick to point out the ways in 
which  the  libraries  and  Google  perform  distinct  functions, 
with  different  goals,  and  approach  digitized  material 
differently.  Libraries regarded the digitized corpus, in some 
ways,  as  an  extension  of  their  print  collections.    While  it 
presented  new  opportunities  for  search  and  discovery, 
remote  access,  and  service  opportunities  for  blind  and 
disabled  users,  these  new  possibilities  arose  very  much 
within  the  library  environment.    There  was  a  strong 
centripetal force pulling the library scans back to the  core 
missions  of  preservation,  access,  records  management  and 
ensuring high-quality metadata. 

934

SESSION: ETHICS AND POLICY

Google, on the other hand, had its own set of priorities that 
were likely different than those of the library.  Even Google’s 
Book  Search,  arguably  the  nearest  cousin  of  the  library 
community, offered different functionality and used quality 
measures  calibrated  for  purpose  distinct  from  those  of 
libraries: 

for 

searched 

“If  you 
something,  Proust’s 
“Remembrance of Things Past,” in Google Books 
the three volumes were not together.  And journals 
were  scattered  and  not  understood  in  a  coherent 
way.  In contrast, libraries would provide a serial 
record or a multi-volume unit title of a record which 
said  “here  are  all  the  parts  and  here’s  how  they 
relate to each other and the print holdings.”  If you 
had a thousand-volume journal that went back to the 
17th  Century,  the  library  would  show  you  number 
one, two, three, rather than “your hit occurred in 
these 25 places in some uncoordinated way.”      

Discoverability and record management were just a few of 
the  ways in  which Google and libraries differed.   Overall, 
there  was  a  compelling  sense  that  research  libraries  and 
Google  operated 
in  distinct,  non-competing  spheres. 
Libraries  care  a  tremendous  deal  about  metadata,  record 
management, and core library missions around preservation 
and  access.  Google  cares  a  tremendous  amount  about 
improving and expanding its computational power and reach 
via  enhanced  search  algorithms  and  the  development  and 
provision of innovative new services like Google translate. 
The MDP was a means for each to achieve their particular 
ends.  §4.4.2 made sense in the context of libraries traditional 
function and did not seem to pose a serious threat to Google’s 
interests or market dominance. 
POLICY AS EMBEDDED GENERATIVITY 
Hindsight bias can pose a significant obstacle to accurately 
tracing of the creation and subsequent impacts of a policy 
such  as  §4.4.2.    There  is  a  strong  tendency  for  people  to 
understand  HathiTrust  as 
it  currently  exists  and 
retrospectively make sense of its emergence and evolution as 
a rational, planned, fairly linear, perhaps even unavoidable 
progression from point A to point B.  In reality, however, that 
could not be further from the truth.   
When  the  UM-Google  Agreement  was  entered  into,  and 
section §4.4.2 was drafted, UM was operating on the belief 
that the digitized corpus would be a dark archive – a digital 
back-up  copy  of  the  library  with  little  to  no  provision  for 
access. 

“The  legal  rationale  supporting  our  decision  to 
digitize our entire collection – in-copyright works as 
well  as  public  domain  –  was  based  on  the  dark 
archive principle.  We believed we were permitted 
to make a back-up copy of everything we own for 
ourselves.    Whether  we  do  anything  with  it  or  let 
other  people  see  it  is  where  we  believed  the 
copyright questions would come in.”     

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

It may, in retrospect, seem implausible or unbelievable that 
a sophisticated and savvy institution like the University of 
Michigan engaged in the mass digitization of its library to 
create a dark archive, but it was an understandable position 
to take given the state of copyright law as it was understood 
to exist at the time.  
This is not to suggest, however, that there was no inkling that 
the  digitized  corpus  might  someday,  somehow,  under  a 
modified  set  of  legal  and  organizational  facts  become 
something more than a dark archive.  There was certainly a 
utopian  vision  of  creating  a  universal  digital  library 
underlying §4.4.2, but it was deeply buried and very much 
inchoate when the agreement was made.  No one, not even 
the  architect  of  the  provision,  knew  the  extent  of  its 
significance and meaning in advance.  It was, at that point, a 
matter  of  embedded  generativity, 
the 
possibility  of  future  transformation  within  the  academic 
research  library  world  by  preserving  open  spaces  for 
collaboration and new, innovative, and unanticipated uses of 
what was assuredly an unparalleled digital resource.   
It took time for that generative potential to take shape and 
evolve.    In  fact,  when  HathiTrust  was  initially  conceived, 
years after the UM-Google Agreement and the creation of 
§4.4.2,  the  controlling  vision  of  HathiTrust  was  not  as  a 
research library collaboration around the provision of web-
based services.  HathiTrust was a quick, rather unglamorous 
fix for a simple but potentially serious technical problem: 
“HathiTrust  started  as  a  back-up  problem,  a  file 
back-up problem.  We’ve known for decades that we 
need to have offsite backup so that problems that hit 
you aren’t likely to hit them.  But the Provost made 
a mistake when we decided to go forward with the 
MDP.  He didn’t set aside the money to back this 
thing up.” 

safeguarding 

Moreover, when I interviewed the manager of HathiTrust’s 
day-to-day  operations  and  asked  him  to  identify  key 
milestones  or  turning  points  in  HathiTrust’s  development 
and  evolution,  one  of  the  first  ones  mentioned  was  the 
creation of the graphical user interface because, simply put, 
in its initial conception as a back-up for UM’s dark archive, 
there was no obvious need for a user interface: 

“Reaching a critical mass of institutions necessary 
to  create  and  launch  HathiTrust  was  a  huge 
milestone.    Coming  together  and  deciding  that 
creating HathiTrust was what we wanted to do and 
laying  out  objectives  which  included  having  an 
interface to look at the volumes was a big turning 
point.    We  were  deciding  to  tie  preservation  to 
access, that there’s no value to preservation without 
access.    That  was  a  really  big  thing  because  the 
digital corpus was no longer seen as this big block 
of  dark  stuff  that  we  can’t  do  anything  with.    It’s 
malleable.    We  can  flip  the  switch  from  closed  to 
open.” 

Breaking apart this observation a little bit more, one way of 
understanding the significant of the creation of the graphical 
user  interface  was  that  it  began  to  realize  the  values  of 
collectivism and cooperation central to §4.4.2.   Having lived 
through  some  of  the  earlier  large-scale  digitization  efforts 
(and failures), the architect of this provision recognized that 
primary obstacle to large-scale or mass digitization projects 
were  not  technological  or  resource-based,  but  were  rather 
social and/or institutional.   

“We  needed  to  find  a  way  to  use  the  [MDP]  to 
leverage  collective  action  around  the  collective 
collection.”  

toward  a  collective. 

Reaching  the  critical  mass  required  to  actually  launch 
HathiTrust,  design  the  graphical  interface  to  access  its 
contents,  thinking  of  ways  to  creatively  pursue  non-
infringing and fair uses of the corpus and, in some cases, flip 
the  “switch  from  closed  to  open”  were  all  steps  in 
HathiTrust’s  evolution 
  Today, 
HathiTrust is now comprised of over one hundred research 
institution partners and, aside from legal issues (which are 
still filtered through the University of Michigan), is largely 
self-governed  and  autonomous.    And  each  of  the  steps 
toward collectivism  relied, in fundamental  ways,  upon  the 
values  and  generativity  embedded  in  that  single  policy, 
§4.4.2.     
Today, the values and generativity embedded in §4.4.2 are 
finding new outlets.  Projects like the HathiTrust Research 
Center are beginning to providing academic researchers with 
support  and  assistance  in  conducting  non-consumptive 
computational  research  including  data  mining  and  other 
forms of digital humanities work.  Libraries are also using 
the  corpus  to  engage  in  cooperative  non-consumptive 
research  for  their  own  ends.    For  example,  under  the 
leadership of the University of Michigan Library and with 
funding support in the form of a National Leadership Grant 
from the Institute of Museum and Library Services, libraries 
have used the HathiTrust corpus to research key dates in the 
lifecycle  of  copyrighted  works  (publication  date  and 
location,  author  information  and  death  dates  if  applicable, 
GATT  restoration,  and  other  complex  considerations)  to 
build evidence  for opening  works to the  public domain or 
setting trigger dates for their future release.  This copyright 
review  management  system  would  have  been  functionally 
impossible without the MDP and §4.4.2. 
Additional nodes of expansion are being discussed to support 
new  and  innovative  uses  of  the  corpus.  Some  HathiTrust 
members  are  actively  seeking  ways  to  expanding  beyond 
text-based services to include audiovisual nodes.  This work 
implicates  complex  issues  ranging  from  copyright  to 
captioning which libraries are now seeking ways to resolve 
and manage.     
While  HathiTrust’s  memberships  consists  primarily  of 
research libraries located in the United States, there are also 
active  discussions  about  how  and  whether  membership 

935

to 

reflect 

might  be  extended  to  include  other  kinds  of  institutions, 
organizations,  and  even  individuals. 
  Possibilities  of 
expanding  into  other  geographical  locations  abound  and 
these too raise new and complex issues around copyright law 
and  questions  about  how  the  costs  and  requirements  of 
membership  might  change 
its  changing 
constituency.    These  are  ultimately  questions  that  require 
HathiTrust to ask: Who are we?  Who is our collective? 
These are just a few of the changes currently being discussed 
and  developed  by  HathiTrust’s  membership  and  each  of 
these  new  potentials  reflects  the  values  and  generativity 
embedded in §4.4.2.   
While this research has focused on the ways in which §4.4.2 
opened  space  for  new,  often  unanticipated,  forms  of 
innovation and generativity, it is important to note that the 
clause  also  foreclosed  some  opportunities.    The  Internet 
Archive,  for  example,  has  been  largely  excluded  from 
participation  in  HathiTrust  because  of  §4.4.2  and  other 
aspects of the UM-Google Agreement.  As described by one 
of the lead architects of the Agreement:   

“The  University  of  Michigan’s  agreement  with 
Google  allows  us  to  share  the  scans  with  other 
library consortia and indeed part of the reason that 
the HathiTrust exists is to meet that requirement.  It 
is a library consortia.  The Internet Archive is not 
part of a library consortia.” 

Relatedly, the Agreement has fairly rigid restrictions about 
sharing  and  collaboration  even  with  respect  to  the  public 
domain materials: 

“Under  the  Agreement  we  would  not  have  been 
permitted to open the public domain for mass use. 
We  agreed  with  Google  that  we  would  take 
measures to prevent potential competitive usage of 
the scans – we argued that there wasn’t actually that 
much economic value in the public domain scans – 
but  nevertheless,  we  agreed  that  we  would  take 
measures to basically throttle mass downloading of 
the collection.   
Giving  the  Internet  Archive  permission  to  mass 
download all of the public domain materials to host 
on its site would not have been consistent with our 
agreement with Google.  My personal view is that 
Google is being wrongheaded and they should have 
opened up the public domain but we have to wait for 
all  these  damn  lawsuits  to  resolve  before  we  can 
start being rational with them again.” 

that 
and 

sensemaking 
reorganizing 

involves  post  hoc 
Recognizing 
justification 
and 
reconstructing 
interpretations of events to resolve multiple, often conflicting 
interpretations of a decision’s  meaning(s).  There is likely 
more to the Internet Archive’s exclusion than what appears 
on the surface.   

SESSION: ETHICS AND POLICY

Personal  histories,  tensions  among  differing  philosophies 
held  by  some  of  the  key  players  at  Google,  the  Internet 
Archive, and possibly within the academic research library 
community  may  be  contributing  factors.    While  these  are 
largely outside the scope of this work, it is interesting to note 
that  Google’s  restrictions  on  bulk  downloading  the  public 
domain did not deter some devotees of a free and open public 
domain. As described by the Internet Archive’s founder: 
“Aaron Swartz, who worked at the Internet Archive 
for period of time, orchestrated a set of his friends 
to slowly download Google's public domain scans 
and upload them to the Internet Archive. 800,000 of 
them  were  done  this  way.  The  Internet  Archive 
copies attributed them to Google and to the library 
that they came from originally, and we did our best 
to OCR them, but they are public domain so they are 
posted  on  the Internet  Archive  site.  Google,  to  its 
credit,  did  not  assert  copyright  on  these  digitized 
materials.  We  had  gotten  unsupportive  comments 
from one of the Google libraries but very supportive 
comments from another of the Google libraries for 
having these materials up on the Internet Archive. I 
found  it  a  very  interesting  Rorschach  test  of  the 
librarians and the libraries.” 

Recognition  that  policies  like  §4.4.2  can  open  and  close 
spaces  of  social  practice  and  technical  design  must  also 
accept  that  even  these  barriers  are  permeable  and,  with 
sufficient technical skill and social support, may be prone to 
dissolution. 
CONCLUSION 
The MDP and HathiTrust story provides a localized, granular 
example of how policy, design, and practice are entangled, 
dynamic,  and  mutually  constitutive. 
  While  policy, 
particularly §4.4.2, had a tremendous impact on library mass 
digitization and the subsequent emergence and evolution of 
HathiTrust,  it  was  value-driven  and  generative  rather  than 
determinative.  §4.4.2 did not cause, create, or produce the 
HathiTrust  we  know  and  understand  today.    Rather,  it 
embedded within the MDP a source of generativity capable 
of  opening  (and  closing)  spaces  of  social  practice  and 
technical design in new, innovative, often unanticipated, and 
potential transformative ways. 
This research contributes to the growing recognition within 
CSCW  that  policy  matters  in  several  ways.  First,  this 
research illustrates how policy played an important role in 
ameliorating  some  of  the  risks  and  challenges  that  had 
plagued  other  large-scale  digitization  efforts.  The  scale, 
speed, and financial backing of Google, paired with UM’s 
willingness  to  undertake  a  comprehensive  retrospective 
conversion effort (including public domain and in-copyright 
works)  and  develop  the  organizational  infrastructure  to 
support  collective  action  around  the  resulting  resource 
pushed the MDP past the obstacles that had hampered many 
previous 
efforts.  Digitizing 
everything, as fast as possible, and securing the possibility of 

large-scale  digitization 

936

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

in 

archive  practices 

cooperative  work  around  the  corpus  was  an  imperfect 
strategy in some respects, but it was able to successfully fend 
off the creep of siloed obsolescence and that had threatened, 
endangered,  and  extinguished  many  previous  digitization 
attempts. In the context of new and emerging sociotechnical 
forms, this research suggests that leaving policy analysis and 
consideration to other fields and  other scholars risk losing 
out on some of the important lessons the CSCW community 
might glean from the interplay between these interconnected 
and entangled threads.    
Second, this research illustrates how policy does not always 
trail  behind  design  and  practice 
the  emergence, 
development, and evolution of innovative social computing 
forms  but  rather  can  function  as  an  important  source  of 
embedded  generativity.  There  was  a  tremendous  sense  of 
potential around the MDP in terms of how it might transform 
research  and  scholarship  and  alter  the  trajectory  of  library 
and 
around  print  management, 
preservation,  access  and  so  forth.    But  no  one  could 
anticipate or predict precisely how the MDP might change 
the practices of academic research libraries or institutions of 
higher education.  This work illustrates not only that policy 
is  important,  but  that  policy  can  precede  and  enable 
subsequent  design  choices  and  social  practices  in  socio-
technical systems.  
Third,  this  research  suggests  that  an  increased  focus  on 
policy can help bridge “the gap between what we need to do 
socially  and  what  we  can  do  technically”  that  has  been  a 
primary concern and challenge for much CSCW researchers 
[1].  Policy can provide a flexible-yet-binding link between 
relatively  rigid  technical  forms  and  relatively  fluid  and 
unpredictable  social  practices.    Policy  can  simultaneously 
enable rigorous action by reducing uncertainty around risk 
and  also  imbue  relationships  with  a  degree  of  nuance  and 
functional ambiguity that supports adaptability and change.  
Borrowing from value-sensitive design research, we can see 
that the value of collectivism or collective action around the 
collective  collection  was  a  driving  force  in  the  design  of 
§4.4.2.  
Fourth,  we  saw  how  policy  can  stabilize  and  coalescence 
future  sensemaking  and  decision-making  around  emergent 
sociotechnical  forms,  ultimately  tightening  the  design- 
practice-policy  knot  [31].  The  UM-Google  agreement 
provided  important  clues  and  signals  about  individual  and 
organizational sensemaking and decision-making around the 
MDP.    Policy  provides  a  window  into  what  the  parties 
believed was important, what concerns (or lack of concerns) 
they might have had, and what sorts of justifications might 
underlie those beliefs and decisions.  In addition, when the 
UM-Google  agreement  became  public,  its  power  became 
demonstrable;  the  policy  altered  the  ways  in  which  other 
institutions negotiated, enacted, and engaged in digitization.  
The irreversible and visible commitment between UM and 
Google channeled future sensemaking and decision-making 
around  the  MDP,  tightening  these  processes  and  making 

them  more  predictable,  orderly,  organized,  and  self-
reaffirming. The policy became more than a simple artifact 
of  a  binding  commitment  between  UM  and  Google.    It 
became  a  reserve  for  leveraging  and  generating  collective 
action.     
Finally, this paper contributes to the growing body of CSCW 
research and practice oriented around policy considerations 
by  illustrating  the  powerful  role  of  policy  plays  in  the 
complex interaction between design and practice at a local 
level  and  as  a  source  of  generativity  for  future  decision 
making  at  the  intersection  of  policy,  design,  and  social 
activity.    In  this  study,  we  saw  how  §4.4.2  helped  solved 
some  of  the  persistent  challenges  that  had  plagued  prior 
large-scale  digitization  attempts  and  technical  and  social 
challenges  around  specific  issues  like  print  collection 
management.  We also saw how even a single contract clause 
can have tremendous impact on the development, evolution, 
and generativity of subsequent sociotechnical systems.   
Without  §4.4.2,  it  is  doubtful  that  the  academic  research 
library  community  would  have  had  HathiTrust.    Now,  a 
decade since that clause was drafted, HathiTrust has grown 
into a cooperative partnership of over 100 partner institutions 
that collectively govern a shared trusted digital repository, a 
digital  library,  and  a  research  center  that  facilitates  non-
consumptive computational research across its vast thirteen 
million volume corpus.  And as we’ve seen, new forms and 
services are still emerging.  More importantly, this research 
illustrates  how  CSCW 
researchers  and  practitioners 
interested  in  the  relationships,  tensions,  gaps,  and  knots 
between  technical  design  and  social  practice  might  seek 
ways to use policy to instill values and embed generativity 
into CSCW work in the future, safeguarding spaces for new, 
innovative,  unanticipated,  collaborative,  and  potentially 
transformative changes to emerge.      
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The  author  is  grateful  to  the  anonymous  conference 
reviewers for their helpful comments and feedback on earlier 
drafts of this work.  
REFERENCES 
1.  Mark Ackerman. 2000.  The Intellectual Challenge of 

CSCW: the gap between social requirements and 
technical feasibility. In Human-Computer Interaction, 
15(2-3), 179-203. 

2.  S. Clément. 2008. Google partenaire numérique official 
de la bibliothèque de Lyon.  ActuaLitté – les univers du 
livre, July 12, 2008.  Retrieved May 22, 2015 from 
https://www.actualitte.com/bibliotheques/google-
partenaire-numerique-officiel-de-la-bibliotheque-de-
lyon-3396.htm 

3.  Austrian National Library. 2015. Austrian Books 

Online. Retrieved May 22, 2015 from 
http://www.onb.ac.at/ev/about/austrianbooksonline.htm 

4.  Louise Barkhuus. 2012. The mismeasurement of 
privacy: using contextual integrity to reconsider 

937

privacy in HCI. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
5.  Bavarian State Library. 2015. Mass Digitization within 
the Framework of a Public-Private Partnership between 
the Bayerische Staatsbibliothek and Google.  Retrieved 
May 22, 2015 from http://www.bsb-
muenchen.de/en/about-us/projects/digitisation/mass-
digitisation-within-the-framework-of-a-public-private-
partnership-between-the-bayerische-staatsbibliothek-
and-google/ 

6.  Kirsti E. Berntsen. 2014. Generativity for 

Infrastructuring eHealth. 

7.  Matthew J. Bietz, Drew Paine, and Charlotte P. Lee. 

2013. The work of developing cyberinfrastructure 
middleware projects. In Proceedings of the 2013 
conference on Computer supported cooperative work. 

8.  Alan Borning, Batya Friedman, Janet Davis, and 

Peyina Lin. 2005. Informing public deliberation: Value 
sensitive design of indicators for a large-scale urban 
simulation. ECSCW, 449-468. Springer Netherlands. 

9.  Alissa Centivany. 2015. Innovative Deviance: A 

Theoretical Framework Emerging at the Intersection of 
Copyright Law & Technological Change.  In 
Proceedings of the iConference, 2015, 1-9.  
http://hdl.handle.net/2142/73651 

10.  Committee on Institutional Cooperation. 2015. Google 

Book Search Project – Introduction.  Retrieved May 
22, 2015 from 
http://www.cic.net/projects/library/book-
search/introduction 

11.  Cornell University. 2015. Making of America. 

Retrieved May 22, 2015 from 
http://digital.library.cornell.edu/m/moa/  

12.  Cornell University Library. 2015. Google Book Search 

Library Project. Retrieved May 22, 2015 from 
https://www.library.cornell.edu/google-book-search-
library-project 

13.  Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. Authors 
Guild, Inc. v. Google, Inc., 721 F.3d 132. 2013. 
14.  Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. Authors 

Guild, Inc. v. HathiTrust et al.., 755 F.3d 87. 2014. 
15.  Digital Pioneers. 2010. Interview with Paul Conway, 

May 25, 2010.  Retrieved from 
http://digitalpioneers.library.du.edu/paulConway/transc
ript.html 

16.  Digital Pioneers. 2010. Interview with Peter Hirtle, 

May 25, 2010.  Retrieved from 
http://digitalpioneers.library.du.edu/peterHirtle/transcri
pt.html 

17.  Paul N. Edwards, Steven J. Jackson, Melissa K. 

Chalmers, Geoffrey C. Bowker, Christine L. Borgman, 
David Ribes, Matt Burton, and Scout Calvert. 2013. 

938

SESSION: ETHICS AND POLICY

Knowledge infrastructures: Intellectual frameworks 
and research challenges. 

18.  Casey Fiesler. 2014. Copyright and social norms in 

communities of content creation. In Proceedings of the 
companion publication of the 17th ACM conference on 
Computer supported cooperative work & social 
computing. 49-52. 

19.  Batya Friedman. 1996. Value-sensitive design. 

interactions 3(6), 16-23. 

20.  Batya Friedman, Daniel C. Howe, and Edward Felten. 

2002. Informed consent in the Mozilla browser: 
implementing Value-Sensitive Design. In Proceedings 
of the 35th Annual Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences (HICSS ’02).  

21.  Lon L. Fuller. 1941.  Consideration and Form.  41 Col. 

Law Rev. 5, 799-824. 1941. 

22.  Google Books.  2015.  Library Partners.  Retrieved 

May 22, 2015 from 
http://www.google.ca/googlebooks/library/partners.htm
l 

23.  Google Library Project.  2015. Retrieved May 22, 2015 

from 
https://support.google.com/books/partner/faq/3396243?
hl=en&rd=1 

24.  Harvard University Library. 2008. Harvard-Google 

Project.  Retrieved May 22, 2015 from 
http://hul.harvard.edu/hgproject/index.html  

25.  HathiTrust. 2008.  Launch of HathiTrust – October 13, 

2008.  Retrieved May 22, 2015 from 
http://www.hathitrust.org/press_10-13-2008 

26.  HathiTrust.  About – Welcome to the Shared Digital 

Future.  Retrieved May 22, 2015 from 
http://www.hathitrust.org/about 

27.  HathiTrust.  Mission and Goals.  Retrieved May 22, 
2015 from http://www.hathitrust.org/mission_goals 

28.  Benjamin Mako Hill, and Andrés Monroy-Hernández. 

2012. The remixing dilemma: The trade-off between 
generativity and originality. American Behavioral 
Scientist (2012): 0002764212469359. 

29.  David Sanford Horner. 2010. Metaphors in orbit: 

revolution, logical malleability, generativity and the 
future of the internet. ETHICOMP.  201-208. 

30.  Internet Archive. 2015. Retrieved May 22, 2015 from 

https://archive.org/index.php  

31.  Steven J. Jackson, Tarleton Gillespie, & Sandy Payette. 

2014. The policy knot: Re-integrating policy, practice 
and design in CSCW studies of social computing.  In 
Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’14), 1-15.  
32.  Steven J. Jackson, Stephanie B. Steinhardt, Ayse 

Buyuktur. 2013. Why CSCW needs science policy (and 
vice versa).  In Proceedings of the 16th ACM 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
(CSCW ’13). 

33.  Ricardo Acebes Jiménez. 2008. The partnership project 

between the Complutense University of Madrid 
Library and Google Book Search.  Fourth UNICA 
Scholarly Communication Seminar, May 15-16, 2008.  
Charles University, Prague.  

34.  Keio University. 2013. Keio University’s collection 
digitized by Google Books Library Project, October, 
2013.  

35.  Karina Kervin and Margaret Hedstrom. 2012. How 

research funding affects data sharing. In Proceedings 
of the ACM 2012 conference on computer supported 
cooperative work companion (CSCW ’12). 

36.  John Leslie King, Rob Kling, and the Irvine School. 

2004. The Information Society 20(2), 97-99. 

37.  Rob Kling and W. Scacchi. 1982. The Web of 
Computing: Computer Technology as Social 
Organization. Advances in Computers 21. 

38.  Rob Kling. 1991. Computerization and social 

transformation. Science, Technology & Human Values, 
16(3), 342-367. 

39.  Rob Kling, Andy Hopper, and James Katz. 1992. 

Controversies about privacy and open information in 
CSCW.  In Proceedings of the 1992 ACM conference 
on Computer-supported cooperative work (CSCW ’92). 

40.  Rob Kling. 1996. Computerization and controversy: 

value conflicts and social choices. Morgan Kaufmann 
Publishers: San Francisco. 

41.  Bing Li. 2014. Sustainable value and generativity in 
the Ecological Metadata Language (EML) platform: 
toward new knowledge and investigations. System 
Sciences (HICSS), 2014 47th Hawaii International 
Conference on. IEEE, 2014. 

42.  Heather Richter Lipford, Pamela J. Wisniewski, Cliff 
Lampe, Lorraine Kisselburgh, and Kelly Caine. 2012. 
Reconciling privacy with social media. In Proceedings 
of the ACM 2012 conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work Companion (CSCW ’12).  

43.  Princeton University. 2007.  Library Joins Google 
project to make books available online, February 5, 
2007. Retrieved May 22, 2015 from 
http://www.princeton.edu/main/news/archive/S16/84/7
1S02/index.xml?section=topstories 

44.  Barbara Quint. 2004.  Google and Research Libraries 
Launch Massive Digitization Project, December 20, 
2004.  Information Today, Inc. Retrieved May 22, 2015 
from 
http://newsbreaks.infotoday.com/NewsBreaks/Google-
and-Research-Libraries-Launch-Massive-Digitization-
Project-16307.asp   

45.  Raj Reddy & Gloriana StClair. 2001. The Million 

Book Digital Library Project. Retrieved May 22, 2015 
from http://www.rr.cs.cmu.edu/mbdl.htm 

46.  robertjbernsteinblog.  2014. Authors Guild v. Google 
Oral Argument Before Second Circuit on December 3, 
2014, December 6, 2014. Retrieved May 22, 2015 from 
https://robertjbernsteinblog.wordpress.com/2014/12/06
/authors-guild-v-google-oral-argument-before-second-
circuit-on-december-3-2014/ 

47.  Pamela Samuelson. 2005. The Generativity of Sony v. 
Universal: The Intellectual Property Legacy of Justice 
Stevens. Fordham L. Rev. 74, 1831. 

48.  Katie Shilton, Jes A. Koepfler, and Kenneth R. 
Fleischmann. 2014. How to see values in social 
computing: methods for studying values dimensions. In  
Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer 
supported cooperative work & social computing 
(CSCW ’14), 426-435. 

49.  Katie Shilton. 2015. Anticipatory Ethics for a Future 
Internet: Analyzing Values During the Design of an 
Internet Infrastructure. Science and engineering ethics 
21.1 (2015): 1-18. 

50.  Katie Shilton. 2015. “That's Not An Architecture 

Problem!”: Techniques and Challenges for Practicing 
Anticipatory Technology Ethics. In Proceedings of the 
‘15 iConference. 

51.  Stanford University Libraries.  2005.  Statement of 
Support and Participation.  Retrieved May 22, 2015 
from https://lib.stanford.edu/google-books/statement-
support-participation-2005 

52.  Stephanie B. Steinhardt & Steven J. Jackson. 2015. 
Anticipation Work: Cultivating Vision in Collective 
Practice.  In Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference 
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW 
’15), 1-11. 

53.  Frederic Stutzman and Woodrow Hartzog. 2012. 

Boundary regulation in social media. In Proceedings of 
the ACM 2012 conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work (CSCW ’12).  

54.  Technología. 2009. Google digitalize 35 mil libros de 
la Biblioteca de Catalunya libres de derechos de autor, 
July 27, 2009. Retrieved May 22, 2015 from 
http://www.lavanguardia.com/internet-y-
tecnologia/noticias/20090727/53753696854/google-
digitaliza-35-mil-libros-de-la-biblioteca-de-catalunya-
libres-de-derechos-de-autor.html 

55.  UM-Google Cooperative Agreement.  2004.  Available 
at http://www.lib.umich.edu, last visited May 22, 2015.   

56.  University of California. 2006. UC Libraries Partner 

with Google to Digitize Books, August 10, 2006.  
Retrieved May 22, 2015 from 
http://www.cdlib.org/cdlinfo/2006/08/10/uc-libraries-
partner-with-google-to-digitize-books/ 

939

SESSION: ETHICS AND POLICY

67.  Na Wang, Jens Grossklags, and Heng Xu. 2013. An 
online experiment of privacy authorization dialogues 
for social applications. In Proceedings of the 2013 
conference on Computer supported cooperative work 
(CSCW ’13). 

68.  Max Weber. 1949. Objectivity in social science and 

social policy. The Methodology of the Social Sciences, 
78: Free Press New York. 

69.  Karl E. Weick. 1995. Sensemaking in organizations. 

Vol. 3. Sage. 

70.  Jonathan Zittrain, 2006.  "The generative internet." 

Harvard Law Review, 1974-2040. 

71.  Jonathan Zittrain. 2007. Saving the internet. Harvard 

Business Review 85(6), 49. 

72.  Jonathan Zittrain. 2008. The future of the Internet. 

London: Allen Lane. 

 

57.  University of California. 2015. California Digital 

Library.  Retrieved May 22, 2015 from 
http://www.cdlib.org/ 

58.  University of Michigan.  2007. Making of America. 

2007. Retrieved May 22, 2015 from 
http://quod.lib.umich.edu/m/moagrp/ 

59.  University of Michigan Library. 2004. Google 

Digitization Project: A Brief Overview, Dec. 13, 2004.  
Retrieved May 22, 2015 from 
http://www.lib.umich.edu/michigan-digitization-
project/michigan-digitization-project-complete-list-
resources 

60.  University of Oxford Bodleian Libraries.  2012. Oxford 

Google Books Project.  Retrieved May 22, 2015 from 
http://www.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/dbooks 

61.  University of Texas at Austin. 2007.  The University of 
Texas Libraries Partner with Google to Digitize Books, 
January 19, 2007. Retrieved May 22, 2015 from 
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/about/news/google/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

62.  University of Toronto. 2015. University of Toronto 

Internet Archive.  Retrieved May 22, 2015 from 
https://archive.org/details/university_of_toronto 

63.  University of Virginia.  2006.  U.Va. Library Joins the 

Google Books Library Project, November 14, 2006. 
Retrieved May 22, 2015 from 
http://news.virginia.edu/content/uva-library-joins-
google-books-library-project 

64.  University of Wisconsin. 2012.  Overview of the 

Google Library Initiative.  Retrieved May 22, 2015 
from 
http://proxy.library.wisc.edu/digitization/faq.html#prim
ary 

65.  Theresa Velden. 2013. Explaining field differences in 

openness and sharing in scientific communities. In 
Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Computer 
supported cooperative work (CSCW ’13).  

66.  Janet Vertesi and Paul Dourish. 2011. The value of 
data: considering the context of production in data 
economies. In Proceedings of the ACM 2011 
conference on Computer supported cooperative work 
(CSCW ’11). 

940

