CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Storytelling with Data: Examining the Use of Data by

Non-Proﬁt Organizations

Sheena Erete†, Emily Ryou†, Geoff Smith*, Khristina Fassett*, Sarah Duda*

†College of Computing and Digital Media

serete@cdm.depaul.edu, emily.ryou@gmail.com, [gsmith33, kfassett, sduda1]@depaul.edu

*Institute for Housing Studies

DePaul University Chicago, IL USA

ABSTRACT
Despite the growing promotion of the “open data" movement,
the collection, cleaning, management, interpretation, and dis-
semination of open data is laborious and cost intensive, partic-
ularly for non-proﬁts with limited resources. In this paper, we
describe how non-proﬁt organizations (NPOs) use open data,
building on prior literature that focuses on understanding chal-
lenges that NPOs face. Based on 15 interviews of staff from
10 NPOs, our results suggest that NPOs use data to develop
narratives to build a case for support from grantors and other
stakeholders. We then present empirical results based on the
usage of a data portal we created, which suggests that tech-
nologies should be designed to not only make data accessible,
but also to facilitate communication and support relationships
between expert data analysts and NPOs.

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.m. Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g. HCI):
Miscellaneous

Author Keywords
Non-Proﬁt Organizations; NPOs; open data; storytelling

INTRODUCTION
Though the term “open data" is not a new concept, over the
past decade national and local government agencies in the US
have become more aggressive in their efforts to make data
publicly available for citizens to use [19, 21]. We deﬁne open
data as facts, observations, and statistics collected together
for reference and analysis that is publicly available for use.
Studies have shown that use of open data has been pivotal in
an institution’s execution of their goals [21]. However, while
some may praise the US government’s effort in making more
data available, there is still concern about the consumption
of such data [26, 9, 16] – that is, the collection, cleaning,
management, interpretation, and dissemination of data. Data

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW ’16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA
Copyright © 2016 ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02...$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820068

1273

consumption is laborious and cost intensive, both factors that
can make open data inaccessible for non-proﬁt organizations
(NPOs) with limited resources [31] and can affect fulﬁlling
their goals (e.g., inciting policy changes, community devel-
opment, obtaining grants). We argue that by understanding
how NPOs use open data, we can design technology solutions
that not only provide access to but also easier consumption of
open data. Thus, we pose the following research questions:
How are non-proﬁt organizations using open data to achieve
their goals? How can we better design technologies to make
open data more consumable for organizations with limited
resources?
The objective of this paper is to: (1) describe how non-proﬁt
organizations with limited resources use open data in the US
and (2) evaluate the use of our data portal by NPOs. Our data
portal, which can be publicly accessed through our research
center’s website, was also designed to support collaboration
between NPOs and our Field Expert Data Analysts (FEDAs).
The data portal is an online tool that provides access to ag-
gregated data (i.e., data combined by multiple factors such
as geography) and reports created by our FEDAs. FEDAs
are trained expert analysts with strong statistics, data mining,
and information visualization skills that specialize in a spe-
ciﬁc ﬁeld or subject (e.g., education, health, crime). FEDAs
provide technical assistance, custom analyses, and reports
comprised of data visualizations and in-ﬁeld analyses to NPOs
at no cost. We speciﬁcally focus on the relationship between
NPOs and FEDAs as much prior HCI research has focused on
inter-organizational collaboration amongst NPOs [15, 29], ig-
noring the potential beneﬁts of collaborative analysis between
NPOs and external ﬁeld experts. Our approach builds on ex-
tensive CSCW work on organization knowledge management
[3, 5, 28] by extending the context to NPOs.
To answer our research questions, we interviewed staff of vari-
ous levels at NPOs that advocate for affordable housing locally,
regionally, or nationally. NPOs reported using housing data to
administer programs, develop policy, and to tell organization
and community-speciﬁc narratives. NPOs further enrich these
narratives with other contextual data that helps connect their
story to their target audiences.
We then discuss NPOs’ responses to our data portal. We found
that features in our portal that support access to aggregated

data play a limited role; instead, NPOs rely heavily on their
relationships with specialized ﬁeld experts to satisfy their
data needs. Based on our ﬁndings, we suggest best practices
around designing effective technologies that support NPOs
in interpreting, consuming, and communicating open data to
address their goals and objectives.
Our research contributions are two-fold. First, this paper
provides insight into how NPOs use open data, building on
prior literature that focuses on understanding challenges that
NPOs encounter [12, 15, 24, 29, 31]. Second, we describe the
collaboration practices between NPOs and individuals who
are external experts (non-volunteers), extending previous HCI
work on inter-organizational collaboration [29, 32] as well
as organization knowledge and memory management [5, 28].
Our design implications, which encourage interpretation and
consumption of data through collaborative analysis, add to the
large body of research on designing technologies for NPOs [8,
12, 11, 15, 17, 20, 22, 23, 24, 29, 31, 32].
In the following sections, we begin by presenting prior litera-
ture on technology use by NPOs and general practices of open
data. We provide an overview of our study design, including
a detailed description of our data portal and the NPOs that
we interviewed. We then present our research ﬁndings and
conclude by describing design implications and opportunities
for future work.

RELATED WORK
With the recent push towards open data, NPOs are rapidly
gaining access to data that can help them lobby grantors, vol-
unteers, and other government agencies for support. However,
NPOs have limited resources to effectively analyze and visu-
alize open data. Research on collaborative analysis suggests
beneﬁts to partnering with others to understand open datasets
[18, 27, 33]; yet, few have explored how NPOs could take
advantage of such techniques. In this section, we describe
prior literature around NPOs’ Information and Communica-
tion Technologies (ICTs) use, open data analysis practices,
and collaborative analysis technologies.

Non-Proﬁt Organizations and ICTs
NPOs play a pivotal role in society, economically and socially.
For example, a study by the Urban Institute found that 2.3
million NPOs operate in the U.S., contributing over $800 bil-
lion to the economy in 2010 [6]. Over 25% of U.S citizens
volunteered over 15 billion hours in 2011, an estimated worth
of $296 billion [6]. In addition, NPOs advocate for community
wellness, encourage social change, and serve the underpro-
vided with critical functions that empower individuals [15].
NPOs support the needs of many communities by compen-
sating for the disparities of goods and services ranging from
emergency resources to advocacy for policy change [31].
Despite their large economic and societal role, NPOs have
limited resources that originate from painstaking efforts in
fundraising and grant writing [24]. Such efforts motivate
NPOs to primarily focus on their organizational goals, neglect-
ing important in-house necessities such as technology and
staff development [31]. Yet, NPOs still wish to function as
efﬁciently as their for-proﬁt counterparts [29], and ICTs play

1274

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

an integral role in achieving such goals by supporting staff and
intra-organizational structures [15].
Due to budget restrictions, many NPOs face a multitude of
challenges regarding the use and adoption of ICTs [11, 15,
20, 24, 29, 31, 32]. Some NPOs rely on inexpensive, yet
inadequate, “out-of-the-box" solutions that require much in-
ternal maintenance, leaving NPOs with the task of continually
patching together and reconﬁguring systems [31]. Such main-
tenance can result in lost, abandoned, or duplicated data [31].
Centralized data provides a means for NPOs to identify trends,
which enables them to more effectively focus their campaigns
to achieve their goals [8]. Furthermore, deﬁciencies in in-
ternal technologies and differences in technology adoption
demotivate NPOs from engaging in inter-organizational col-
laboration [29]. Thus, lack of resources impact NPOs’ current
ICT practices and inhibit their ability to collaborate with oth-
ers to accomplish their goals. This paper presents a novel
perspective by describing how NPOs use our data portal to
collaborate with external experts to supplement their limited
resources.

Open Data Practices and Collaborative Analysis
There has been a surge in the availability of open data in re-
cent years, trending from government agencies mandating the
release of more datasets [4]. During its launch in May 2009,
data.gov contained 76 datasets from 11 US government agen-
cies. Eleven months later, data.gov contained 1,284 datasets
from 170 government and public agencies [19]. The growth in
open data has implications across private, public, and not-for-
proﬁt sectors, acting as a catalyst for innovation by stimulating
potential for funding, providing information about markets,
and inspiring development beyond applications [21].
With data becoming more available, scholars have begun to
investigate the consumption practices of open data [4, 9, 14,
16, 19, 21, 26]. There have been numerous studies that sug-
gest that availability of data does not ensure accessibility and
equity in data consumption, which could empower those who
have been traditionally marginalized [16, 26]. In addition,
some have found that raw data (i.e., data presented in abso-
lute number for the purpose of re-use [9]) is preferred over
manufactured reports [19]. Davies & Frank, however, suggest
that access to raw data does not necessitate proper reuse of
data [9]. Instead, they found that repurposing data success-
fully requires creating context for users, which could stem
from an understanding of how the data was created and will
be used [9]. This suggests a complex relationship amongst
those who create open data, those who use open data, and
the technologies that support access to open data. Though
relationships between data experts and consumers may shape
the use of open data, few have examined the extent to which
these relationships may impact data consumption.
Given the increased access to data, there has been more fo-
cus on effective data analysis techniques. One that has gained
much attention is collaborative analysis, where data consumers
(experts and non-experts) work together to analyze, interpret,
and visualize data [9, 15, 18, 31]. The production of these
analyses requires communication between users to assist in
decision-making by “distributing information across group

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Figure 1. Sample of Data Portal ﬁlters with populated viewing area

members" [18]. Organizing information can help users collab-
oratively analyze data, which can be done through tags and
links [33]. Collaborative analysis technologies, which support
such communication, have also become effective tools to assist
users in understanding and discussing their ﬁndings [18, 27,
33]. Furthermore, collaborative help-seeking amongst users
and experts have been found to increase organizational mem-
ory [1, 2], the sharing of organizational knowledge amongst
its members [5]. Given the beneﬁts of collaborative analysis
technologies and the need for NPOs to ﬁnd inexpensive, yet
accurate, data analysis solutions, there is an opportunity to
explore how NPOs can partner with others to assist in data
analysis.
NPOs often lack the ﬁnancial means, time, or technical skills
to easily analyze and consume open data; however, NPOs are
savvy in ﬁnding ways to support their need for data despite
how time-consuming and inconvenient these methods may
be. Use of collaborative analysis technologies on open data
may be an opportunity for NPOs to use fewer resources when
attempting to achieve their goals around open data consump-
tion. Our study addresses this gap by describing how NPOs
use data and collaborative ICTs that effectively support data
interpretation and consumption by NPOs.

DESIGN STUDY
We examined the following research questions: (1) How are
non-proﬁt organizations using open data? (2) How can we
better design technologies to make open data more consum-
able for organizations with limited resources? To address
these questions, we established a cross-disciplinary team of
researchers, graduate students, and staff of our research cen-
ter, which is housed at a large private university in the Mid-
west. We conducted semi-structured interviews with staff at 10
NPOs. During interviews, we asked participants to reﬂect on
their current data use and their experience using our existing
data portal. We then analyzed the interview transcripts using
inductive qualitative analysis techniques.

Research Center Background
The Institute for Housing Studies (IHS) is a research center
conceived through a grant from the John D. and Catherine T.
MacArthur Foundation. The mission of the research center
is to provide reliable, recent, unbiased data to NPOs so that

they can make informed decisions regarding housing policy.
IHS focuses explicitly on providing data that informs issues
including, but not limited to availability and preservation of
affordable housing, housing development ﬁnance, community
development, and emerging trends in neighborhood housing
markets. In addition to property-level data, the research center
also collects related data such as U.S. census data, Home
Mortgage Disclosure Act data, crime data, and USPS vacancy
data.

Data Portal Background and Reports
The initial features of the data portal were based on the experi-
ences of the IHS staff and feedback from NPOs. In May 2013,
nine months prior to our study, our team deployed an online
data portal that can be accessed freely from the research cen-
ter’s website. Both the IHS website and the data portal were
built by an outside vendor using a Django framework. The
research center’s staff updates the data manually via a content
management system (CMS). Of the 16 aggregated datasets, 15
are updated yearly and one is updated quarterly. Prior to our
data portal, local housing NPOs would often rely on national
research centers.
Staff of the research center, which included Field Expert Data
Analysts (FEDAs), developers, and community development
liaisons, led the development of the portal. The data portal
provides aggregated data through the use of three ﬁlters: data
type, geographic level, and year range. The data type ﬁlter
includes housing stock composition, property sales activity,
mortgage activity, foreclosure ﬁling activity, foreclosure auc-
tions, and long-term residential vacancy rates. The geographic
levels comprise of county region, municipality, community
area, and ward. The corresponding viewing area presents the
data as a table. Figure 1 shows an image of the ﬁlters and
populated viewing area.
In addition, our research center provides access to reports
created by FEDAs, who continually research and analyze the
local housing market. Reports, which are created quarterly
at a minimum, are located outside the data portal but still
within the research center’s website. Each report is unique,
containing in-depth analyses, synopsis of the subject, data
sources, data visualizations, and/or key ﬁndings. The format
of the reports varies from academic articles and white papers
to more applied reports such as policy briefs and fact sheets.

1275

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

NPO Area Cov-

erage
Region

Region

Region

Region

Focus of Work

Community
Development

Community De-
velopment
Community De-
velopment
Housing

Region
Housing
Community Housing
Community

Community Housing

Community De-
velopment

Community

Housing

Participation
Code
R1

R2
R3

R4

R5
R6
R7
R8
C1
C2

C3

C4
C5
C6
C7

Individual Role

Project

Senior
Manager
Data Analyst
Director

Project Manager

Data Analyst
Director
Program Ofﬁcer
Director
Director
Senior Organizer

Executive Direc-
tor
Field Manager
Field Manager
Director
Vice President

1

2

3

4

5
6
7

8

9

Figure 2. Sample Data Visualization from Reports

Figure 2 shows an example data visualization from a report,
which can be downloaded as a PDF from the website.
For further assistance or inquiries, the website prompts users
to reach out to the research center by providing contact infor-
mation for a FEDA.

Field Expert Data Analysts (FEDAs)
Field Expert Data Analysts (FEDAs) are staff members at
the research center that perform in-depth analyses of hous-
ing market trends in the city and surrounding municipalities.
During this study, there were six full-time FEDA staff, all
compensated through the same grant as the research center.
Four of the FEDAs have Masters degrees in Urban Planning
and Policy, one in Geography, and one a Ph.D. in Economics.
All the FEDAs’ training emphasized housing studies, which
included statistics, data mining, and data visualizations (e.g.,
mapping). With professional experience as local housing ex-
perts that range from ﬁve to seventeen years, our FEDAs are
well respected amongst housing organizations across the city.
Furthermore, their reports have received national attention
from media outlets such as the New York Times, Chicago Tri-
bune, Wall Street Journal, and Washington Post. In addition
to generating the datasets, conducting in-depth analyses, and
creating reports of local housing trends, FEDAs complement
the data portal by collaborating with NPOs to provide custom
datasets for their target area and valuable market insights. Be-
fore the availability of FEDAs at our research center, NPOs
often requested assistance from national organizations that
may have lacked local experts.

Study Participants
We interviewed 15 staff members from 10 NPOs that used our
data portal, which is free. Though the shared mission between
all the NPOs was to promote affordable housing, the size and
structure of the organizations as well as the method of achiev-
ing the mission differed. We ﬁrst identiﬁed 10 NPOs varying
in size, structure, and area coverage. The NPOs yearly budgets
ranged from $148,000 to over $293,000,000, where the median
was $2,800,159. Despite the budget, all the NPOs reported a
lack of resource allocation towards data analysis. Five NPOs
were region-based, and ﬁve were community-based. Region-
based organizations covered an area that reached beyond the
metropolitan area, while community-based organizations fo-
cused on neighborhoods in the city. Table 1 summarizes the
participants and their NPOs.

1276

10

Community

Community De-
velopment

Table 1. Overview of Participating Individuals and NPOs

Region-based Organizations
Region-based organizations collaborate with other NPOs, local
governments, businesses, and community leaders to explore
community development, policy, and ﬁnancing issues. Two
region-based organizations (NPO 4 and 5) interact directly
with residents and focus only on housing-related issues. The
other three focus on public policy issues and overall commu-
nity development. NPO 1, 4, and 5 support development by
providing ﬁnancial lending services to potential residents and
other NPOs.

Community-based Organizations
Community-based organizations interact and develop relation-
ships with individual residents in a targeted neighborhood.
Two community-based organizations (NPO 6 and 7) accom-
plish their goals by organizing community leaders and resi-
dents; the other three establish programs, secure grants, and
execute strategic plans. NPO 8, 9, and 10 focus solely on
affordable, subsidized, or integrated housing, while the other
two community-based organizations focus on overall commu-
nity development.
To recruit participants, we contacted the NPOs and asked to
interview people who worked directly with data or made deci-
sions regarding how data is used in the organization. Thus, our
participants had varying hierarchical positions in the organiza-
tion. We interviewed participants with varying positions to not
only understand how data is manipulated by those who work
with data on a regular basis but also organizational strategy
and rationale of data use decisions.
Seven participants were higher-level, and eight had associate
to mid-level positions. We identiﬁed higher-level positions as
those whose role in the organization was strategic decision-
making (e.g., grant seeking, deciding on future directions for
organization). Higher-level employees did not work directly
with data but instead were in a position to ask someone else
to gather and/or analyze certain data. High-level positions
included director, executive director, and Vice President. Asso-
ciate to mid-level positions were staff that were more likely to
have direct contact with data on a fairly consistent basis. Such

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

positions included project managers, data analysts, program
ofﬁcers, senior organizers, and ﬁeld managers. Participants’
data analysis skills varied, with 12 identifying themselves as
amateur and ﬁve as experts (R2, R5, C1, C3, and C7).
Participants’ ages ranged from 25 to 45 years old with a me-
dian age of 34. Four participants were male (36%), and
eleven were female (64%). Eleven participants were Cau-
casian (73%), three Latino (20%), and one African-American
(7%). The highest level of education for six participants (40%)
was a Bachelors degree, and nine participants (60%) had a
Masters degree.

Data Collection
We conducted 15 semi-structured interviews, where we asked
about: interviewee background information and role in the
organization, data usage and practices, data portal usage, and
technologies used at work. We created two interview scripts to
ﬁt the interviewee’s proﬁle in regards to their position level and
degree of contact with data. The major differences between the
two interview scripts were the level of depth around particular
topics. Speciﬁcally, we asked high-level staff questions regard-
ing how data ﬁts into the long-term organizational objectives
while reserving questions about detailed data manipulation
practices to those who consistently have direct contact with
data. At the end of each interview, we administered a sur-
vey to understand work-related technology use and to gather
demographic information.

Data Analysis
We qualitatively analyzed the interviews by developing a code-
book with 41 codes initially. After achieving an inter-rater
reliability score of 95%, two of the authors applied the codes
line-by-line on the interview transcripts. We then iterated on
the codebook by consolidating overlapping codes, reducing the
number of codes to 31. Examples of codes are organizational
mission, data availability, data format, and analysis techniques.
We then grouped the codes into 4 categories: data question
types, portal use, challenges and NPO proﬁles. During our
ﬁnal iteration of analysis, we identiﬁed unique differences in
how organizations use data to develop narratives, differences
in the types of data questions, and salient challenges. We also
identiﬁed design opportunities based on data portal feedback
and data needs.

FINDINGS
Staff from NPOs reported that they use open data to narrate
stories to donors and stakeholders. Our ﬁndings suggest that
NPOs would beneﬁt from technologies that facilitate the op-
portunity for collaborative analysis of open data.

Storytelling with Data
NPOs primarily use data to narrate local conditions to seek
support for their goals. Data provides “ways for information
to come alive" (C1) and establishes evidence for future strate-
gic planning. NPOs use storytelling to make data consumable
for their target audience, which can include internal and ex-
ternal stakeholders, government ofﬁcials, funders, ﬁnancial
investors, residents, and community leaders. Using Boje’s

study of organizations using storytelling, we deﬁne to story-
telling as “how people [or organizations] perform stories to
make sense of events, introduce change, and gain political ad-
vantage" [7]. We recognize that there are numerous deﬁnitions
of stories and narratives but in this paper, we use the terms
interchangeably to refer to the creation of “part of the story
line, a bit of interpretation, and some facts that conﬁrm a line
of reasoning" [7]. There has been much work on organizations
using storytelling as a mechanism for organizational change
by gaining support from stakeholders, sharing facts and knowl-
edge, and co-creating narratives that inform future direction of
the organizations [10]. Our results suggest that NPOs use data
to narrate their reports, presentations, and data visualizations.
R2, a data analyst in a region-based organization, describes
how her NPO communicates their stories:
“In presentations [..] I’m not up there just pointing to numbers
but translating that into more of a story or an explanation of
methodology."
Storytelling may differ depending on the objective (i.e., grant
applications, internal benchmark evaluations, or for local gov-
ernment ofﬁcials), which affects the process in which NPOs
utilize data. This aligns with Eisenhardt who suggest that
while “[g]ood storytelling may make studies entertaining [..],
their theoretical impact comes from rigorous method and
multiple-case comparative logic" [13]. The remainder of this
section describes two types of stories that NPOs tell: het-
erogeneous and homogeneous data stories. We conclude by
describing how NPOs incorporate context to strengthen their
stories.

Heterogeneous Data Stories
Heterogeneous data stories amalgamate multiple data to tell
one composite story that depicts current conditions of a spe-
ciﬁc area. R6, a director at a region-based organization, de-
scribes an example:

“When we talk about telling our story, I think we also
use broader economic data, both population changes, not
only in the city and the suburbs, but within speciﬁc com-
munity areas, racial, ethnic change within a particular
area, income information, unemployment information."

Heterogeneous data stories often try to answer questions such
as, “How has our organization affected foreclosure rates in
our targeted neighborhood?" or “What policy changes will
affect development?" NPOs tell heterogeneous data stories by
compiling complex data. These are custom built data, derived
from multiple sources and datasets (such as housing, crime,
demographics, etc.) and can span across large geographies and
time frames. We found that in-house data analysts rarely com-
pile these complex data; instead, NPOs rely on relationships
with external data analysts (such as our FEDAs) to obtain and
interpret these datasets.
To tell heterogeneous data stories, NPOs often need to un-
dergo a complicated process to identify the data needs. NPOs
without a data analyst rely on relationships with FEDAs for
this process. In-house data analysts, such as R2, use their
own unique, complicated analysis process to identify key data
components:

1277

“This department was just trying to get an aerial snap-
shot of what’s happening there. “What" and “what"
kinds of issues are overlapping with each other? The
way I went about that wasn’t exactly to ﬁgure out [the]
research question, but to compartmentalize issues that I
thought went together."

Homogeneous Data Stories
Homogeneous data stories consist of one dataset that can tell
multiple stories. NPOs may manipulate one speciﬁc dataset
to tell various stories. Our analysis suggests two types of
homogenous data stories: parcel and trend based.
NPOs tell parcel-based homogeneous data stories using parcel
level data – that is, information about individual units or build-
ings. Often, these stories try to answer questions such as “Is
this unit vacant?" The purpose of these stories is to help iden-
tify the status of speciﬁc units or buildings to, ultimately, aid in
administering and identifying new program opportunities (e.g.
foreclosure prevention). Parcel-level questions could also be
applied to other topics; in health, for example, a parcel-level
question may translate into a question about whether a house-
hold has been exposed to a particular disease. In other words,
parcel-level questions are very low-level questions that may
be important for “on-the-ground" program implementation.
Parcel-based homogeneous data stories pertain to small geo-
graphic areas (sometimes as small as one square mile), over
short time periods – such as weeks. C7, from a community-
based organization, describes an example of using parcel level
data to tell a homogeneous data story:

“We track losses of Single Room Occupancies because
when we go to alderman, we want to say, ’Look, this is
happening really fast, and we need an ordinance to pre-
vent this bleeding from continuing in our neighborhoods.’
And that’s a really stark number that people respond to."

Packaged datasets (e.g., existing data cleaned and ready for
use) may not exist to tell this type of parcel-based story, leav-
ing NPOs to manually obtain this data through ﬁeldwork (e.g.,
physically visiting buildings and documenting the conditions),
calling landlords or tenants, or performing Internet searches.
These homogeneous data stories require very detailed data,
which most open datasets do not provide.
Trend-based homogeneous data stories use aggregated datasets
to help NPOs understand patterns and trends that communicate
changes in neighborhood market conditions over a designated
period of time – retrospectively and prospectively. These types
of homogeneous data stories may answer questions such as,
“In the past year, have foreclosures increased or decreased in
this neighborhood?" This data relates to larger geographical
areas (e.g., neighborhoods, municipalities) and over annual
time periods.
These stories help measure and narrate organizational progress,
create benchmarks, and/or programmatic goals and evalua-
tions. For example, C3’s organization tells a story about their
progress in reducing racially segregated housing by “look[ing]
at the change from this census to that census [to see if] the
integration of [this community] has improved."

1278

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Data Context to Strengthen Stories
NPOs use data to describe a speciﬁc context to forge a stronger
connection with their targeted audience. Adding context to
narratives can be achieved via geographical or statistical data.
NPOs typically decide between using aggregated (e.g., per-
centages) or raw data (e.g. data before it is processed into
percentages). C7 articulates the importance of these contexts:

“When you go meet with the legislator for policy, if you
show up with info about the city or state as a whole, and
they’re concerned about their district, it’s time wasted.
[But] if you can walk in there and say that ‘Out of the
10,000 housing units in your community, 20% are dis-
tressed – that’s why we’re trying to get these resources
from this particular source to do this,’ you make a real
connection for them in what’s happening right now in
their area."

To personalize their narratives, NPOs may pair qualitative data
with statistical facts. Personal stories create richer narratives
to increase the impact of the organization’s work. When dis-
cussing the use of residents’ stories in her presentations to
donors and policy makers, C1 states:

“I think we do our most powerful work where the human
voice is there and then the data backs up the experiential
story."

To summarize, NPOs use open data to communicate two types
of stories to achieve their goal. NPOs reported that they used
both quantitative and qualitative data to describe the context
to strengthen their connections with their targeted audience.

Data Portal Experience
To answer our second research question, we explored the use
of our data portal. Our data portal was designed to provide free
access to housing data in varying formats (e.g., aggregated
data, reports). As a complement to the portal, users also had
the ability to consult with FEDAs. In the following sections,
we discuss NPOs’ experiences using our data portal, focusing
on the three themes that emerged. Speciﬁcally we describe
how NPOs (1) access data and face challenges, (2) utilize
reports that we generated, and (3) build relationships with
FEDAs.

Data Access and Challenges
The aggregated datasets available on our data portal help NPOs
quickly gather facts, make decisions, and substantiate their sup-
positions about targeted areas. Participants transform the ag-
gregated data into more consumable formats (e.g., fact sheets
or high-level overviews) for higher-level colleagues, such as
organizational directors. Upon receiving the transformed data,
higher-level colleagues use the data for storytelling, targeting
speciﬁc audiences (e.g., policy maker, grant organizations).
While all the NPOs appreciated the type of data available
through our portal, not all were pleased with the format of
the data. We provide aggregated data in percentages, a design
decision we based on previous studies indicating that raw data
may not be as helpful to these organizations [9]. However,
we found that when NPOs need a deeper comparison, they
prefer to do quick calculations in spreadsheets (e.g., counts).

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Though our data portal allows users to download .csv ﬁles, ﬁve
(R2, R5, C1, C3, and C7) participants expressed frustrations
because of the difﬁculties of doing calculations on percentages
rather than absolute numbers.
In fact, we found that NPOs generally have challenges access-
ing the data in absolute numbers. Absolute numbers facilitate
the ability to freely manipulate the dataset, making the data
reusable for other purposes. The lack of absolute numbers
limits the ability to repurpose data for homogeneous data
stories. At times, NPOs may only acquire datasets in percent-
ages, which removes the context of the data, especially when
comparing across geographies. Staff such as C3 prefers both
formats, explaining:

“I always want both – but if I had to choose, I’d rather
have raw. [The data] doesn’t tell you that [one com-
munity] has 90,000 people and other communities have
30,000."

Our data portal provides aggregated data that is associated with
speciﬁc geographical units (e.g., neighborhoods, wards, coun-
ties, municipalities). NPOs require varying levels of geocoded
data to accurately compare matching data to produce neigh-
borhood trajectories, comparisons, and heterogeneous and
homogeneous data stories. Unavailable geocoded data affects
the story being told. NPOs compromise by using related,
available data and then modify their message accordingly. R5
recounts:

“If it’s not at the level we want it, we have to help inter-
pret it or come up with a way of talking about it that is
useful in our geography. [..] It’s almost like crafting your
message."

Accessing raw data can be challenging for NPOs. Packaged
geocoded raw data may be especially difﬁcult to obtain, which
may pertain to privacy issues – which is the case with health
and crime data. Also, there may be restrictions regarding
which formats the data can be accessed due to data subscription
agreements (a challenge we also face). Subscription-based
data sources refer to data that may have been initially open,
but after it is processed and cleaned, it is now licensed (free
or for a cost). The license many times limits the format of
delivered data. The subscription model of data access can be
an issue with data in numerous topics.
NPOs struggle with identifying reliable and useful open data
sources and often expend excess time and labor in doing so.
The lack of a centralized retrieval hub led our interviewees
to visit multiple sources, requiring arduous tracking of their
many options. Meanwhile, newer sources were obscure. R5
states:

“Another challenge would be keeping up-to-date with
what [sources are] out there and available. There are so
many different sources. I know there are different things
I could be using, but I don’t know about them. There
are always new resources that are coming out. You don’t
know where to go and what’s available."

Subscription-based obstacles plague both region and
community-based NPOs, though more commonly the latter

due to little ﬁnancial resources. Participants reported that
they sometimes “borrow" subscriptions from colleagues at
other organizations. NPOs may also bypass subscription-based
sources through intricate and time-consuming processes. R2
explains neutralizing this issue by securing the data through
collaborations with our FEDA:

“The process is to look at your data portal, looking at that
overview that was published a while ago, trying to get an
understanding of what they have and what their sources
are, and then deciding if its hard to get that data. They
calculated this data with the County Assessor’s, which
we don’t have that data and we’re not in the position to
purchase it. So then I reach out [to your ﬁeld expert data
analyst]."

Reports Generated by Field Expert Data Analyst
Our FEDAs generated reports containing data overviews. We
found that NPOs more frequently chose to use our reports over
the available aggregated data due to time, labor efﬁciency, ease
of use, and overall convenience.
Our reports satisfy multiple data needs. We discovered that
our reports could resolve issues regarding costly subscriptions
by providing data otherwise unavailable to them. Additionally,
NPOs rely on the advanced analyses and ﬁndings, which allow
them to select applicable pre-processed data points to insert
into their local narrative. NPOs stated that our reports inform
their current and future work by apprising them of current
housing issues.
In addition to resolving some data challenges, our reports help
with data consumption through examples, such as sample data
visualizations. For instance, R2, a data analyst at a region-
based organization, stated:

“We looked through a lot of data points that were pre-
sented in the report that you created. It was for the city,
but we wanted to recreate that. [..] We liked a lot of those
charts because you can take a lot away really quickly.
So we replicated those by getting the data from [your
FEDA] and then also putting in some of our own."

Contrarily, we found that the reports may be overwhelming;
in fact, four participants (R3, R5, R6, and C2) expressed difﬁ-
culty understanding the content. Participants that lacked tech-
nical data analyst skills considered the visualizations unsuited
for their needs and were unable to repurpose the visualizations
accordingly. In fact, participants at NPO 5 relied entirely on
our FEDAs to create custom reports and visualizations (e.g.,
charts and graphs). When asked how we can improve the
reports, R8 – a director at NPO 5 – did not have the technical
understanding to provide suggestions. This leads to interesting
questions about the role of in-house analysts, whose skill may
not result in-depth statistical calculations but whose familiar-
ity with data may allow them to easily translate analyses and
apply them to their NPO’s narrative.

Building Relationships with Field Expert Data Analysts
Though access to our aggregated data and generated reports
help NPOs meet their data needs, it also initiates communi-
cation with our FEDAs. Through this communication, NPOs

1279

begin to build meaningful relationships with FEDAs. FEDAs
collaborate with NPOs throughout the use of open data through
personalized services (which include personal consultations),
technical support, cultivating in-ﬁeld awareness, and custom
datasets to craft heterogeneous data stories.
Relationships with FEDAs bridge the gap between NPOs’ lim-
ited resources [15, 29, 31, 30, 32] and their technical data skills
[9] by providing a means of collaborative analysis. We deﬁne
collaborative analysis as the symbiotic relationship between
NPOs and FEDAs, where FEDAs typically provide technical
support (e.g., detailed analysis, context for data) while NPOs
provide insight given their local knowledge that allows for a
more sophisticated, informed interpretation of results that ex-
tends beyond simple quantitative analysis. During one-on-one
consultations, NPOs brief FEDAs on their goals. FEDAs then
use their expertise to devise a plan and/or solution. During
the analysis, FEDAs and NPOs deliberate on the interpreta-
tion of the data by answering questions such as “What do the
results mean for this community area?" Given their percep-
tive understanding of the local area that they service, NPOs’
interpretation of the quantitative analysis is vital.
NPOs with and without in-house data analysts beneﬁt from
these collaborations. FEDAs collaborate with NPOs without
in-house data analysts by providing data converted into di-
gestible visualizations, walkthrough analyses, and unknown
data sources. Our FEDA helped R3 achieve her goal by con-
necting her to different sources and providing helpful situa-
tional information around her issue:

“We wanted to encourage the communities to do more
than just look at a chart for all 42 towns and only look at
their town. We want to have them think about what’s a
collective issue. [..] It was honestly [your FEDA] giving
us a great chart with the data sources – ‘here’s the issue
and limitations you may experience, and here’s a link to
the direct data to the portal.’ She made it really easy for
us."

Additionally, results suggest that relationships with FEDAs
support the work of in-house data analysts by disseminating
vital in-ﬁeld expertise. R5, a data analyst, may not need
technical assistance, but still collaborates with our FEDA for
market speciﬁc issues:

“We’ve started to build relationships [..] and have point
people that we can call for advice and help for things
that are beyond understanding or scope. This happens a
lot. [..] [The FEDA] helped us with neighborhood data
and questions with that."

Participants in higher positions (e.g., directors, vice presidents)
also work with our FEDAs to build awareness for speciﬁc
in-ﬁeld concerns. High-level staff trusts FEDAs to deﬁne
and clarify issues that affect the NPO’s overall goals. Such
collaborations help deﬁne data issues to develop large-scale
goals and underlying issues. For example, R8 explains:

“[The FEDA] helped us sort [this issue] in however we
want to cut that. What should our goal be? [..] We don’t
really know what types of buildings need a retroﬁt. He

1280

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

helped us ﬁgure that out. Then he asked us questions –
’What do you think are the issues that would matter here?’
That has been really helpful."

Above all, NPO and FEDA collaborations maintain a symbi-
otic nature. Inquiries from NPOs in return help inform the
FEDAs’ research, which ultimately result in new data, analysis,
or reports. R8 says:

“We’re always the ones asking the questions. [..] Once
they have the issue, they take it in some direction."

We observed a collaborative relationship between NPOs and
FEDAs as opposed to a one-sided consultancy given that from
the NPOs, FEDAs can acquire access to a new, previously
unavailable dataset and establish a new data source for other
NPOs. For example, FEDAs may rely on NPOs for parcel
level datasets – that is, data concerning the status of individual
units or buildings. FEDAs do not manually collect data at this
level (e.g., visual ﬁeldwork) and depend on other NPOs to
create and then deliver parcel level datasets. In one interview,
C2, a community organizer from a community-based NPO,
described a unique, detailed parcel level dataset created by
her organization. Upon learning about this dataset during a
debrieﬁng of the interview, our FEDA stated:

“This dataset you’ve just described – it’s a completely
new dataset. I don’t think this exists in any other orga-
nization in the city [..] but I get calls for this all the
time."

Consequently, our study suggests that the beneﬁts of our data
portal extend beyond the use of aggregated data and generated
reports. We found that NPOs prefer data delivered through
our reports; more importantly, the relationships built with our
FEDAs increase data consumption and, thus, supports the
missions of NPOs.

DISCUSSION
Our ﬁndings suggest that the relationship between NPOs and
FEDAs are critical to the use, consumption, and interpretation
of open data despite other features of our portal. The notion
of user and expert knowledge sharing has been thoroughly
studied [3, 5, 28]. For example, Ackerman and colleagues’
work on Answer Garden, a system that allowed users and ex-
perts within an organization to share knowledge, illustrates
the beneﬁts of computer-mediated communication amongst
users with varying expertise. Our study extends this literature
by illustrating similar results in a different context – organiza-
tions that are not-for-proﬁt. NPOs may face unique challenges
(as compared to other organizations) such as limited budgets,
temporary unpaid staff (volunteers), and prosocial objectives,
which could inﬂuence how the organization uses data. Future
work may explore organizational factors (e.g., goals, budget,
strategy, culture) that may impact how various organizations
use open data and engage in collaborative analysis.
Other studies regarding organizational memory demonstrate
the importance of designing effective technologies that support
information sharing practices in organizations [5, 28]. Our
ﬁndings suggest that not only are experts beneﬁcial to users
[3, 2], but that the relationship between the two can be mutu-

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

ally beneﬁcial. Thus, technologies that support collaborative
analysis should support relationship building and knowledge
sharing symbiosis between users and experts. Future work
may explore characteristics of relationships (e.g., trust) be-
tween FEDAs and NPOs and how such factors may inﬂuence
decision-making around data usage. Furthermore, our study
was unique in that our experts were subject-matter experts as
well as data analysts. Prior literature suggests that these are
two distinct competencies that have speciﬁc outcomes [25].
Future work could examine the impact of various skill levels
amongst experts on how NPOs’ choose to adapt data analysis
and build relationships with experts.
Given the signiﬁcant relationship between FEDAs and NPOs
in our study, we propose four design implications that target
collaboration: (1) browsing datasets; (2) recommending con-
tent; (3) nurturing relationships with FEDAs and other NPOs;
and (4) developing custom data visualizations.

Browsing Datasets
We found that NPOs face difﬁculties gaining access to open
data and must scour through different sources to identify new
datasets. Our data portal also limits users to only our aggre-
gated datasets. To address this challenge, we suggest creating
a centralized database hub for other external datasets. To con-
nect sources to the users [9], NPOs could enrich the database
content by uploading and sharing useful datasets – a feature
gaining popularity among web-based platforms such IBM’s
cityforward.org. Users could discover datasets by browsing
the contents through different ﬁlter, search, and tagging mech-
anisms to promote collaborative analysis [33].

Recommending Content
Results from our study suggest that when seeking assistance,
NPOs rely on and trust recommendations from FEDAs to use
open data, ranging from speciﬁc datasets to visualizations.
The current design of our data portal does not include recom-
mendations. Instead, FEDAs provide recommendations upon
request, which may not be a sustainable model. To help FEDA
services become more scalable, future work could examine
the impact of developing a system that recommends content
(i.e., data, analysis techniques, appropriate visualizations) to
users based on their stated needs. These recommendations
could be based on previous suggestions made by FEDAs to
NPOs or users with similar proﬁles. We found that FEDAs pro-
vide unique solutions (such as creating customized complex
datasets) that reﬂect the NPO’s data questions and goals. A
proﬁle comprised of such elements would provide parameters
for developing an automated system. In addition to recom-
mended content, FEDAs would be able to make personalized
suggestions directly to speciﬁc NPOs as needed.

Nurturing Relationships with FEDAs and Other NPOs
Our study suggests that FEDAs perform a crucial role in con-
suming data. NPOs often emphasized that their organizations
are not research facilities. In fact, R1 proclaimed, “I’m not a
researcher, this might not be appropriate but sometimes I don’t
know where the data is or where to start." Eight out of ten
NPOs maintained a direct relationship with our FEDA to con-
sult on housing issues and data questions. Our ﬁndings suggest

1281

that communicating with FEDAs play a pivotal role in data
consumption. To build on this relationship, we suggest future
iterations of our portal to include an online discussion forum.
An online discussion forum would give NPOs the ability to
better collaborate with FEDAs, devise solutions, and more
easily be directed towards different sources [1]. Moreover, it
would allow NPOs and research centers to communicate and
share information, which would not only strengthen relation-
ships between NPOs and FEDAs, but also inter-organizational
communication between NPOs [2, 32]. Given that NPOs some-
times learn from example analyses (R2), online discussions
would allow NPOs to share past experiences, best practices,
data processes, and stories amongst each other.

Developing Custom Data Visualizations
Seven out of ten NPOs used data visualizations from our re-
ports to communicate their narratives and to advance their
goals. Our portal does not currently support the ability to
create custom visualizations. Future work could examine
the beneﬁts of collaborative visual data analysis tools, which
could provide a means for groups to explore data by manipu-
lating data visualizations. Such tools help users more easily
consume data by highlighting insights and important ﬁndings
[27], which could be particularly useful when creating homo-
geneous data stories. Furthermore, visual analysis may allow
NPOs and FEDAs to collectively analyze data and create solu-
tions [18].

CONCLUSION
This paper moves HCI designers and researchers beyond creat-
ing open data tools that are simply clearinghouses, databases,
or storage facilities where NPOs with limited resources are
forced to scour through massive amounts of data. Instead,
our ﬁndings suggest that technologies should be designed to
not only provide data in consumable ways, but also facilitate
communication and relationship building between FEDAs and
similar NPOs. Though our study focused solely on open data
practices of NPOs with housing missions, many of our insights
may be applicable to NPOs that focus on other topics and areas.
Future work may explore open data use among NPOs with
varying missions – such as sustainability, health, and crime
data. Such work could begin to unpack the similarities and
differences of NPOs’ open data consumption practices across
topics.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank our study participants and the John D.
and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation for their support of
the Institute for Housing Studies. We would also like to thank
the reviewers for their thoughtful comments.

REFERENCES
1. M. S. Ackerman and T. W. Malone. 1990. Answer

Garden: A Tool for Growing Organizational Memory. In
Proc. of COCS (COCS ’90). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
31–39. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/91474.91485
2. Mark S. Ackerman and David W. McDonald. 1996.

Answer Garden 2: Merging Organizational Memory with
Collaborative Help. In Proc. of CSCW (CSCW ’96).

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

14. Lisa Gitelman. 2013. Raw data is an oxymoron. MIT

Press.

15. Jeremy Goecks, Amy Voida, Stephen Voida, and

Elizabeth D. Mynatt. 2008. Charitable Technologies:
Opportunities for Collaborative Computing in Nonproﬁt
Fundraising. In Proc. of CSCW (CSCW ’08). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 689–698. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1460563.1460669

16. Michael B Gurstein. 2011. Open data: Empowering the

empowered or effective data use for everyone? First
Monday 16, 2 (2011).

17. Darrene Hackler and Gregory D. Saxton. 2007. The

Strategic Use of Information Technology by Nonproﬁt
Organizations: Increasing Capacity and Untapped
Potential. Public Administration Review 67, 3 (2007),
474–487. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6210.2007.00730.x

18. Jeffrey Heer and Maneesh Agrawala. 2007. Design

Considerations for Collaborative Visual Analytics. In
Proc. of VAST (VAST ’07). IEEE Computer Society,
Washington, DC, USA, 171–178. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/VAST.2007.4389011

19. Becky Hogge. 2010. Open data study. Technical Report.

Transparency and Accountability Initiative.
http://www.soros.org/initiatives/information/focus/
communication/articles_publications/publications/
open-data-study-20100519

20. Youyang Hou and Cliff Lampe. 2015. Social Media

Effectiveness for Public Engagement: Example of Small
Nonproﬁts. In Proc of CHI (CHI ’15). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 3107–3116. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702557

21. E. Lakomaa and J. Kallberg. 2013. Open Data as a

Foundation for Innovation: The Enabling Effect of Free
Public Sector Information for Entrepreneurs. Access,
IEEE 1 (August 2013), 558–563. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2013.2279164

22. Christopher A. Le Dantec and W. Keith Edwards. 2008.
Designs on Dignity: Perceptions of Technology Among
the Homeless. In Proc. of CHI (CHI ’08). 627–636.

23. Christopher A. Le Dantec and W. Keith Edwards. 2010.
Across Boundaries of Inﬂuence and Accountability: The
Multiple Scales of Public Sector Information Systems. In
Proc. of CHI (CHI ’10). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
113–122. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753345

24. Cecelia Merkel, Umer Farooq, Lu Xiao, Craig Ganoe,

Mary Beth Rosson, and John M. Carroll. 2007. Managing
Technology Use and Learning in Nonproﬁt Community
Organizations: Methodological Challenges and
Opportunities. In Proc. of CHIMIT (CHIMIT ’07). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, Article 8. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1234772.1234783

ACM, New York, NY, USA, 97–105. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/240080.240203

3. Mark S. Ackerman, Volker Wulf, and Volkmar Pipek.

2002. Sharing Expertise: Beyond Knowledge
Management. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA.

4. Charalampos Alexopoulos, Lefkothea Spiliotopoulou,

and Yannis Charalabidis. 2013. Open Data Movement in
Greece: A Case Study on Open Government Data
Sources. In Proc. of PCI (PCI ’13). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 279–286. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2491845.2491876

5. Liam J. Bannon and Kari Kuutti. 1996. Shifting

Perspectives on Organizational Memory: From Storage to
Active Remembering. In Proc. of HICSS (HICSS ’96).
IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, 156.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=795700.798548

6. Amy Blackwood, Katie Roeger, and Sarah Pettijohn.
2012. The nonproﬁt sector in brief: Public charities,
giving and volunteering, 2012. Technical Report. The
Urban Institute, Washington DC.

7. David M. Boje. 1991. The Storytelling Organization: A
Study of Story Performance in an Ofﬁce- Supply Firm.
Administrative Science Quarterly 36, 1 (1991), pp.
106–126. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2393432

8. Eleanor Burt and John A. Taylor. 2000. Information and

Communication Technologies: Reshaping Voluntary
Organizations. Nonproﬁt Management and Leadership
11, 2 (2000), 131–143. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/nml.11201

9. Tim Davies and Mark Frank. 2013. ’There’s No Such

Thing As Raw Data’: Exploring the Socio-technical Life
of a Government Dataset. In Proc. of WebSci (WebSci
’13). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 75–78. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2464464.2464472

10. Robert F. Dennehy. 2001. The Springboard: How

Storytelling Ignites Action in Knowledge-era
Organizations. Journal of Organizational Change
Management 14, 6 (2001), 609–614. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/jocm.2001.14.6.609.2

11. Lynn Dombrowski, Jed R. Brubaker, Sen H. Hirano,

Melissa Mazmanian, and Gillian R. Hayes. 2013. It Takes
a Network to Get Dinner: Designing Location-based
Systems to Address Local Food Needs. In Proc. of Ubi
Comp (UbiComp ’13). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
519–528. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2493432.2493493

12. Lynn Dombrowski, Amy Voida, Gillian R. Hayes, and

Melissa Mazmanian. 2012. The Labor Practices of
Service Mediation: A Study of the Work Practices of
Food Assistance Outreach. In Proc. of CHI (CHI ’12).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1977–1986. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2208342

13. Kathleen M. Eisenhardt. 1991. Better Stories and Better
Constructs: The Case for Rigor and Comparative Logic.
Academy of Management Review 16, 3 (1991), 620–627.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.5465/AMR.1991.4279496

1282

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

25. Florence Millerand and Geoffrey C Bowker. 2009.

Metadata Standards. In Standards and their stories: How
quantifying, classifying, and formalizing practices shape
everyday life. 149–165.

26. William P OHare. 1988. The rise of poverty in rural

America. (1988).

27. Benoît Otjacques, Mickaël Stefas, Maël Cornil, and

Fernand Feltz. 2012. Open Data Visualization Keeping
Traces of the Exploration Process. In Proc. of WOD
(WOD ’12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 53–60. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2422604.2422612

28. Dave Randall, Jon O’Brien, Mark Rounceﬁeld, and
John A. Hughes. 1996. Organizational Memory and
CSCW: Supporting the Mavis Phenomenon. In Proc. of
OZCHI (OZCHI ’96). IEEE Computer Society,
Washington, DC, USA, 26–.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=548200.883222
29. Jennifer Stoll, W. Keith Edwards, and Elizabeth D.
Mynatt. 2010. Interorganizational Coordination and
Awareness in a Nonproﬁt Ecosystem. In Proc. of CSCW

(CSCW ’10). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 51–60. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1718918.1718930

30. Amy Voida. 2011. Shapeshifters in the Voluntary Sector:
Exploring the Human-centered-computing Challenges of
Nonproﬁt Organizations. interactions 18, 6 (Nov. 2011),
27–31. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2029976.2029985

31. Amy Voida, Ellie Harmon, and Ban Al-Ani. 2011.
Homebrew Databases: Complexities of Everyday
Information Management in Nonproﬁt Organizations. In
Proc. of CHI (CHI ’11). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
915–924. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979078

32. Amy Voida, Ellie Harmon, and Ban Al-Ani. 2012.

Bridging Between Organizations and the Public:
Volunteer Coordinators’ Uneasy Relationship with Social
Computing. In Proc. of CHI. 1967–1976.

33. Wesley Willett, Jeffrey Heer, Joseph Hellerstein, and

Maneesh Agrawala. 2011. CommentSpace: Structured
Support for Collaborative Visual Analysis. In Proc. of
CHI (CHI ’11). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3131–3140.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979407

1283

