CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Citation and Attribution in Open Science: A Case Study

Yla R. Tausczik

iSchool

University of Maryland,

College Park

ylatau@umd.edu

ABSTRACT
Technology is changing the way in which scientists and math-
ematicians communicate. New platforms for scholarly com-
munication enhance informal communication and imbue it
with some of the functionalities of formal communication.
A citation analysis was conducted to examine how content
from one of these platforms, MathOverﬂow, has been cited
and referenced within the mathematics literature. Citation
patterns suggested that some authors were treating Math-
Overﬂow content as a legitimate source of scholarly knowl-
edge. Some problems with references and attribution oc-
curred, which can be addressed by changes in the design of
these technologies. Developing better systems for scholarly
communication can help advance open science.

Author Keywords
open science; bibliometrics; large-scale collaboration;
scientiﬁc publishing; scholarly communication

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.3. Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g. HCI):
Group and Organization Interfaces

INTRODUCTION
From as early as 1990, academics believed that the internet
and web technologies would change scholarly communica-
tion [17]. Scholarly communication, the means by which aca-
demics disseminate knowledge and discuss ideas, can be cat-
egorized into two classes: formal and informal communica-
tion. Formal communication is exempliﬁed by peer-reviewed
journal publications while informal communication includes
casual conversations and the exchange of early drafts and un-
published manuscripts.
Peer-reviewed journal publications1 have been the standard
accepted form of formal communication for the last 350 years

1For simplicity, by journal publications I am also including publi-
cations in journal-like venues, such as conference proceedings and
electronic journals

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the ﬁrst page.  Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the 
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW’16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).  Publication rights licensed to ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02 $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820070

1524

[27]. Journal publications serve four main functions: archiv-
ing, registration, dissemination, and certiﬁcation [31, 29].
Journals archive knowledge by preserving a permanent record
of articles. These articles can in principle, be retrieved at any
time. Journals also serve to register the order in which ideas
are announced, providing canonical date stamps in the form
of articles. Journals disseminate knowledge through publi-
cation to their subscribers. The peer review mechanism pro-
vides legitimacy by requiring the approval of a small number
of scholars, whose approval is typically accepted by the larger
community.
Through informal communication, scholars are able to share
new results quickly and get feedback on ideas. Participating
in informal communication is important for both dissemina-
tors and recipients. For recipients it is a way to access inter-
mediate results, access new results more quickly and discuss
implicit knowledge not included in formal communication.
Scholars in many disciplines report seeking out information
through informal communication to support their research ac-
tivities [7]. Historically, the importance of informal commu-
nication varies among disciplines, and is particularly impor-
tant in certain ﬁelds like economics and mathematics [7, 15].
In the quarter-century since 1990, the internet has indeed
changed scholarly communication [21], particularly in the
area of informal communication. Personal communication
that might have taken place in person can take place on list-
servs, blogs and through social media [15, 29]. Manuscripts
and preprints are being deposited and stored in repositories,
such as arXiv [21]. These forms of communication reach a
larger audience faster and with less effort than previous forms
of informal communication. As a result there has been an ex-
pansion in scholarly informal communication, with more and
richer information shared through a wider class of media [27].
The affordances of new communication technologies have led
to an overlap in the functionality of informal and formal com-
munication [29]. For example, pre-internet manuscripts were
exchanged directly between scholars without a permanent
record or collection. Now repositories, such as arXiv, col-
lect manuscripts in one place and store manuscripts versions
with unique ids. These repositories serve to archive, register,
and disseminate knowledge by storing articles in a way that
can be retrieved later, creating a primacy record for ideas, and
distributing articles through mailing lists and search accessi-
bility. Other communication technologies, including online
discussion forums, serve similar functionality [15].

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

The increasing functionality of informal communication and
impediments in the journal system, such as slow publication
rate, have led to an increase in legitimacy of informal com-
munication. In economics, citations of preprints have risen to
14% as of 2007 [1]. Web sources, including preprint repos-
itories and online discussion forums, have become a larger
part of works cited in many disciplines [9]. Change in schol-
arly communication is slow and incremental; while informal
communication has not usurped formal communication, it is
gaining recognition.
Web technologies are also enabling radically new forms of in-
formal communication. Academics are using web technolo-
gies to create tools for metascience to address widespread
methodological problems through collective action [30]. Psy-
chﬁledrawer.org is a place to document and aggregate failed
replication attempts which often fail to appear in the lit-
erature. Open Science Framework is a platform to docu-
ment studies and to hold researchers accountable for scientiﬁc
practices [32]. Academics are also using web technologies
to engage in larger-scale collaborations. Polymath project
1 created collaboration on mathematics proof at a scale not
seen to date [12]. On MathOverﬂow, a question and answer
platform, mathematicians engage in ad hoc collaboration on
micro-research questions every day [33].
These projects are a part of a larger movement toward open
science. There is a widespread belief, with some empiri-
cal support, that openness in science will accelerate scien-
tiﬁc progress [6]. Through disclosure of intermediate re-
sults, open science allows for the cumulative generation of
knowledge through smaller, more rapid contributions. Use
of web technologies in efforts like polymath and MathOver-
ﬂow create functionality beyond what is typical for informal
scholarly communication. These forms of communication are
more generative, with new knowledge built through interac-
tion [33]. Often, individual contributions are small and col-
laborations are large, allowing for division of labor in which
individuals can take on specialized roles.
Addressing two broad questions would help to evaluate the
impact of these new technologies on scholarly communica-
tion.
1. To what extent are new forms of communication being
used in practice to replace important aspects of the jour-
nal system?

2. To what extent are new forms of communication being

used to extend the functionality of the journal systems?

As scientists, theoreticians, and technologists grapple with
the design of new technologies for scholarly communica-
tion, one important goal is to support greater openness and
sharing in science. One avenue for such development lever-
ages changes in information and communication technology
(ICT) which enhance informal communication, imbuing it
with some of the functions of formal communication. In this
way, sharing of partial, unpublished ideas becomes easier and
gains some of the beneﬁts of sharing published ideas. In this
paper I examine a community of mathematicians which has

coopted a Q&A platform to study research-level mathemat-
ics questions, and we quantify the way that this community
interacts with and extends more traditional forms of formal
communication. This work contributes to an understanding of
whether and how scholars make use of new informal commu-
nication technologies, and our results can inform the design
of future platforms which support open science.

RELATED WORK
Communication and collaboration among scientists, and the
technology which supports it, has been a major focus of
CSCW research. Changes in science are driven by many fac-
tors, such as funding and an emphasis on interdisciplinary
research, and these have led to systematic shifts in the nature
of collaboration. For example, the importance of teams in
science has increased over time [38], and this has been ac-
companied by other shifts such as collaborations which span
larger geographic distances, more institutions, and a greater
variety of disciplines [16, 11].
The availability of new forms of technology has also led to
changes in scientiﬁc collaboration. Collaboratories leverage
internet technologies to create virtual labs in which large
groups of researchers share data and computing resources
[14]. Citizen science projects use technology to engage the
general public in science. Ubiquitous computing and mobile
technology support virtual organizations which allow citizens
to collect of data over wider geographic areas and longer time
periods [37]. Crowdsourcing techniques allow both the gen-
eral public and experts to pool resources in the interest of
solving scientiﬁc problems. Several of these projects have led
to scientiﬁc progress, including FoldIt [10] and Galaxy Zoo
[8]. Notably, mathematics is one area in which large-scale
collaboration through online technologies has led to major
discoveries and may be especially fruitful [12].
Despite the increased emphasis on and potential for interac-
tion, researchers have found that deep collaboration is hard
to cultivate and support. Integrative collaboration is rare even
among groups which are funded as a unit [2]. Moreover, col-
laboration is often impeded by social, cultural, geographic
and institutional barriers (e.g. [25, 13]). Some authors have
emphasized the importance of human aspects of organization
within cyberinfrastructure [23]. The effective design of col-
laborative technology requires an understanding of the socio-
technical aspects of its use.
One particular research focus in this area has been the design
of technology to encourage sharing and reuse within science.
Most often this research has focused on sharing of data, but
it may also include sharing of other scientiﬁc knowledge and
resources, such as specimens, software, materials, protocols
and unpublished ideas [36]. Velden [35] identiﬁes an inher-
ent tension between sharing and secrecy in which the former
allows for greater cooperation while the latter ensures credit
for individual ideas.
The trade-offs between these two motivations varies by ﬁeld,
and incentives play a major role in determining sharing be-
havior. A misaligned incentive structure can hamper effec-
tive collaboration, as was found in studies of scientiﬁc soft-

1525

ware production [19]. Birnholtz and Bietz [5] suggest that
careful engineering of systems to support data sharing may
bypass some of the risks associated with sharing, for exam-
ple by having scientists share data abstractions rather than
datasets themselves.
In mathematics, sharing is somewhat
less problematic because, compared to other ﬁelds, mathe-
matics research does not depend as heavily on supplemental
resources such as data, software, or protocols. In addition,
there is less of a ﬁnancial motive for secrecy, as mathemati-
cal ideas cannot be patented. Therefore, in mathematics there
is a greater emphasis on sharing knowledge and unpublished
ﬁndings [12, 33].

CURRENT STUDY
MathOverﬂow (MO) is a question and answer website used
for the discussion and generation of mathematical knowledge
by academic mathematicians [34, 33]. MO is a member of
the Stack Exchange community, which contains many other
popular Q&A sites, including Stack Overﬂow.

Affordances of formal communication
Communication on MO shares many of the functions of for-
mal communication in journals, including archiving, regis-
tration, dissemination, and certiﬁcation. Question and an-
swer pages are stored in a database, displayed on the website
mathoverﬂow.net, and archived on the Internet Archive by the
Stack Exchange company. Content can easily be retrieved by
anyone using the unique ID given to a Q&A page or unique
ID given to an individual contribution on a Q&A page, such
as an answer or a comment. Every contribution is dated; this
creates a record of the date and time when an individual ﬁrst
submitted an idea. Content is made available online, is re-
turned by search engines, and is emailed to subscribers of
topic areas. Content is lightly moderated and peer-reviewed
by readers through comments and votes.
As informal communication gains many of the functions of
formal communication it begins to take on some of the its
roles as well. This is evident in the increasing prominence
of preprints. Because preprint repositories have mimicked
many of the functions of journals (i.e. archiving, registra-
tion, dissemination) preprints can be treated as journal arti-
cles. Some preprints have achieved a large impact without
ever being published [22] and preprints in general are becom-
ing a larger fraction of published citations in some disciplines
[1]. However, academia is slow to adapt and change takes
widespread community acceptance. A record of when an idea
is ﬁrst “published” is meaningless unless a community agrees
on what counts as being published [21]. Any form of peer re-
view is valid only to the extent that a community accepts it as
a valid certiﬁcation.
Of course, community acceptance of MO as legitimate schol-
arly discourse is not an all or nothing consideration. There
will inevitably be some early adopters. If these early adopters
are experienced mathematicians, more central to the profes-
sional community, this may help MO to gain legitimacy. Sim-
ilarly, if early adopters cite MO in high-impact, mainstream
journals, this will add to its credibility. On the other hand, if

1526

SESSION: OPEN SCIENCE AND INFRASTRUCTURES

MO citations are associated with inexperienced mathemati-
cians and/or lower-tier journals the path toward legitimacy
may be longer and perhaps unsuccessful.
My ﬁrst set of questions concerns the degree to which MO
content is being treated as formal communication in prac-
tice. Each question addresses the practical adoption of the
functions of journals. Legitimacy results from dissemination
of content and acceptance of certiﬁcation. Retrieval results
from adoption of the archival system. Attribution results from
recognition of MO as registering ideas to speciﬁc people.

Research Question Set 1: Is MathOverﬂow content be-
ing treated as formal communication?

a) Are authors citing MO contributions in the literature

(Legitimacy)?

b) Are authors providing complete references for cita-

tions to MO (Retrieval)?

c) Do references credit individual MO authors for their

contributions (Attribution)?

Affordances of informal communication
MathOverﬂow has affordances that create functionality not
present in the journal system. On MO, individuals can solicit
the content they want by posting questions. This functionality
is more similar to traditional forms of informal communica-
tion, such as asking an expert in a ﬁeld. The main difference
is that, on MO, content can be solicited from many more peo-
ple at once, with little social capital and little effort. These
discussions can be more interactive and involve a larger num-
ber of people.
Individuals may make very small contribu-
tions to these discussions, such as a single answer or a com-
ment. These small individual contributions by many authors
can build on each other to generate a larger contribution [33].
It is unclear whether journal authors are using MO content as
a complement to their principal arguments or in a more cen-
tral role. For example, authors may use MO content in the in-
troduction, related work, and discussion sections to frame and
discuss the problem at hand by providing motivation for the
problem, background information, related problems, and/or
examples. Alternatively, authors may use content as part of
the main arguments of the journal article and/or to support
speciﬁc claims made in these main arguments. The former
use suggests MO content is strengthening the journal article,
but not in an essential way, whereas the latter would suggest
that MO content is essential to the main results and that MO
could become an critical tool in the generation of publishable
results.
My second set of questions concern the way in which MO
content is being cited. If MO is being used to generate knowl-
edge to be used in formal communication then this will be re-
ﬂected in citations. If journal article authors recognize these
small contributions as stand alone contributions then they will
appear as individual citations in their papers.

Research Question Set 2: Do citations reﬂect the unique
affordances of MathOverﬂow?

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

a) Are authors of the journal articles prompting the gen-

eration of the content being cited (Generativity)?

b) Are small contributions on MO being cited (Level of

Granularity)?

Interaction between formal and informal communication
Career advancement in academia relies on receiving credit for
one’s work. One challenge to open science is incentivizing
participation when there are no individual rewards for shar-
ing intermediate results [24]. One way to address this is to
give credit for work in aggregate. Large collaborations, like
those on MathOverﬂow, could be credited as a unit (e.g. dis-
cussion by X, Y, Z). This is how authorship was handled for
the ﬁrst polymath project [26]. The work of all 39 contribu-
tors was credited under a single pseudonym DHJ Polymath.
However, when equal credit is given to a large number of au-
thors, it can be difﬁcult for individuals to receive the recog-
nition they want and difﬁcult for outsiders to judge who did
most of the work [4]. Alternatively, credit can be given to
each small contribution. This has the advantage that it is clear
who contributed what. To date there is no evidence that MO
contributions are being used as part of hiring, tenure or pro-
motion decisions. If one day these contributions do reﬂect on
measures of scholarly productivity, such as impact factor, the
distribution of credit in these collaborative endeavors will be
an important consideration.
The third and ﬁnal set of questions concerns the interaction
between the traditional functions of formal communication
and the new forms of communication occurring on MO. If
authors are going to receive credit for small contributions
on MathOverﬂow, then references must be at the appropri-
ate level of granularity (i.e. a citation for an answer should
provide archival information for an answer) and references
ought to speciﬁcally name individuals who have made these
small contributions.

Research Question Set 3: How is credit for MathOver-
ﬂow content being assigned?

a) Are authors providing complete references for cita-
tions to MO at the appropriate level of granularity
(Retrieval X Level of Granularity)?

b) Do references credit individual MO authors for their
contributions even when those contributions are small
(Attribution X Level of Granularity)?

These three sets of questions were addressed by collecting
and analyzing all MO citations in published journal articles
up to January 2015.

METHOD
Data Collection - Peer-reviewed articles
Google Scholar (scholar.google.com) was used to gather a
collection of published articles that cited MathOverﬂow. A
search for “MathOverﬂow” returned 1,670 results. Google
displayed the ﬁrst 1,000 entries ranked as the most relevant.
Each entry was manually reviewed; the majority were not
published articles (e.g. blog posts, MO pages). Only entries

which were journal articles, articles in conference proceed-
ings, preprints of journal articles, masters theses or disserta-
tion theses were retained.
For each article the following inclusion criteria were applied
to obtain a ﬁnal set of published articles. An article had to be
published in a peer-reviewed journal or conference proceed-
ings (computer science only). Preprints which clearly stated
that they had been accepted and were to appear in a speciﬁc
peer-reviewed journal were also included. Articles had to be
published in a journal related to mathematics or a related dis-
cipline (e.g. theoretical computer science). These rules meant
that the following types of publications were excluded: con-
ference presentations without a proceedings; books or book
chapters; lecture notes or seminar notes; preprints which did
not indicate that they had been accepted; and papers about
MO.
All articles which met the inclusion and exclusion crite-
ria were downloaded from the journals’ websites or another
source (e.g. arXiv). Two articles could not be downloaded
due to licensing restrictions and are not included in this study.
Finally, only articles in which the citation was included in the
body of the journal article were included; this excluded arti-
cles in which MO was cited in the acknowledgements section
only.
In addition to the collection of published papers, the study
also includes theses, dissertations, and accepted preprints.
Theses and dissertations citing MO were retained from the
original collection of articles before the inclusion criteria had
been applied. A count of the number of preprints was de-
termined by searching arXiv.org, where authors upload their
articles as PDFs. Because arXiv does not support full-text
search of the articles on its site, Google’s search engine was
used to search the site “arXiv.org/pdf” for the term “Math-
Overﬂow”. This allowed a complete search of preprints
hosted by arXiv that cited MO.

Data Collection - Citations and References
Citations and references were identiﬁed within the collection
of published articles. The term reference will be used to in-
dicate the text of the reference section, which provides infor-
mation about the source of the content being cited, e.g.:

“[8] MathOverﬂow, http://mathoverﬂow.net/questions/54851.”

The term citation will be used to refer to text in the body of
the article which concerns the given reference, e.g.:

“It was discovered by F. Brunault [8].”

MO mentions were segmented into a collection of distinct
citation-reference pairs using a few basic rules. A reference
was linked to every place in the text where it was cited. A cita-
tion was considered on its own if no reference was provided.
Any citations to the same content which shared a reference
and appeared in the same article were treated as a single ci-
tation (e.g. two different mentions of reference “[8]” in the
same article). A single citation which mentioned two parts
of a Q&A discussion (e.g. two answers) and which only pro-
vided one reference for the citation were treated as a single
citation. Citation-reference pairs were matched to particular

1527

Q&A page using the information provided in the published
article, if it could be determined.

Variables and Measures
Information about the citations and references was gathered
directly from the journal articles and MO. Citation-reference
pairs were coded according to the following eight variables:
Self- vs. Other- Citations: In order to determine whether a
citation was a self-citation, the names of the journal authors
were compared to the names of the authors of the content
being cited. If any journal author was an author of the origi-
nal content it was considered a self-citation. The majority of
users on MO use their real names [34]. When the name of the
original author(s) could not be determined (e.g., a pseudonym
was used) the citation was not coded.
Author experience: For each author, their number of math-
ematics papers was gathered from MathSciNet, the main
database for mathematics literature. These authors were com-
pared to a random sample of contributors to MO. The random
sample of authors came from the 150 Q&A posts collected in
[33]. I chose this comparison sample because, while it was
randomly selected, it had already been screened to eliminate
off-topic Q&A posts and was from a similar time period.
Journal Reputation: A measure similar to Impact Factor
was collected from MathSciNet for each journal. MathSciNet
reports the mathematical citation quotient (MCQ), which is
the number of citations of articles in the journal divided by
the number of items published in that journal calculated on
data from the last 5 years. The reputation of these journals
was compared to the average MCQ across all of MathSciNet
and to the MCQ scores for a sample of other journal articles
published by the same authors (speciﬁcally, the most recent
paper by that author which did not cite MO).
Complete Reference: A reference was considered complete
if it included information that uniquely identiﬁed the Q&A
page being cited, such as the title of the page, the url of the
page, or the question’s unique ID. The data was also coded as
to the inclusion of a date (month and year).
Individual Attribution: Journal authors were considered to
have provided attribution if at least one name was provided in
the reference entry.
Author Asked the Question: Whether or not one of the jour-
nal authors asked the MO question that resulted in the cited
content.
Level of Granularity: Content can be cited at various lev-
els of granularity. Four levels of granularity were coded,
presented in order of increasing granularity: Q&A discus-
sion, multiple individual contributions, individual contribu-
tion (question, answer, or comment), and edit to an individual
contribution. The text surrounding a citation provided infor-
mation about the level of granularity being cited. For exam-
ple, the citation “Micciancio [15] showed that ...” was coded
as a citation to an individual contribution whereas “...see the
discussion in [10] and [11]” was coded as a citation of a
coarser Q&A discussion.

1528

SESSION: OPEN SCIENCE AND INFRASTRUCTURES

Figure 1. Number of journal articles citing MO per year.

Location of Citation: Citations were classiﬁed based on
whether they were cited in the main body of the journal arti-
cle or only appeared in the introduction, related work, discus-
sion section or appendix. Classiﬁcation was based on stan-
dard headers used by authors (e.g. introduction, preliminar-
ies, general discussion, concluding remarks). If no standard
headers were used then classiﬁcation was based on location
relative to the ﬁrst and last proofs given for theorems, corol-
laries or propositions.
Speciﬁc Reference: A reference may or may not provided
sufﬁcient information to identify the speciﬁc content men-
tioned in a citation. For example, a reference-citation pair
would be considered speciﬁc if its reference indicated in some
way the answer being cited, such as by providing the answer’s
unique ID.
Speciﬁc Attribution: A reference was considered to provide
a speciﬁc attribution if it named all the original author(s) of
the content being cited (e.g. when citing an answer, giving
the name of the answer’s author in the reference).
Shared Attribution:
Journal authors were considered to
have provided shared attribution if they named two or more
people in the reference entry (e.g. named both the question-
asker and a respondent).

RESULTS
Research Question Set 1: Is MathOverﬂow content being
treated as formal communication?
93 published articles in mathematics and related ﬁelds cited
MO contributions. A larger body of unpublished work has
also cited or acknowledged MO, including 1 Master’s thesis,
21 Ph.D. dissertations, and 778 preprints 2. Some fraction of
these articles may eventually end up in the published litera-
ture. Figure 1 shows the number of published articles with
citations over time. There was early growth in the number of
citations per year, which tracks the growing popularity of MO
during these early years. The number of citations to MO may
be stabilizing or slightly declining to around 30 per year.
2Counts of theses and preprints may partially overlap with the num-
ber of published articles (e.g. a portion of a dissertation has already
been published).

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Level of Granularity
Q&A Discussion
Multiple Contributions
Individual Contributions

Edits to Contributions

Question
Answer
Comment

% of Citations
9%
10%
81%

27%
73%
0%

0%

Figure 2. Number of papers with 95% conﬁdence intervals for journal
authors citing MO and published contributors to MO.

There were a total of 109 citations within published articles.
There were 18 self-citations; these citations represent authors
formalizing contributions ﬁrst made in informal communica-
tion channels by publishing them as part of a journal article.
The remaining 90 citations3 are examples of informal com-
munication being treated as stand-alone artifacts. These cita-
tions suggest that MO is being treated as a legitimate source
of information.
On average, MO content was typically cited by experienced
authors in central journals. The journal authors had more pa-
pers on average than a typical contributor to MO, even after
limiting consideration to published authors (Negative bino-
mial regression, Coef. = 0.70, z = 5.46, df = 380, p < 0.001)4.
The journal authors had, on average, 25 more papers than a
typical MO contributor (Journal authors: M = 51, Med. =
17, SD = 108; Contributions to MO: M = 25, Med. = 16, SD
= 30). The impact factor of journals citing MO was higher
than that of the average paper on MathSciNet (one tailed t-
test:
t(65) = 4.4, p < 0.001): 0.62 for MO citations com-
pared to 0.38 on average (SD = 0.44). The journals in which
authors published MO citations were equivalent to those in
which their other publications appeared; there was no statisti-
cal difference in impact factor between the two (paired t-test:
t(105) = -0.37, p = 0.71; Other Journal M = 0.63 Journal Cit-
ing MO = 0.65).
In addition, the nature of these citations suggest that individ-
uals are using MO for other functions of formal communica-
tion. Authors included a reference entry in the reference sec-
tion for the majority of MO citations, 79% (χ2(1) = 43.9, p <
0.001). Every reference included either the title of the Q&A
page, a unique URL to the Q&A page, or the unique ID for the
Q&A page. This information allows the MO content to be re-
trieved by future readers. Journal authors named at least one
of the original authors of the MO content in the reference en-
try for the majority of citations, 67% (χ2(1) = 20, p < 0.001).
This provides original authors with attribution for their work.

Table 1. Percentage of citations broken down by level of granularity and
type of individual contribution.

The fact that MO content was treated more like a journal ar-
ticle and less like a web resource led to one unexpected con-
sequence: the majority of references did not include the date
when the content was retrieved (χ2(1) = 4.4, p = 0.04). Only,
39% of references included the retrieval date (or the date of
the content creation). For archival purposes, dates are espe-
cially important in this context because questions and answers
on MO are often edited and many of these edits are substan-
tial [33].

Research Question Set 2: Do MathOverﬂow citations re-
ﬂect the unique affordances of MathOverﬂow?
MO provides a platform in which the authors can quickly
and easily seek answers from a large audience. The im-
portance of this capability is demonstrated by the fact that
58% of citations involved a question asked by one of the ar-
ticle’s authors.
In the remaining 42% of the instances the
authors of the journal article were not involved in generating
the cited content5. Presumably these authors discovered the
content through browsing or searching. There was no statisti-
cal difference in the frequency of these two different practices
(χ2(1) = 2.2, p = 0.13).
The majority of citations were at the level of individual con-
tributions, such as a question or an answer (see Table 1;
χ2(1) = 44.8, p < 0.001). No citations cited content at the
level of a single edit to a question or answer. Some citations
were at higher levels of granularity and acknowledged mul-
tiple contributions as a unit. Among citations to individual
contributions, citing answers was more common than citing
questions, and no comments were cited on their own.
Slightly more than half of the citations, 56%, were included
as part of the main body of the journal article; the remaining
44% were cited in the introduction, related work, discussion
or appendices only. Inexperienced journal authors were more
likely to use MO content in the main body of the article. Au-
thors who had prompted the results by asking the question
were also more likely to the cite content in the main body of
the article. Logistic regression showed that both these vari-
ables, journal authors’ number of papers (odds = 0.73, z =
-2.1, p = 0.04) and whether an author had asked the original
question on MO (odds = 4.2, z = 2.5, p = 0.01), were signif-
icantly related to use of MO content in the main body (χ2(2)
= 11.5, p = 0.003). Only some authors may be using MO to

3One citation could not be classiﬁed due to missing information.
4Published authors meant any MO contributor with at least one pa-
per on MathSciNet.

5Measured to the best of my knowledge. Using real names is
strongly encouraged, but authors may have used a pseudonym when
posting

1529

SESSION: OPEN SCIENCE AND INFRASTRUCTURES

Level of Granularity

Q&A Discussion
Multiple Contributions
Individual Contributions

Reference
Speciﬁc
100%
29%
74%

Present
0%
71%
84%

Attribution
Speciﬁc
0%
43%
82%

Shared
0%
43%
5%

Table 2. Citations providing a speciﬁc reference or a form of named attribution broken down by level of granularity, conditional on the presence of a
reference.

support essential elements of publishable results and in only
some circumstances. In other cases, this communication may
be helpful, but not necessary.

Research Question Set 3: How is credit for MathOverﬂow
content being assigned?
For typical citations, that is citations to journal articles, there
is only one unit of granularity, a single article. Credit and
attribution are determined by the original authors and citing
authors follow their lead. Citations of MO content, on the
other hand, cite content at various levels of granularity from
individual contributions to entire Q&A discussions. Multiple
levels of granularity for citations make credit and attribution
more complex. References were examined by the level of
granularity.
Citations were equally likely to be included with a reference
regardless of level of granularity (χ2(2) = 1.0, p = 0.60;
Q&A Discussions: 75% had a reference; Multiple Contribu-
tions: 88%; Individual Contributions: 89% ). However, there
were signiﬁcant differences in whether a reference contained
enough information to uniquely identify the speciﬁc contri-
bution being cited (see Table 2; χ2(2) = 9.0, p = 0.01). Ref-
erences to Q&A discussions were the most likely to include
identifying information. References to multiple contributions
were the least likely to identify speciﬁc contributions in the
reference entry, followed by individual contributions. These
differences are best explained by differences in the accessi-
bility of identifying information for components of a Q&A
page. In order to cite speciﬁc parts of a Q&A page, such as
an answer, a reader must sift through the source page html or
ﬁnd the cite button for a speciﬁc contribution. The cite but-
ton is hidden and not easy to ﬁnd. In addition some types of
content, such as comments, do not have a cite button.
There were signiﬁcant differences in whether and how jour-
nal authors gave credit to original authors based on the type
of citation. Journal authors credited MO authors more of-
ten when the content being cited was more granular (χ2(2) =
9.0, p = 0.01). Journal authors who referenced individual or
multiple contributions usually gave credit to at least one orig-
inal author, whereas no journal authors gave credit to original
authors when citing an entire Q&A discussions (see Table 2).
When credit was given to original authors it was typically
given to the author most directly responsible for the content
being cited. For example, 100% authors of questions were
referenced by name and 98% of authors of answers were ref-
erenced by name when the content being cited was a question
or an answer respectively and credit was given to someone.
This was not true to the same extent for citations of multi-
ple contributions together, only 60% of these references men-
tioned all the direct authors of the content being cited.

Journal authors did not make much use of shared attribution
(i.e. including multiple people’s names in a reference). There
were signiﬁcant differences based on the granularity of the
citations (χ2(2) = 12.1, p = 0.002). The most frequent use of
shared attribution was when citing multiple contributions to-
gether (see Table 2). Rarely were shared attributions given
when citing individual contributions. Unexpectedly, when
citing an entire Q&A discussion shared attribution was not
used. No attributions were given for these citations.

GENERAL DISCUSSION
One strategy to support greater openness in science and math-
ematics is to blend informal and formal scholarly commu-
nication, mitigating the risks associated with revealing pre-
publication ideas (e.g.
theft of ideas) and instead inherit-
ing the beneﬁts associated with publication (e.g.
recogni-
tion and credit). This blurring of the boundaries between
formal and informal communication has led to optimism re-
garding the potential for web technologies to supplant tradi-
tional forms of scholarly communication [29], in particular
improving the ease, speed, and reach of informal communi-
cation [21]. MathOverﬂow is one example of an emerging
Q&A platform that has been coopted for scholarly commu-
nication in mathematics and exhibits these design features.
At present, contributions to MO unquestionably fall into the
category of informal communication. Indeed, several math-
ematicians think of these contributions as analogous to per-
sonal communication [20]. While these conversations might
once have happened face-to-face, now they occur online, us-
ing the new functionality provided by modern technology.
Nonetheless, these informal communications are now sup-
plemented by the four affordances of formal communication:
archiving, registration, dissemination and certiﬁcation.
In this paper we ﬁnd empirically that, given technology for
informal communication which supports formal affordances,
some individuals will cite informal communication in ways
similar to published articles. We found evidence that infor-
mal communication from MO was cited in published articles,
by experienced mathematicians, in standard, well-regarded
mathematics journals. In addition, these contributions were
cited in ways which allow for retrieval and attribution, al-
though these did not always reﬂect the increased granularity
available in the new technology. This is consistent with prior
theoretical work, which has suggested that imbuing informal
communication with the four aspects of formal communica-
tion would be sufﬁcient to mimic publication in journals (e.g.
[29]). These results add to a growing body of empirical work
showing that contributions via informal communication chan-
nels are being cited at substantial rates within published jour-
nal articles [1, 9] and suggest that informal communication is

1530

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

becoming a more legitimate source of scholarly knowledge.
The legitimization of new forms of informal communication
provide scholars with better tools to seek out the unpublished
knowledge they need to pursue their own research. We also
found that journal authors often use MO to elicit knowledge
from a large audience and that the knowledge generated and
cited was typically small in scope (e.g. a single answer).
Compared to other types of informal communication sup-
ported by web technology, such as email listservs, blogs,
preprint servers, and social media, Stack Exchange Q&A
platform may be particularly well-designed to support the
requisite aspects of both formal and informal communication.
The Stack Exchange voting system provides a form of peer
review (certiﬁcation) which most other forms of informal
communication lack; it also serves to promote the most valu-
able ideas to a wider audience (dissemination). Like arXiv
and unlike, email listervs and blogs, the fact that so much con-
tent is on a single platform makes archiving and registration
easier. All content is stored using consistent, unique identi-
ﬁers and is currently being archived using a public repository.
In contrast, links to emails and blogs in published articles are
often subject to link rot and may be unavailable only a few
years after a journal article is published.
Unlike other forms of informal communication which have
been integrated into scholarly citations such as blogs and
preprints [9], affordances of Q&A technology also allow
greater use of the unique affordances of informal commu-
nication. On MO it is easy for journal authors to ask for
the information they need to bolster their own work, by ask-
ing a question directed to their interests. It is less straight-
forward to elicit content from blogs or preprint servers, al-
though this is possible on email listervs and social media.
Different forms of informal communication also cater to dif-
ferent quantities of knowledge transmission: social media en-
courages small, off-the-cuff exchanges whereas preprints are
limited to article-size contributions. Others, such as blogs and
MO allow for contributions of varying sizes.
For these reasons, the Q&A platform may be particularly ad-
vantageous as an informal communication platform; it allows
authors to elicit content and exhibits ﬂexibility in the char-
acter of their responses. In addition to advantageous design
features, historical uses and community attitudes may also
dictate whether valuable prepublication content is shared on
a particular platform. While social media could be used to
share prepublication ideas, and indeed shares many similar-
ities with Q&A platform conversations, in-depth discussion
are less common than simply providing links to published
work [28, 18].
The results of this paper suggest that technology design which
supports informal communication with the functions of for-
mal communication can foster greater openness and sharing
in science and mathematics, goals which present an ongoing
problem faced by researchers in the CSCW community (e.g.
[5, 35]). Successful sharing depends on incentivizing sharing
and openness [24]. Here we make the argument that by blend-
ing informal communication with the affordances of formal
communication we can lower the risks of sharing and increase

its beneﬁts to individual researchers. Crucially, this requires
that individuals receive credit for the ideas they share.
Another major ﬁnding from this study is that problems with
references and attribution arise from the integration of formal
and informal ways of communicating. Although the majority
of MO citations were provided with references that linked to a
unique Q&A page, fewer citations of individual and multiple
small contributions provided enough information to identify
speciﬁc contributions within the Q&A page. Without such
pointers, speciﬁc content (and its authors) are not easily re-
trievable. Without a clear indication in the reference section
of the speciﬁc content being cited there is no link between ref-
erence and content, which could in the future contribute to the
impact factor of a particular contribution. While static refer-
ences to speciﬁc content were problematic for small contribu-
tions, attribution to speciﬁc individuals was problematic for
larger collaborative contributions. Speciﬁc individuals were
not credited in the reference section for citations of the en-
tire discussions and fewer speciﬁc individuals were credited
when multiple contributions were cited collectively.

Design Recommendations
The use of new media for scholarly communication disrupts
traditional patterns of citation and reference. New community
guidelines are needed to integrate new forms of communica-
tion into formal references. Citations of this content can vary
in their speciﬁcity from short comments to lengthy, multi-
author discussions, and references should reﬂect this while
preserving traditional elements of attribution and archiving.
With the emergence and rapid change of new technologies
supporting scholarly communication, new guidelines must
develop through an interaction between the community and
the developers of its tools. Potential features to support this
development could include the provision of governance tools
for the community to decide on citation and reference guide-
lines, allowing authors to give attributions of their own, and
providing tools to automatically generate appropriate refer-
ences for citations.
Community governance tools: Reference style and attribu-
tion are fundamentally a discipline-speciﬁc, community de-
cision. Traditionally, these sorts of decisions have been made
by scholarly organizations or journals. Such organizations
often react slowly and, as novel platforms like MO appear,
decisions on these matters may also become more informal.
Platform design should allow communities to settle on new
reference styles and promote their decisions. Stack Exchange
sites already make use of a meta Q&A forum to discuss mod-
eration and other community issues; there are several discus-
sions of proper citation and reference styles for MO. These
platforms could also use governance tools, such as voting
systems for community norms, so that group decisions like
the selection of an appropriate reference style can be made
with technological support. The more easily these decisions
can be made, the easier they will be to modify as technology
changes.
Attribution tools: Journal authors did not reference individu-
als as often when they cited multi-author content. One way
to address this would be to give MO authors tools to declare

1531

who should get credit for a particular contribution. Authors
often revise their answers, sometimes heavily, in response to
comments left by others. They usually acknowledge these
inﬂuences in the text, but there is no systematic way to as-
sign shared credit. If authors could specify attributions them-
selves, this would help readers to accurately assign credit for
ideas. Similarly the question-asker, who can already select a
preferred answer, could decide who should receive credit for
citations of the entire Q&A discussion (e.g. everyone equally,
the top answerer, the top answerers). Defaults could be set
based on community guidelines, but such a tool would leave
the ultimate decision with the individuals involved.
Reference tools: Currently MO supports a citation widget that
generates a reference as a BibTeX or plain text snippet. This
is an important feature and should be more thoroughly devel-
oped. The widget is hidden on the site and seems to be rarely
used, as only a minority of references matched the widget’s
style. It should be displayed more prominently. While the
citation widget allows a reader to cite a particular question
or answer, it does not support references at multiple levels of
granularity. It could easily be extended to create appropriate
references for citing an entire Q&A discussion, multiple con-
tributions together, or even individual edits. This tool would
be helpful because it would create a de facto standard for ref-
erence styles.
It could also handle the tedious retrieval of
author, unique id for contribution, date, and archival informa-
tion which journal authors often omit. The speciﬁc way in
which this reference information is instantiated is not as im-
portant as the fact that it should be done in a way that is 1)
consistent, 2) complete, and 3) made easily available to users
to encourage high usage rates. For example, instead of a ci-
tation widget, URLs could be created for each contribution
(now only the Q&A as a whole has a url, not each post) and
designed to have all necessary attribution and archival infor-
mation.

Limitations & Future Work
By design, this study only focused on positive examples of
MathOverﬂow citation. MO content that was included in
journal articles without any citation could not be collected
and was not studied. There may be a substantial number
of contributions that do go uncited. For example, one au-
thor asked for advice on meta.mathoverﬂow (a site discussing
MO) to help address a situation in which his MO work was
included in a preprint without a citation (e.g. [3]). In addi-
tion, only citations that used the word “MathOverﬂow” were
collected. Citations that referred to the source of the content
as personal communication without saying that the commu-
nication occurred on MO were not collected.
A qualitative study, such as an interview study with math-
ematicians familiar with MO who either do or do not cite
MO content in their journal articles would help validate these
quantitative results and provide deeper context to understand
usage. This quantitative study shows that some individuals
are citing MO, but it cannot answer deeper questions about
how MO content is viewed and being used. For example, this
study cannot tell us the degree to which individuals feel that
MO is legitimate, credible source of material (maybe only

1532

SESSION: OPEN SCIENCE AND INFRASTRUCTURES

some content is seen as credible or it is only seen as partially
credible). This study also cannot tell us whether MO is ac-
tually being used to generate new content (maybe it is only
being used to make work developed by the journal authors
seem more credible and grounded).
Future work should gather qualitative data on perceptions and
attitudes directly from users to complement these quantita-
tive results.
In particular, it would valuable to know how
perceptions of MO’s credibility varies across different sub-
disciplines of math, how it varies across different levels of
mathematical experience, and in what contexts mathemati-
cians do or do not view MO as an appropriate (citable) re-
source.

CONCLUSION
As new technologies emerge for scholarly communication,
there will be a continued blurring between informal and for-
mal communication. The design of these technologies can
have a large impact on the success of these systems for open
science, and the long-term value of these citations within the
scientiﬁc literature. Citations of MathOveﬂow content re-
veal that journal authors make use of the platform’s features
to use informal communication in traditionally formal ways,
drawing on the platform’s archival features. They also reﬂect
the traditional values of informal communication in providing
tailored, interactive interactions. Problems with citations and
references emerge when these formal and informal functions
mesh. Design of future systems should focus on the devel-
opment of community citation guidelines and the creation of
citation tools to help readers follow these guidelines.

REFERENCES
1. Ofer H. Azar. 2007. The slowdown in ﬁrst-response

times of economics journals: Can it be beneﬁcial?
Economic Inquiry 45 (2007), 179–187.

2. Aruna D. Balakrishnan, Sara Kiesler, Jonathon N.
Cummings, and Reza Zadeh. 2011. Research team
integration: What is it and why it matters. In
Proceedings of the ACM conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’11). ACM Press,
523–532.

3. Andras Batkai. 2014. Reference to Mathoverﬂow.

(2014). http://meta.mathoverflow.net/questions/
1629/reference-to-mathoverflow

4. Jeremy P. Birnholtz. 2006. What does it mean to be an

author? The intersection of credit, contribution, and
collaboration in science. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science 57 (2006), 1758–1770.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/asi

5. Jeremy P. Birnholtz and Matthew J. Bietz. 2003. Data at
work: Supporting sharing in science and engineering. In
Proceedings of the 2003 international ACM SIGGROUP
conference on Supporting group work (GROUP ’03).
ACM Press, 339–348. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/958160.958215

6. Kevin Boudreau and Karim Lakhani. 2013. Cumulative

innovation & open disclosure of intermediate results:

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Evidence from a policy experiment in bioinformatics.
(2013).

7. Cecelia M. Brown. 1999. Information seeking behavior

of scienctists in the electronic information age:
Astronomers, chemists, mathematicians and physicists.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science
50, 10 (1999), 929–943.
http://www.trans.uma.es/numeros.html

8. Carolin Cardamone, Kevin Schawinski, Marc Sarzi,

Steven P. Bamford, Nicola Bennert, C. M. Urry, Chris
Lintott, William C. Keel, John Parejko, Robert C.
Nichol, Daniel Thomas, Dan Andreescu, Phil Murray,
M. Jordan Raddick, An ˇZe Slosar, Alex Szalay, and Jan
Vandenberg. 2009. Galaxy Zoo Green Peas: Discovery
of a class of compact extremely star-forming galaxies.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 399,
3 (2009), 1191–1205. DOI:http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.15383.x
9. Chuanfu Chen, Kai Sun, Gang Wu, Qiong Tang, Jian

Qin, Kuei Chiu, Yushuang Fu, Xiaofang Wang, and Jing
Liu. 2009. The impact of internet resources on scholarly
communication: A citation analysis. Scientometrics 81,
2 (2009), 459–474. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11192-008-2180-y

10. Seth Cooper, Firas Khatib, Adrien Treuille, Janos
Barbero, Jeehyung Lee, Michael Beenen, Andrew
Leaver-Fay, David Baker, Zoran Popovi´c, and Foldit
Players. 2010. Predicting protein structures with a
multiplayer online game. Nature 466 (Aug. 2010),
756–60. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature09304

11. Elizabeth A. Corley, P. Craig Boardman, and Barry

Bozeman. 2006. Design and the management of
multi-institutional research collaborations: Theoretical
implications from two case studies. Research Policy 35,
7 (2006), 975–993. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2006.05.003
12. Justin Cranshaw and Aniket Kittur. 2011. The Polymath
Project: Lessons from a successful online collaboration
in mathematics. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’11). ACM Press, Vancouver, Canada, 1865–1874.

13. Jonathon Cummings and Sara Kiesler. 2007.
Coordination costs and project outcomes in
multi-university collaborations. Research Policy 36
(2007), 1620–1634.

14. Thomas A. Finholt and Gary M. Olson. 1997. From
laboratories to collaboratories: A new organizational
form for scientiﬁc collaboration. Psychological Science
8, 1 (1997), 28–36. DOI:http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.1997.tb00540.x

15. Jeremy Fox. 2012. Can blogging change how ecologists

share ideas? In economics, it already has. Ideas in
Ecology and Evolution 5 (2012), 74–77. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.4033/iee.2012.5b.15.f

1533

16. Oliver Gassmann and Maximilian von Zedtwitz. 1999.

New concepts and trends in international R&D
organization. Research Policy 28, 2-3 (1999), 231–250.
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0048-7333(98)00114-0

17. Stevan Harnad. 1990. Scholarly skywriting and the

prepublication continuum of scientiﬁc inquiry.
Psychological Science 45, 1990 (1990), 342–343. DOI:
http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.1990.tb00234.x

18. Kim Holmberg and Mike Thelwall. 2014. Disciplinary

differences in Twitter scholarly communication.
Scientometrics 101 (2014), 1027–1042. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11192-014-1229-3

19. James Howison and James D. Herbsleb. 2011. Scientiﬁc

software production: Incentives and collaboration. In
Proceedings of the ACM conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’11). ACM Press,
513–522.

20. Steve Huntsman. 2010. No Title. (2010).

http://tea.mathoverflow.net/discussion/64/
where-to-keep-track-of-math-overflow-success-stories/

21. Rob Kling, Geoffrey Mckim, and Adam King. 2000. A
bit more to it: Scientiﬁc multiple media communication
forums as socio-technical interaction networks. Journal
of the American Society for Information Science 54,
2001 (2000), 47–67.

22. Greg Kuperberg. 2002. Scholarly mathematical

communication at a crossroads. Nieuw Archief Wiskunde
5 (2002), 262–264.
http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0210144

23. Charlotte P. Lee, Paul Dourish, and Gloria Mark. 2006.

The human infrastructure of cyberinfrastructure. In
Proceedings of the ACM conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’06). ACM Press,
483–492. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1180875.1180950

24. Arijit Mukherjee and Scott Stern. 2009. Disclosure or
secrecy? The dynamics of Open Science. International
Journal of Industrial Organization 27, 3 (2009),
449–462. DOI:http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijindorg.2008.11.005
25. Gary M. Olson and Judith S. Olson. 2000. Distance

matters. Human-Computer Interaction (2000).

26. DHJ Polymath. 2012. A new proof of the density

Hales-Hewett theorem. Annals of Mathematics 175
(2012), 1283–1327.

27. Jason Priem. 2013. Scholarship: Beyond the paper.

Nature 495 (2013), 437–40. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/495437a

28. Jason Priem and Kaitlin Light Costello. 2010. How and
why scholars cite on Twitter. In Proceedings of the 73rd
ASIS&T Annual Meeting on Navigating Streams in an
Information Ecosystem (ASIS&T ’10), Vol. 47. 1–4.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/meet.14504701201

29. Jason Priem and Bradley M. Hemminger. 2012.

Decoupling the scholarly journal. Frontiers in
Computational Neuroscience 6 (2012), 1–19. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2012.00019
30. David De Roure, Carole Goble, Sergejs Aleksejevs,

Sean Bechhofer, Jiten Bhagat, Don Cruickshank, Paul
Fisher, Duncan Hull, Danius Michaelides, David
Newman, Rob Procter, Yuwei Lin, and Meik Pschen.
2010. HPCTOOLKIT: Tools for performance analysis of
optimized parallel programs. Concurrency Computation
Practice and Experience 22 (2010), 685–701. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/cpe

31. Fytton Rowland. 2002. The peer review process.

Learned Publishing 15 (2002), 247–258.

32. Gordon B. Schmidt and Richard N. Landers. 2013.

Solving the replication problem in psychology requires
much more than a website. Industrial and
Organizational Psychology 6 (2013), 305–309. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/iops.12056

SESSION: OPEN SCIENCE AND INFRASTRUCTURES

ACM Press, Baltimore, Maryland, 355–367. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2531602.2531690
34. Yla R. Tausczik and James W. Pennebaker. 2011.

Predicting the perceived quality of online mathematics
contributions from users’ reputations. In Proc. Human
Factors in Computing Systems. ACM Press, Vancouver,
Canada, 1885–1888. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979215

35. Theresa Velden. 2013. Explaining ﬁeld differences in

openness and sharing in scientiﬁc communities. In
Proceedings of the ACM conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’13). ACM Press,
445–457. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2441776.2441827

36. Theresa Velden, Matthew J. Bietz, E. Ilana Diamant,

James D. Herbsleb, James Howison, David Ribes, and
Stephanie B. Steinhardt. 2014. Sharing, Re-use and
Circulation of Resources in Cooperative Scientiﬁc Work.
In Companion CSCW 2014. ACM Press, 347–350.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556420.2558853
37. Andrea Wiggins and Kevin Crowston. 2010. Distributed

scientiﬁc collaboration: Research opportunities in
citizen science. In CSCW 2010 Workshop. 1–4.
http://www.sci.utah.edu/images/docs/cscw2010/
wiggins_2.pdf

33. Yla R. Tausczik, Aniket Kittur, and Robert E. Kraut.

2014. Collaborative problem solving: A study of
MathOverﬂow. In Proceedings of the ACM conference
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’14).

38. Stefan Wuchty, Benjamin F. Jones, and Brian Uzzi.

2007. The increasing dominance of teams in production
of knowledge. Science 316 (May 2007), 1036–1039.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1136099

1534

