CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Repurposing FM: Radio Nowhere to OSNs Everywhere

Morgan Vigil

Dept. of Computer Science

UC Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA
mvigil@cs.ucsb.edu

Elizabeth Belding

Dept. of Computer Science

UC Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA

ebelding@cs.ucsb.edu

Matthew Rantanen

Southern California Tribal
Chairman’s Association

Pala, CA

mrantanen@sctdv.net

ABSTRACT
While online social networks (OSNs) play a critical role in
developing social capital [?], many communities are unable
to utilize the beneﬁts of OSNs due to lack of Internet acces-
sibility.
In this paper, we investigate the feasibility of the
Radio Broadcast Data System (RBDS) associated with FM
radio stations as a means to deliver social network content
to OSN users who do not have access to Internet services.
Using Instagram as a case study, we analyze data from 254
public Instagram users associated with the Tribal Digital Vil-
lage (TDV) network in Southern California. Our analysis of
over 1.2 million unique Instagram posts reveals that Insta-
gram users in the TDV network interact with locally gen-
erated content 46.6× more often than content generated by
users from outside the network. We use our observations
of OSN usage to compare ﬁve OSN content scheduling ap-
proaches. Our evaluation reveals that up to 81% of users re-
ceived at least half of their content requests and 35.5% of the
1.1 million requested Instagram photos were transmitted to
users.

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.3 Information Storage and Retrieval: Information Search
and Retrieval; H.4 Information Systems Applications: Mis-
cellaneous

Author Keywords
Native American, RBDS, FM radio, OSN, social network
analysis, locality

INTRODUCTION
By the end of 2014, only 58% of the U.S. American In-
dian/Alaska Native population [?] and only 10% of Native
Americans living on reservations had Internet access [?]. This
divide is not unique to North America–indigenous people
around the globe are facing digital marginalization [?]. For
many disconnected indigenous communities, lack of Internet
access is largely determined by geographic obstacles, com-
plex telecommunications policies, and socio-economic fac-
tors [?]. Several studies of networks that bring initial Internet

Permission(cid:1)to(cid:1)make(cid:1)digital(cid:1)or(cid:1)hard(cid:1)copies(cid:1)of(cid:1)all(cid:1)or(cid:1)part(cid:1)of(cid:1)this(cid:1)work(cid:1)for(cid:1)personal(cid:1)or(cid:1)
classroom(cid:1)use(cid:1)is(cid:1)granted(cid:1)without(cid:1)fee(cid:1)provided(cid:1)that(cid:1)copies(cid:1)are(cid:1)not(cid:1)made(cid:1)or(cid:1)distributed(cid:1)
for(cid:1)proﬁt(cid:1)or(cid:1)commercial(cid:1)advantage(cid:1)and(cid:1)that(cid:1)copies(cid:1)bear(cid:1)this(cid:1)notice(cid:1)and(cid:1)the(cid:1)full(cid:1)cita-
tion(cid:1)on(cid:1)the(cid:1)ﬁrst(cid:1)page.(cid:1) Copyrights(cid:1)for(cid:1)components(cid:1)of(cid:1)this(cid:1)work(cid:1)owned(cid:1)by(cid:1)others(cid:1)than(cid:1)
ACM(cid:1)must(cid:1)be(cid:1)honored.(cid:1)Abstracting(cid:1)with(cid:1)credit(cid:1)is(cid:1)permitted.(cid:1)To(cid:1)copy(cid:1)otherwise,(cid:1)or(cid:1)re-
publish,(cid:1)to(cid:1)post(cid:1)on(cid:1)servers(cid:1)or(cid:1)to(cid:1)redistribute(cid:1)to(cid:1)lists,(cid:1)requires(cid:1)prior(cid:1)speciﬁc(cid:1)permission(cid:1)
and/or(cid:1)a(cid:1)fee.(cid:1)Request(cid:1)permissions(cid:1)from(cid:1)Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW(cid:1)’16,(cid:1)February(cid:1)27-March(cid:1)02,(cid:1)2016,(cid:1)San(cid:1)Francisco,(cid:1)CA,(cid:1)USA(cid:1)
2016(cid:1)ACM.(cid:1)ISBN(cid:1)978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02...$15.00
DOI:(cid:1)http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820001

1260

services to communities have found that geographic remote-
ness and rugged geographic features comprise some of the
major barriers to infrastructural deployments [?, ?, ?].
In order to bridge the information gap, many Native Ameri-
cans living on reservations rely on FM radio to receive cul-
turally relevant programming, emergency notiﬁcations, local
news, and information on civic participation, health, and eco-
nomics [?, ?, ?]. While FM radio operates at frequencies that
have excellent penetration rates for distributing content over
long distances and can be received by end users at little to no
cost, it is not supportive of real-time, interactive, media-rich
content that is pervasive on the web today.
Studies of indigenous broadband usage indicate that when In-
ternet services are available, online social networks (OSNs)
account for the most frequently accessed sites [?, ?, ?, ?].
While users cite reasons for using social media that are sim-
ilar to the general population [?, ?], there is also a distinct
emphasis on the use of OSNs for building cultural resilience
through local social connections, staying connected to geo-
graphically distant friends and family [?, ?], and receiving
news from alternative media sources [?, ?].
In this work, we propose and evaluate a content dissemina-
tion system that leverages the data subcarrier of FM radio
transmissions (RBDS) in order to broadcast digital content
to co-located communities of users who do not have access to
point-to-point communications infrastructure due to issues of
affordability or availability (or both). Based on the reported
information needs of indigenous communities [?, ?, ?] and
ﬁndings from previous studies of indigenous web usage [?, ?,
?], we ﬁnd that content from online social networks (OSNs)
is critical to indigenous efforts towards cultural revitalization
and building community connections. Thus, our proposed
system focuses on the efﬁcient dissemination of OSN content
in particular.
We describe the speciﬁc details of our contributions below.

Paper contributions
In order to assess the feasibility of OSN content delivery over
RBDS, we use Instagram data generated by users of a Na-
tive American Tribal-operated WISP (wireless Internet ser-
vice provider) in Southern California. This WISP provides
Internet access to 17 different tribes located across 13 differ-
ent reservations. In assessing the design and feasibility of our
proposed system, we are guided by three research questions:
RQ1: How does a set of co-located users interact with OSN
content and what implications does this activity have on
bandwidth requirements?

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

RQ2: How much overlap exists between the social networks
of users who are from the same geographic community?
RQ3: Can we leverage social network relationships to reduce
overall bandwidth usage while still providing adequate con-
tent coverage?
Previous studies of indigenous technology usage suggest that
access to OSN content is helpful for building indigenous cul-
tural identity, that there is limited empirical knowledge about
North American indigenous OSN usage, and that there is a
continuing digital divide affecting indigenous peoples living
in remote and rural areas. In the interest of providing more
people with access to these beneﬁts, our work delivers three
major contributions:
• We empirically characterize OSN usage and social interac-
tion using Instagram data collected from a Tribal operated
WISP. Our ﬁndings represent some of the ﬁrst empirical
evidence of strong locality of interest expressed through
indigenous OSN usage.
• We propose a content distribution system that would pro-
vide access to OSN content without requiring access to per-
vasive broadband or cellular infrastructure.
• We evaluate the feasibility of such a system using Insta-
gram data generated by a diverse set of users who access
the Internet through a Tribal operated WISP. We demon-
strate that it is possible to take advantage of social con-
nections between co-located users in order to reduce high
bandwidth content so that users can receive the most rel-
evant content via technology that is already ubiquitously
available.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. First, we be-
gin with a discussion of related work. Second, we provide
an overview of a proposed OSN-to-RBDS system. Third, we
describe the data sets used to assess the feasibility of the pro-
posed system. Next, we analyze the data sets using research
questions RQ1 and RQ2 as guides. We then introduce and
evaluate four content scheduling approaches that could be
used with the proposed system in order to address research
question RQ3. Based on our evaluation of content schedul-
ing approaches with respect to patterns identiﬁed in RQ1 and
RQ2, we discuss the transferability of our study to other in-
digenous communities not represented by our data sets and
conclude with a discussion of the system’s impact on the
CSCW research agenda.

RELATED WORK

Locality
A signiﬁcant body of work has explored the relationship be-
tween social networks and the distance between the people
that comprise a social network [?, ?, ?, ?]. There are two com-
mon approaches to understanding the correlation between so-
cial relationships among users and distance between users.
Our work is most similar to work that explores themes of dis-
tance in terms of geography [?, ?, ?]. Given our speciﬁc in-
terest in co-located communities, we focus more on work that

explores the geographic relationship between users with re-
spect to their social connections. While previous work has fo-
cused on characterizing the probability that two users are ge-
ographic friends based on online friendships [?], and the aver-
age geographic distance between friends in a social network
based on the population density of communities where users
live [?], we are interested in approaching the relationship be-
tween social closeness and geographical closeness from the
reverse direction.
When looking speciﬁcally at locality as it relates to rural con-
tent interests, there have been numerous studies that reveal
that locality is an important factor in determining the so-
cial relationships and content interests of rural users when it
comes to their engagement with OSNs. Gilbert et al. examine
the MySpace accounts of urban and rural users in the U.S. and
determine that in general, rural users live 2.3× closer to their
OSN friends than urban users [?]. Studies of speciﬁc rural [?,
?] and indigenous communities [?, ?, ?] have revealed that
the strongest social ties of rural OSN users are with friends
who live within their own geographic community. Moreover,
when examining the content with which speciﬁc rural [?, ?, ?,
?] and indigenous [?] communities engaged, research found
a high locality of content interest–with many users accessing
locally generated content and locally viewed content.
While survey studies of indigenous content interests have
suggested a strong locality of interest with respect to content,
there have been very few empirical studies that corroborate
this implication. Our work characterizes social network us-
age of Instagram users that originate from 17 different Native
American tribes located across 13 reservations serviced by
the TDV network in San Diego County. While our empiri-
cal analysis does not provide comprehensive coverage of all
indigenous peoples, our ﬁndings reﬂect similarities between
the OSN relationships found in the studied Native American
community and those identiﬁed in previously studied rural
communities. We discuss this in greater depth in the “Gener-
alizability” section of this paper.

Content delivery systems
In essence, the system we propose to broadcast OSN content
over RBDS is a content delivery system operating over con-
strained bandwidth. This is related to work exploring two
other classes of content delivery systems–high trafﬁc content
delivery and content delivery over extremely low bandwidth.
In both types of content delivery systems, a common bottle-
neck is located at the “last mile” network link that connects
users to content [?, ?]. For both scenarios, numerous princi-
ples have been shown to improve the user experience, lead-
ing to faster delivery times and optimization of bandwidth
resources.
In high trafﬁc content delivery systems (including web con-
tent over HTTP and video over P2P networks), common so-
lutions for avoiding bottlenecks include processes of mon-
itoring network conditions to pinpoint congestion and fail-
ure points [?], identifying frequently requested content and
replicating it to appropriate replication servers [?, ?], balanc-
ing content requests across a large number of servers con-
taining replicated content [?], localized content caching [?],

1261

and splitting content [?, ?, ?, ?]. Our work is also similar
to content delivery systems that allocate network resources to
reﬂect the activities and preferences of system users [?, ?].
Principles for improving the user experience for content de-
livery systems designed for operation in low-bandwidth en-
vironments include content localization with distributed stor-
age systems [?, ?] and web caching [?, ?, ?], transaction
pre-scheduling [?, ?], and transmission scheduling based on
content properties [?, ?].
Our work most closely resembles that of Ioannidis et al. and
Zhao et al. Like Ioannidis et al., we focus on allocating band-
width in order to maximize the fairness of content distribu-
tion across a community of users [?]. In contrast to this prior
work, we allocate bandwidth speciﬁcally for OSN content.
This allows us to take advantage of social relationships in-
herent to OSNs that can work as a heuristic for determin-
ing which content is most relevant to a co-located group of
users. To the best of our knowledge, there has not been a
content delivery system designed speciﬁcally for OSN data.
Moreover, our work focuses on delivering OSN content via
an extremely low-bandwidth broadcast technology. In order
to maximize the ratio of relevant content to the bandwidth re-
sources dedicated to an entire community, our work accounts
for content relevance to a community of users when schedul-
ing resources. In addition, our work is similar to that of Zhao
et al. in that we determine a part of a larger collection of con-
tent that will be broadcast based on a priori information about
users preferences [?]. While Zhao et al. focus on delivering
video segments based on explicit user preferences, we rely
on implied user preferences based on a record of their OSN
interactions.

OSN CONTENT OVER RBDS
Leveraging the digital transfer capabilities of FM frequencies
has not been explored in the context of bridging the digital
divide. The FM radio broadcast data system (RBDS)1 is a
communications protocol that enables FM broadcast stations
to embed small amounts of digital information into conven-
tional FM radio broadcasts. RBDS functions as a subcarrier
on the main FM radio transmission–its most familiar applica-
tion is to carry digital information about current FM broad-
casts (e.g. song title, artist name, station name) to display
to listeners. While it operates over extremely low bandwidth
(1.1875 kbps), it has many properties that are appealing for
data transmission to areas lacking Internet infrastructure, in-
cluding: large geographic coverage footprints [?], robustness
to error [?], and operational infrastructure [?, ?]. While the
bandwidth limitations of the protocol are prohibitive to cer-
tain types of data services (e.g. streaming media, interac-
tive applications, real-time services), RBDS does have the
potential to provide access to OSN content to areas where
FM broadcast stations function as the sole arbiters of media
content. This work is the ﬁrst to characterize the feasibility of
RBDS to provide data services to disconnected communities.

1Radio Broadcast Data System in the U.S. and Radio Data System
(RDS) internationally. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radi
o_Data_System

1262

SESSION: NON-PROFITS AND HUMANITARIAN RESPONSES

Figure 1: Proposed system for the propagation of OSN con-
tent over RBDS.

It is important to note that use of RBDS to deliver informa-
tion from OSNs could be implemented in many ways, given
the availability of FM receivers. In order to simplify our ap-
proach to understanding the feasibility of RBDS for OSN
content delivery, we assume the architecture shown in Fig-
ure ??. Such an architecture would be able to actively down-
load public OSN content and then use a protocol such as
RDS-Link [?] to broadcast data to remote, ofﬂine reposito-
ries where users could access content over a local wireless
network.
Our proposed system focuses on delivering OSN content to
rural indigenous users over the FM radio broadcast data sys-
tem. The focus on OSN content is motivated by studies of
indigenous ICT usage which have shown OSNs to be ma-
jor contributors to indigenous cultural revitalization and re-
silience. Prior surveys have revealed that social networking
sites are the most popular means of everyday communica-
tion in the Sioux Lookout community [?, ?, ?]. Moreover,
these studies have also found that OSNs play a potentially
powerful role in indigenous cultural preservation and revital-
ization. Many surveyed users reported using OSNs to post
information about upcoming cultural events [?, ?], to ﬁnd in-
formation about cultural events and look at photos and videos
of the events [?], to look at pictures of family and ancestral
land [?], to provide and seek support for patients participating
in indigenous telemedicine programs [?], to participate in po-
litical and social movements advocating for indigenous rights
and justice [?, ?], and to communicate in their native lan-
guage [?]. The most popular OSN may differ from commu-
nity to community; in some of the studied indigenous com-
munities Instagram is the most popular OSN, in others it is
Facebook, and in still others, it is MyKnet2. We use Insta-
gram to investigate the feasibility of delivering OSN content
over RBDS and we believe that the general principles will
hold for the delivery of content from any OSN. More impor-
tant than the speciﬁc OSN is providing access to OSN con-
tent and the beneﬁts it can provide to indigenous communi-
ties. Our OSN content delivery system over RBDS enables
more people living in rural and remote areas without broad-
band coverage to gain access to this beneﬁcial content using a
technology and infrastructure that is already ubiquitous: FM
radio.
We also note that our proposed system is not limited to deliv-
ering OSN content. In rural areas, it is still difﬁcult to make

2A First Nations owned OSN based in northern Ontario.

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

reliable emergency announcements without ubiquitous cellu-
lar or telephone coverage. In cases of severe weather, natu-
ral disasters, and water contamination, our proposed system
could provide information about safety measures, evacuation
plans, and access to alternative resources.

DESCRIPTION OF DATA SETS
The data used in this paper was collected as part of an ongoing
study of the Tribal Digital Village (TDV) network that seeks
to understand Tribal broadband use in order to create innova-
tive technologies that bridge the digital divide on Tribal land.
The TDV network is a wireless ISP operated by the South-
ern California Tribal Chairmen’s Association in San Diego
County. Established in 2001, the TDV network was created
to bring Internet services to homes located on 17 of its mem-
ber reservations. The TDV gateway is a 500 Mbps ﬁber link
at the Pala reservation. This connectivity is extended over 11
and 18 GHz microwave backbone links and disseminated into
residencies via 2.4 and 5 GHz WiFi. When it was established,
there were no Internet providers in the area. Today, in spite
of efforts towards mobile broadband deployment in the area,
the TDV network continues to be the only provider available
to the majority of residents in the area [?]. At the time of
our study, 354 homes located across six different reservations
utilized Internet services provided by the TDV network. For
users who are unable to access the Internet using TDV’s res-
idential services3, free Internet access is available at schools,
health clinics, libraries, learning centers, and Tribal ofﬁces
located on the reservations. Overall, our data set represents
users who connect to the Internet from both private and public
access points across several reservations in San Diego County
in a variety of different contexts.
Our initial study [?] of TDV web trafﬁc and network per-
formance between June and August 2014 revealed that Insta-
gram trafﬁc accounted for the largest number of web requests
and that both Instagram and Facebook trafﬁc were among the
top ten applications with respect to trafﬁc volume. Closer
inspection of Instagram trafﬁc in the TDV network revealed
that the most engaging Instagram media (with respect to local
engagement) circulating through the TDV network was gen-
erated by local users. Similarly, locally created Instagram me-
dia circulated for longer periods through the network and so-
cial connections between TDV Instagram users were stronger
than social connections between TDV Instagram users and
Instagram users from outside TDV.
By the end of 2014, Instagram was among the ﬁve most pop-
ular OSN platforms in the U.S., with 21% of the entire adult
population owning an Instagram account [?]. After Facebook,
Instagram has the highest number of users between ages 18-
29 and has the highest level of daily engagement (49% of
users report interacting with their Instagram account on a
daily basis). Moreover, having an Instagram account made

3Lack of residential access is typically due to the inability to pay
monthly service bills or geographic remoteness from the main back-
bone and access towers of the TDV network infrastructure. These
challenges are not unique to the TDV network. Tribal ISPs often
face the challenge of connecting widely dispersed users living in re-
mote regions with geographic features prohibitive to wireless signal
penetration [?].

users more likely to have accounts on other OSN platform
than any other type of account. Considering the general pop-
ularity of Instagram in the U.S., the frequency of engagement
with the Instagram platform, and our observations of Insta-
gram’s popularity in the TDV network, we use Instagram as
the lens through which to understand the feasibility of us-
ing co-located social structures to enable the transfer of OSN
content via RBDS.
Data collection steps
In this work, we discuss observations made from data col-
lected between June 23 and December 18, 2014. Over this
period we collected 16.5 TB of data representing 137.2 billion
packets. We use the Bro Network Security Monitor (Bro) to
collect ﬂow-level statistics for network applications [?]. For
this work, we are speciﬁcally interested in HTTP Bro logs.
These data logs include source and destination IP addresses,
timestamp information, HTTP host, HTTP URL, ﬂow size,
and ﬂow duration. Our point of collection is located at the
Internet gateway of the TDV network. We collect data by at-
taching a trafﬁc monitoring server to the switch that bridges
the gateway and the TDV network. A mirror port is con-
ﬁgured to capture all packets traversing the network. Data
collection methodology and subsequent analysis received ap-
proval from UCSB IRB and the Southern California Tribal
Chairmen’s Association prior to collection. All IP addresses
are anonymized using traceanon [?].
We use the Instagram API to identify which posts users can
access during our collection period. We identiﬁed 254 public
Instagram user identiﬁers (unique number corresponding to
an Instagram account) via the URL ﬁeld in the HTTP headers
captured by the Bro web logs. For the remainder of this paper,
we refer to these public users as TDV users. Because 99% of
network trafﬁc is produced at residential access points, we as-
sume that all Instagram users we observe in the network are
residents of the 13 reservations serviced by the TDV network.
Using the Instagram API, we are able to use public Instagram
user identiﬁers of users in the TDV network to identify the
OSN objects they had subscribed to during our collection pe-
riod. We collect this data in two steps. First, we identify the
public user identiﬁers of public users followed by the TDV
users. Users who are followed are called content creators
for the remainder of this paper. Second, we identify all of
the meta data associated with the public media posted by the
content creators during our period of interest, including: the
media identiﬁer and the creation time of the OSN content. By
combining the data collected in these two steps, we generate
a ﬁnal data set that includes: the user identiﬁer of a TDV user,
the user identiﬁer of the content creator, the media identiﬁer
of the OSN content created by the content creator, and the
time the OSN content was created.
In addition, we use “instagram.com/api/v1/media” tags in the
HTTP URLs collected in the HTTP Bro logs to identify TDV
Instagram users’ interactions with Instagram content. These
logs include: the timestamp associated with interaction, the
media identiﬁer of the OSN content that was interacted with,
and the action (“like” or “comment”) taken on the Instagram
content. By coupling this activity data set with the data set
representing the public Instagram content available to each

1263

Content objects
Content creators
Social interactions
Instagram users

Total

1,209,270

47,645
12,615

NA

Local % Local
3,777
184
1,607
254

0.31
0.39
12.7
NA

Table 1: Overview of content interactions observed between
June 23 and December 18, 2014.

Term
locality

publication time

coverage

stimulated

dormant

follow network

Deﬁnition
Where in the network with respect to the
Internet gateway a piece of content origi-
nates. Local content originates within the
local subnetwork behind the Internet gate-
way and non-local content originates from
beyond the Internet gateway.
Time an OSN content object was published
to an OSN platform.
Portion of users who have access to a partic-
ular piece of content.
OSN content object that has received likes or
comments from TDV Instagram users.
OSN content object that has not received
likes or comments from TDV Instagram
users.
All the content creators that a particular user
follows, meaning all the content creators
from whom a particular user receives OSN
content.

Table 2: Deﬁnition of terms used to describe properties of
OSN content.

user, we are able to create a combined data set that includes:
the timestamp of when Instagram content was published, the
user identiﬁer of the Instagram content creator, the identiﬁer
of the Instagram content object, the proportion of co-located
users who have subscribed to the OSN content, and the num-
ber of times co-located users interact with the Instagram con-
tent.

ANALYSIS
An overview of the data set we analyze is presented in Ta-
ble ??. We report on the total data set that includes both con-
tent generated within the TDV network (“local”) and content
generated outside the TDV network. Values that are labeled
“Local” refer to content objects that were created by content
creators from the TDV network. “Content objects” refer to
the number of OSN content objects that were published by
the content creators followed by public Instagram users in the
TDV network. “Social interactions” refer to the number of
TDV users’ likes and comments on followed Instagram con-
tent. Both images and short videos can be published on the
Instagram platform; overall, 93.6% of the followed content
objects were images and 6.4% were videos.
Interaction patterns
To address our three research questions, we begin by exam-
ining interaction patterns with respect to the locality of OSN
content (RQ1), publication time of OSN content (RQ1), the
degree of coverage provided by OSN content (RQ2), and
which OSN content is stimulated or dormant (RQ2). Deﬁ-
nitions of the terms are provided in Table ??.

1264

SESSION: NON-PROFITS AND HUMANITARIAN RESPONSES

Reservation
Pala
Rincon
San Pasqual
Mesa Grande
Pauma
Manzanita

Instagram users

71
61
54
48
17
3

Pop. size

1,573
1,495
752
75
186
69

Table 3: Population4 and Instagram statistics for six TDV
reservations.

Figure 2: Percentage of overall activity that occurs per hour.

Locality
Table ?? provides an overview of the OSN content objects
that were visible to TDV Instagram users during our obser-
vation period. We ﬁnd that less than 0.31% of content ob-
jects were created by TDV Instagram (local) users. However,
on average, TDV Instagram users interact with locally gener-
ated OSN content objects 46.6× more often than non-locally
created OSN objects, demonstrating a strong preference for
locally created content.
Next, we examine locality with respect to users’ follow net-
works, or the content creators each user follows. To analyze
the impact of locality at ﬁner granularity, we examine inter-
actions between Instagram users connecting from the same
reservation. Table ?? provides an overview of the number
of public Instagram users we observe at each reservation and
the corresponding census population. By mapping Instagram
users to their corresponding reservation, we are able to cal-
culate the portion of each user’s follow network that is com-
prised of content creators from the same reservation, a dif-
ferent reservation in the TDV network, or outside the TDV
network. Given that the majority of observed content cre-
ators are from outside the TDV network, it is unsurprising that
97% of users have follow networks that contain more content
creators from outside the TDV network than from inside the
TDV network. When considering only TDV users that com-
prise a given user’s follow network, the median percentage of
content creators from the same reservation is 2.9× the me-
dian percentage of content creators from another reservation
in the TDV network. This indicates the potential impact that
community boundaries have on the success of sharing lim-
ited bandwidth. The broader the boundaries that deﬁne a “co-
located” group of users, the less likely they are able to capture
meaningful connections between that set of users.

4Population sizes from the 2010 U.S. Census. http://www.sand
iego.edu/nativeamerican/reservations.php

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 3: Distribution of the time interval between (a) received OSN content objects, (b) publication time and time of ﬁrst
interaction, and (c) publication times between incoming OSN content objects.

Publication time
By understanding how frequently OSN content is published,
received, and interacted with, we develop a temporal sense
for how frequently OSN content broadcasts would need to
occur in order to sustain a relevant information ﬂow across a
shared low-bandwidth link. While we observe signiﬁcantly
more publications than interactions (see Table ??), we nor-
malize the frequency of publication and interaction activities
by reporting the percentage of activity that occurs per hour
in Figure ??. We note that the percentage of activity is based
on all activities observed during our six month period of inter-
est. As shown in Figure ??, the majority of publications occur
during the evening and early morning, while the frequency of
interactions is consistent with daily web trafﬁc patterns ob-
served in [?].
To understand post frequency from the perspective of the user,
we examine the distribution of the average number of hours
between each user’s reception of a new OSN post in Fig-
ure ??. This relates to how frequently a user’s newsfeed is
updated with new content. The median frequency of recep-
tion experienced by users is one received post per 1.23 hours;
40% of users receive a new post more frequently than once
per hour. We observe the number of hours between the initial
publication of a post and its ﬁrst TDV-originated interaction
(like or comment made on the post by a TDV Instagram user)
in Figure ??. The mean number of hours between a post’s
publication and the initial interaction on the TDV network is
1.04 hours; 90.2% of posts that are interacted with receive
their initial interaction within 24 hours of publication. We
take these values into consideration when evaluating poten-
tial approaches for scheduling OSN content broadcasts over
RBDS.
In order to conceptualize how the rate of OSN content publi-
cation would impact the bandwidth required to update TDV
OSN users in real-time, we examine the distribution of time
intervals between all viewable posts assuming a naive First
Come, First Serve (FCFS) approach. In Figure ??, we plot
the time interval between all unique viewable content in blue
(note the logarithmic x-axis). We ﬁnd that the rate of con-
tent publication translates into a median interval of 2 sec-
onds between OSN content posts that would traverse a shared

1265

Figure 4: Distribution of the Jaccard similarity indices asso-
ciated with pairwise comparisons of each user’s follow net-
work.

link. Depending on the size of the post, the observed data
rate could require bandwidth capacities of 2.24 kbps for the
most bandwidth-light OSN platforms (Twitter) or beyond 80
kbps for media-based OSN platforms (Instagram), assuming
an average data size of 560 bytes and 20 KB, respectively.
Since the RBDS protocol operates at only 1.1875 kbps, trans-
ferring all OSN content on the current FCFS basis is clearly
infeasible. However, there are reasons to remain optimistic
about transferring OSN content to disconnected communi-
ties via RBDS. Only 0.55% of all viewable published con-
tent receives interactions from TDV users. We plot the dis-
tribution of time intervals between the publication times of
stimulated OSN content posts using FCFS scheduling in Fig-
ure ?? as a yellow line. For the stimulated OSN content ob-
jects, the median interval between publication times of OSN
content is 13.66 minutes. This rate of publication translates
into bandwidth requirements of 0.00546 kbps for the most
bandwidth-light platforms (Twitter) and approximately 0.195
kbps for media-based OSN platforms (Instagram). The lower
data rates suggest the feasibility of transmitting the most rel-
evant media over RBDS. The challenge lies in the identiﬁ-
cation of relevant media, which we discuss in the following
section.

SESSION: NON-PROFITS AND HUMANITARIAN RESPONSES

Figure 6: General scheduling approach, where published con-
tent objects, c, are identiﬁed by a unique identiﬁer and placed
in an array until the end of the scheduling period when con-
tent is scheduled for broadcast.

between one content provider and one receiver. Prior to our
evaluation context, there has not been a data-based evalua-
tion of how these approaches perform in a broadcast scenario
where broadcast content can be relevant to multiple receivers.

Description of scheduling approaches
We provide an illustration of the general scheduling approach
in Figure ??. For all scheduling approaches, we assume that
there is sufﬁcient storage at the FM radio station to store all
incoming content prior to scheduling it for broadcast. This
collection of content includes all content that was published
during the current scheduling period. The amount of content
that is broadcast per scheduling period is determined by the
length of the scheduling period using
W = T × B

(2)

where W is the size of the broadcast window, T is the length
of the scheduling period, and B is the bandwidth capacity.
For our evaluations, we use a scheduling period of 3600 sec-
onds (one hour). This means that we schedule enough content
to ﬁll one hour’s worth of broadcasts and drop the remain-
ing unscheduled content in order to provide timely delivery
of transmitted content. We assume the RBDS transmission
operates without error, yielding a net bandwidth capacity of
1.1875 kbps. This leads to a broadcast window of 534 KB.
Because video content objects are over 10× larger than im-
age content and only account for 6.4% of the overall con-
tent objects that occur in our evaluation set, we only evalu-
ate scheduling approaches based on how they schedule image
content. Since we assume that no transmission errors occur,
all content that is scheduled into the broadcast window is ac-
tually broadcast.

Random
To provide a standard against which to evaluate the other ap-
proaches, we schedule content using a random approach. For
each scheduling period, the random scheduling approach se-
lects a random content object from the queue of published
content and then either schedules it or drops it with equal
probability. Once the scheduling window is full for the broad-
cast period, any remaining content is dropped.

Figure 5: Distribution of coverage provided by stimulated and
dormant content.

Coverage
We next investigate whether the high locality of interest iden-
tiﬁed in our previous study of the TDV network will be re-
ﬂected in the amount of overlap observed between TDV In-
stagram users’ follow networks. Using the Jaccard index [?],

jaccard(A, B) =

(1)

(cid:2)
(cid:3)

|A
|A

B|
B|

where A is the set of users that comprise one user’s fol-
low network and B is the set of users that comprise another
user’s follow network, we compare users’ follow networks
and report the distribution of similarity indices in Figure ??.
Contrary to our expectations, the Jaccard similarity between
users’ follow networks is quite low, with similarity indices
ranging from 0 to 0.051 with a median similarity index of
0.0052.
Patterns of interaction with OSN content provide nuance to
our understanding of coverage and relevance. As illustrated
by Figure ??, we observe a signiﬁcant difference (p < 2.2 ×
10−16) between the coverage associated with stimulated con-
tent and dormant content. While stimulated content does not
represent the entire set of content that would be considered
relevant to the TDV users, the higher coverage values associ-
ated with stimulated content signiﬁes a potential heuristic for
determining content relevance to the group of TDV users and
can be used as a prioritization value for scheduling content
broadcasts over RBDS. We explore this in more detail in the
following section.

CONTENT-ORIENTED BROADCASTING
Now that the analysis has shown that social connections be-
tween more geographically proximate users are stronger and
that stimulated content tends to be viewed by a higher num-
ber of co-located users, we address RQ3 by evaluating dif-
ferent approaches to scheduling OSN content over RBDS. In
this section, we compare and evaluate ﬁve different schedul-
ing approaches:
random scheduling, ﬁrst come ﬁrst serve
(FCFS), coverage-based priority scheduling (P-Coverage),
cluster-based priority scheduling (P-CP), and round robin
scheduling. The software used to generate the resulting
scheduled content is available at http://github.com/mvigi
l90/RBDS_Scheduling. While all of the approaches inves-
tigated in this paper have been evaluated in the context of
networks, these prior works assume a one-to-one connection

1266

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Approach
Random
FCFS
P-Coverage
P-CP
Round robin

33.1
32.3
52.2
77.8
54.3

Median coverage per user (%) Mean coverage per user (%)

33.8
33.3
53.6
65.5
55.0

Standard deviation coverage per user (%)

9.5
9.2
18.5
30.1
14.5

Jain fairness index

0.88
0.88
0.86
0.77
0.89

Table 4: Overview of the performance of scheduling approaches.

FCFS
We evaluate a naive ﬁrst come, ﬁrst serve approach to sched-
ule data for broadcast in each scheduling window. Our imple-
mentation of the FCFS approach ﬁlls the scheduling window
with the most recent content every scheduling period, then
drops the remaining unscheduled content. In the context of
broadcast over RBDS, large content ﬂows would correspond
to users following proliﬁc content creators, as well as users
who follow many content creators.

Coverage-based Priority
Priority scheduling is similar to the FCFS approach, but in-
stead of scheduling content based on the time it was pub-
lished, we prioritize content based on the coverage provided
by the creator of the content. The more followers within a
set of co-located users that a content creator has, the higher
its content is prioritized. We call this priority-coverage (P-
Coverage). We expect this approach to bias in favor of users
who follow content creators with high coverage values. Con-
versely, we expect priority-coverage to bias against users who
follow more obscure content creators.

Cluster-based Priority
The cluster-based priority scheduling approach uses the clus-
tering potential (CP) associated with content creators in order
to prioritize content. We ﬁnd the clustering potential associ-
ated with a content creator, c, by calculating the summated
clustering coefﬁcient [?] of each user who would receive a
given content object using the following equation:

CPc(x0, x1, ..., xn) =

n(cid:4)

i=0

Txi
Axi

(3)

where xi represents a user that follows content creator c , n is
the total number of users that follow content creator c, Txi is
the number of creators that form a triadic closure with xi, and
Axi is the number of creators in xi’s follow network. In the
context of the TDV Instagram social network, a user’s clus-
tering coefﬁcient determines how embedded a user is within
the TDV network. While triadic closures, or three nodes con-
necting to each other, provide some clue as to how embed-
ded a user is within their local network, the clustering co-
efﬁcient normalizes this value so that relative embeddedness
can be compared across different subgraphs of the network.
Given the publish-subscribe nature of the Instagram platform,
we consider single-directional links to count towards a triadic
closure. The clustering coefﬁcient in the context of co-located
users provides an indication of how many users might ﬁnd
information destined for a particular user to be relevant. The
approach that prioritizes based on content creators’ CP values
is called priority-CP (P-CP). Priority-CP is expected to bias

in favor of highly embedded users and users with smaller fol-
low networks as it is easier to have a high clustering coefﬁ-
cient with a smaller overall follow network. We expect both
priority approaches to result in starvation of users who are
dissimilar from the majority of co-located users with respect
to content interests and users who are not deeply embedded
in their follow network.

Round robin
In order to ensure that each of the co-located users receives
some portion of their followed content, we evaluate a round
robin approach to content scheduling. For the round robin
approach, we create a queue for each user. As content is pub-
lished, if a user follows that content creator, the content is
added to the user’s queue. Content in user queues is ordered
based on the community coverage provided by the content
creator. The round robin approach cycles through the user
queues at the end of each scheduling period. While there is
room available in the scheduling window, it adds the con-
tent at the front of each user queue to the scheduling window.
When a content object is added to the scheduling window,
it is removed from the queue of any other user that has the
object in their queue. This would occur when multiple users
are following the same content creator. Round robin provides
an equal portion of bandwidth to each user. Some users op-
portunistically beneﬁt from other users’ access to bandwidth
because they follow the same content. Since some users fol-
low signiﬁcantly more content than others, round robin is ex-
pected to bias against users that require an overall larger por-
tion of the bandwidth resources.

Performance evaluation
We evaluate each of the scheduling approaches by schedul-
ing one representative5 (p < 2.2 × 10−16) month of the data
set we collected, with respect to the number of content ob-
jects posted by creators and the distribution of coverage val-
ues associated with posted content objects. We use a one hour
scheduling window for each approach. Based on the speciﬁ-
cations of RBDS, this window size enables a maximum of
534 KB to be broadcast per hour. Our prior study of the TDV
network revealed that the median size of downloaded Insta-
gram image content was 20 KB [?]. As no ﬁle size is pro-
vided as part of the content meta data we collected, we make
the simplifying assumption that all image content is 20 KB.
An overview of each approach’s performance is provided in
Table ??, which reports on the distribution of the percentage
of followed content that was received per user and the fair-
ness of the approach with respect to the coverage provided to
each user.
5Based on the Two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test comparing
the distribution of coverage values and the number of content ob-
jects posted per month.

1267

SESSION: NON-PROFITS AND HUMANITARIAN RESPONSES

for the Instagram context, it could be useful in other scenar-
ios. For instance, if broadcast were the ﬁrst part of an infor-
mation relay, targeting content towards a clustered group of
individuals may lead to more effective information dissemi-
nation throughout the community.

Fairness
In order to evaluate the fairness of each scheduling approach,
we calculate the Jain fairness index [?] over the number of
content objects each user would receive. The Jain fairness
index is calculated as follows:

(cid:5)n
n · (cid:5)n

i=0 xi)2
i=0 x2
i

jain(x0, x1, ..., xn) =

(

(4)

where xi represents the percentage of user i’s content requests
that were broadcast (coverage per user), given n co-located
users to receive scheduled broadcasts.
The Jain fairness index for each scheduling approach is re-
ported in Table ??.
It is expected that the round robin ap-
proach would be the fairest of those evaluated on the data,
as it is an inherently fair approach because it provides equal
opportunities for all users to receive content that is relevant
to them. Because of the broadcast nature of RBDS and the
fact that multiple co-located users can follow content pub-
lished by a single content creator, scheduling content from
a single user’s queue could lead to multiple users receiving
content outside of what would be scheduled from their own
queues. This causes co-located users with overlapping fol-
low networks to have a slight advantage over users who do
not follow networks that are similar to other co-located users.
The least fair approach is priority-CP. This is expected since
prioritizing content destined for a highly clustered set of users
would starve out a signiﬁcant portion of content given the lack
of observed overlap and clustering between TDV users (the
mean clustering coefﬁcient is 0.039). We also ﬁnd that FCFS
is less fair than the random scheduling algorithm, which is
unsurprising given the inherent unfairness of FCFS, which
favors users who follow highly productive creators and tends
to starve out smaller ﬂows. Even though the random ap-
proach and FCFS provide signiﬁcantly lower coverage per
user, they still have high fairness values. These approaches
are fair despite the lower coverage values because the cover-
age they provide has very low variance. The variance in cov-
erage per user is 0.7% for the random approach and 0.8% for
FCFS. Round robin provides a higher level of fairness than
both priority-coverage and priority-CP because round robin
provides a much lower variance in coverage per user. The
variance for the round robin approach is 2.1%, the variance
for priority-coverage is 3.4%, and the variance for priority-
CP is 9.1%.

Timeliness
By only scheduling content that arrives during the current
scheduling period, the delay between the time content was
published and the time it is broadcast is always under one
hour6. While this delay is reasonable given our observations
of users’ responsiveness to content in the section “Publication
6Only scheduled content has associated delay times; unscheduled
content is not considered when calculating delay.

Figure 7: The proportion of content coverage provided to
each user.

Completeness
We examine completeness from the perspective of individual
users and the group of users. We measure the total coverage
provided by a particular scheduling approach by identifying
the number of OSN content objects that the approach sched-
uled over our evaluation month relative to the total number of
OSN content objects that were published during that month.
Each scheduling approach was able to provide a total cover-
age of 35.5%. We measure the coverage per user by identify-
ing the total number of content objects that would be received
by each user during the evaluation month, then identifying
what percentage of that content was actually broadcast using
each scheduling approach. The distributions of the coverage
per user provided by each approach are plotted in Figure ??.
On average, individual users received the highest percentage
of their followed content when using the round robin schedul-
ing approach. These results are unsurprising for several rea-
sons. By scheduling content based on user demand in a fair
way, the round robin scheduling approach is able to address
the content needs of individual users. Because several content
creators are followed by more than one user in the TDV net-
work, the round robin scheduling approach was able to oppor-
tunistically satisfy the needs of several users when scheduling
content based on the needs of a single user.
The FCFS scheduling approach performed the worst with re-
spect to coverage per user. Given its prioritization based on
publication time, it is unsurprising that FCFS would not pro-
vide the optimal approach for scheduling bandwidth in an
overloaded environment. FCFS is unable to discern commu-
nity value associated with content because it operates without
any concept of relative content demand. This causes users
who follow highly productive content creators, users who fol-
low many content creators, and users who follow more video
content to receive a much larger portion of the available band-
width.
We also note that priority-CP had a high coverage rate with
respect to the individual, but varied signiﬁcantly between
users and ultimately provided the most unfair division of re-
sources (we discuss this further in the section “Fairness”).
Priority-CP tends to favor content arriving for small, tightly
knit sub-groups of users and leads to starvation of less em-
bedded users. While it was not the best scheduling approach

1268

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Figure 8: The distribution of delays incurred by scheduling
stored content.

Figure 9: The distribution of content coverage provided by
approaches using stored content.

time,” we note that if we were to relax this delay requirement,
certain approaches would be able to provide a higher level of
coverage to individual users. We test the impact of relax-
ing delay constraints by storing unscheduled data for future
scheduling periods (instead of dropping unscheduled content
as described in the beginning of the section “Description of
approaches”). This means that scheduling approaches would
be able to ﬁll the scheduling window with content published
during the current scheduling period and unscheduled content
from previous a scheduling period. We then evaluate per-
formance over the same representative month of content for
approaches that could increase coverage by scheduling stored
data: priority-coverage, priority-CP, and round robin. We plot
the distributions of delay incurred by scheduling stored con-
tent in Figure ??. Although we expected the delay to increase
for all approaches that schedule stored content, priority-CP
was able to maintain an average delay time below an hour,
with a median delay of 46 minutes and a standard devia-
tion of 11.5 hours. Since the scheduling window is limited
to 534 KB per hour, only 26 content objects with the high-
est CP values are broadcast. When we examine the distribu-
tion of the CP values associated with incoming content across
time, we ﬁnd that on average, 36 of the content objects pub-
lished per hour have a CP value greater than the median CP
(CP = 0.01558) value and 18 of the content objects pub-
lished per hour have a CP value greater than the third quartile
CP value (CP = 0.05556). This means that each hour, con-
tent that is broadcast is likely to have been published during
the most recent hour, leading to generally low delays. The
median delay for priority-coverage is 4.9 days (standard de-
viation = 6.1 days) and the median delay for round robin is
1.2 days (standard deviation = 5.0 days).
Despite the longer delay times associated with broadcast con-
tent, we do ﬁnd that the coverage provided by the approaches
increases. Figure ?? plots the distribution of coverage per
user provided by each approach scheduling stored content.
Overall, each approach is able to provide a total coverage of
36.4%. This is an increase compared to the approaches that
schedule only content published in the current scheduling pe-
riod because some hours of the month do not have enough

content publications to ﬁll an entire scheduling window. With
the ability to schedule content stored from previous schedul-
ing periods, the approaches are able to ﬁll the entire schedul-
ing window during every scheduling period because there is
always a backlog of unscheduled content to ﬁll any gaps.
In addition, the round robin approach and priority-CP ap-
proach are able to increase the coverage per user (the cov-
erage per user provided by priority-coverage remains within
1% of what was provided for scheduling without stored con-
tent). The median coverage per user for priority-CP is 87.8%
(standard deviation=32.1%) and the median coverage per user
for round robin is 84.1% (standard deviation=23.8%). Con-
sequently, the Jain fairness index changes for these two ap-
proaches, and when operating over stored content, the Jain
fairness index for the priority-CP approach decreases to 0.75
and the Jain fairness index for the round robin approach in-
creases to 0.91.
There is a clear trade-off between timeliness and coverage.
Storing unscheduled data for future scheduling periods en-
sures that content has more opportunities to be broadcast.
However, each content object has to compete against a grow-
ing reservoir of content in order to be scheduled. This can
lead to longer delays between publication time and broadcast
time. One way this trade-off can be negotiated is by regu-
larly ﬂushing unscheduled content after it has been stored for
longer than a certain period of time. The ﬂush period would
be based on the delay requirements and the average volume
of data published per hour. Another way to balance delay and
coverage would be to schedule only content published during
the scheduling period and at certain times, consider stored
content for broadcast. Our analysis in the section “Publica-
tion time” reveals that Instagram users have an eight hour
trough in activity, meaning they are not likely to be check-
ing their phone for incoming posts during this period. During
the hours of the day that users are checking content more fre-
quently, it would make sense to only broadcast the most cur-
rent published content. Conversely, the period of inactivity
might be an opportunity to broadcast stored content.

1269

DISCUSSION
Here we discuss some of the issues of practical information
dissemination via social RBDS, including user interaction,
moving beyond social content, and bootstrapping. Although
this paper has focused on a Native American community, it
is important to note that the proposed social broadcast over
RBDS could be used beyond the reservation context in de-
veloping areas where there is limited broadband coverage or
where communication services are prohibitively expensive.

Generalizability
The data used to answer our research questions (RQ1, RQ2,
and RQ3) was derived from Instgaram users from six dif-
ferent Native American reservations in San Diego County.
While the OSN usage data that we characterize in our anal-
ysis are speciﬁc to TDV Instagram users, research exploring
the social media practices of both indigenous and rural com-
munities has revealed similar characteristics of high locality
of interest with respect to content and social connections [?,
?, ?, ?, ?]. Here we discuss how the observed locality of inter-
est in other communities might be leveraged by our proposed
OSN content delivery system over RBDS. We provide two
examples of how our ﬁndings would transfer to other com-
munities based on their OSN usage patterns. The ﬁrst exam-
ple describes OSN usage in the Sioux Lookout region, which
is home to indigenous Ojibway, Oji-Cree, and Cree peoples.
The second example describes OSN usage in a rural village
in Africa.
Survey-based studies performed by Molyneaux et al. on
the social networking practices of indigenous peoples in the
Sioux Lookout region of Northwestern Ontario reveal that
OSNs are the most frequently used web applications and that
members of the community use technology to help preserve
their indigenous culture by posting cultural content to OSNs,
posting announcements about upcoming cultural events, and
reading and listening to other OSN users’ culturally relevant
posts [?].
In this study, 60.2% of the 588 surveyed users
accessed OSNs to daily interact with co-located OSN users.
This is similar to our ﬁnding that TDV Instagram users in-
teracted with content from co-located users 46.6× more of-
ten than content generated by users outside the TDV network.
The locality of interest suggests that OSN content transmitted
over RBDS can provide high coverage to this community of
users, particularly if content pertains to local cultural topics.
Looking to increasingly global populations, locality of inter-
est (particularly in small, rural communities) is strong. Pre-
vious studies of network trafﬁc locality of a rural village in
Macha, Zambia reveal that users are highly involved with on-
line social networks and that the majority of Facebook instant
message exchanges are between co-located users [?]. Further
study of OSN usage in the Macha community revealed that
46% of downloaded Facebook images were not unique im-
ages [?] and the top 10 monthly downloaded Youtube videos
received an average of 541 views per month with a standard
deviation of 2,580 views per month [?]. This implies that
the Macha community could be well-served by our proposed
OSN-to-RBDS system given the high rate of overlapping con-
tent interests exhibited by co-located users.

1270

SESSION: NON-PROFITS AND HUMANITARIAN RESPONSES

Interaction and feedback
The scheduling approaches we evaluated had access to users’
follow networks prior to scheduling content. Since follow
networks are dynamic, there would need to be a mechanism
that allows users to update their social network information
in order to receive content from all of the content creators
they follow. Additionally, the data sets used to evaluate
the feasibility of broadcasting OSN content via RBDS did
not incorporate information on relevance based on ratings or
preferences–from the TDV Instagram users as a group or as
individuals. If users had access to a text-message based in-
terface, they would be able to assign priority preferences to
different types of content or to provide feedback on the rel-
evance of content that was broadcast. With this integrated
information, it would be possible to develop models that pre-
dict relevance of incoming content to a speciﬁc user and to a
group of users.

Access
In order to deploy a system like the one described in Fig-
ure ??, there are a few bootstrapping concerns that must be
addressed. If users wish to receive OSN content over RBDS,
there needs to be an interface for them to grant access to their
social network information or subscribe to certain content.
While this is possible with the current APIs for most OSN
platforms (e.g. Instagram, Facebook, Twitter) and sites that
publish RSS feeds, it still requires users to have some form
of Internet access over which to grant these permissions or
requests. With federal grant programs focusing on provid-
ing broadband access to schools and libraries on reservations,
there may be public Internet access available in the commu-
nity that would allow users to provide initial information to
an RBDS content broadcast system. However, on reserva-
tions that span a signiﬁcant geographic area, the nearest In-
ternet connection may be tens of miles away, and access may
require signiﬁcant time and fuel resources even if the Inter-
net service itself is free [?]. One way to address this chal-
lenge involves a text-message based application that could
interface with a service that grants access to a users’ social
network information on their behalf. Although high speed
mobile broadband services such as 3G, 4G, and LTE are not
pervasive in Tribal lands, 2G services (which work predomi-
nantly for voice and text messaging) have signiﬁcant penetra-
tion and most service plans include unlimited text-messaging
or inexpensive “voice and text-only” plans.

CONCLUSION
While it is easy to imagine that issues of the digital divide
are endemic to developing nations, there are still communi-
ties in developed nations that do not have access to the In-
ternet due to lack of availability. In this study, we focus pre-
dominantly on the digital divide present on Native Ameri-
can reservations in the U.S. [?]. Prior studies investigating
the informational needs of reservation communities have em-
phasized the importance of OSN content for connecting users
together through indigenous language [?, ?], cultural prac-
tice [?], experience sharing [?], participation in political and
social movements [?, ?], and daily communication [?]. Un-
derstanding the information habits of indigenous communi-
ties enables researchers to develop new solutions that help

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

users that live beyond the borders of Internet service con-
nect to each other through existing platforms for computer-
supported collaboration (e.g. OSNs). Our characterization of
OSN usage by TDV Instagram users reveals a high locality of
interest that is consistent with reports of OSN usage in both
indigenous [?, ?, ?] and rural [?, ?] communities around
the world. Based on these observations, we propose a sys-
tem that disseminates OSN content via RBDS. We show that
RBDS holds unlocked potential for content dissemination in
communities that do not have Internet access, and our evalua-
tion of various content scheduling approaches suggests that
RBDS bandwidth can be shared fairly amongst co-located
users even when they have relatively dissimilar content inter-
ests. Through the implementation of our system, users who
have been historically excluded from the unique collaboration
opportunities afforded by OSNs could participate using in-
frastructure and technologies that are already ubiquitous and
affordable.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Joseph Perralta and Geoff Herrin of
the Southern California Tribal Digital Village Network for
their help with the collection of data used in this analysis.
This work was funded by NSF Graduate Research Fellowship
Program under Grant No. DGE-1144085 and NSF Network
Science and Engineering (NetSE) Award CNS-1064821.

REFERENCES
1. Tribal Fund Phase I Potentially Eligible Areas.

http://www.fcc.gov/maps/tribal-mobility-fund-
phase-i-potentially-eligible-areas, March 2013.

2. The Bro Network Security Monitor.

https://www.bro.org/, October 2014.

3. Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile

Movement. http://www.ntia.doc.gov/files/ntia/pu
blications/exploring_the_digital_nation_embrac
ing_the_mobile_internet_10162014.pdf, October
2014.

4. Native Nations Consultation and Policy.

http://www.fcc.gov/encyclopedia/native-nations-
consultation-and-policy, December 2014.

5. traceanon. http:

//www.wand.net.nz/trac/libtrace/wiki/TraceAnon,
May 2014.

6. World Fact Book. https://www.cia.gov/Library/publ

ications/the-world-factbook/fields/2213.html,
June 2014.

7. Ahtone, T. Radio on the Reservation.

http://projects.aljazeera.com/2014/reservation-
radio/index.html, March 2014.

8. Alia, V. The New Media Nation: Indigenous Peoples and

Global Communication, vol. 2. Berghan Books, 2010.

9. Ben-David, Y., Vallentin, M., Fowler, S., and Brewer, E.
JaldiMAC: Taking the Distance Further. In Proceedings

of the 4th ACM Workshop on Networked Systems for
Developing Regions, NSDR ’10 (San Francisco,
California, June 2010), 7–13.

10. Carpenter, P., Gibson, K., Kakekaspan, C., and

O’Donnell, S. Social Media in Remote First Nation
Communities. Journal of Rural and Community
Development 39, 2 (2014), 275–278.

11. Castro, M., Druschel, P., Kermarrec, A., Nandi, A.,

Rowstron, A., and Singh, A. SplitStream:
High-Bandwidth Content Distribution in Cooperative
Environments. In Peer-to-Peer Systems II, M. Kaashoek
and I. Stoica, Eds., vol. 2735 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science. 2003, 292–303.

12. Chen, J., Hutchful, D., Thies, W., and Subramanian, L.
Analyzing and Accelerating Web Access in a School in
Peri-urban India. In Proceedings of the 20th
International Conference on World Wide Web, WWW
’11 (Hyderabad, India, March 2011), 443–452.

13. Chen, X., and Zhang, X. Coordinated Data Prefetching
by Utilizing Reference Information at Both Proxy and
Web Servers. vol. 29, ACM (Cambridge, MA, USA,
September 2001), 32–38.

14. Dilley, J., Maggs, B., Parikh, J., Prokop, H., Sitaraman,
R., and Weihl, B. Globally Distributed Content Delivery.
IEEE Internet Computing 6, 5 (September 2002), 50–58.
15. Du, B., Demmer, M., and Brewer, E. Analysis of WWW

Trafﬁc in Cambodia and Ghana. In Proceedings of the
15th International Conference on World Wide Web,
WWW ’06 (Edinburgh, Scotland, May 2006), 771–780.

16. Duarte, M. Network Sovereignty: Understanding the

Implications of Tribal Broadband Networks. PhD thesis,
University of Washington, November 2013.

17. Duggan, M., Ellison, N. B., Lampe, C., Lenhart, A., and

Madden, M. Social Media Update 2014.
http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/01/09/social-m
edia-update-2014/, January 2015.

18. Ellison, N., Steinﬁeld, C., and Lampe, C. The beneﬁts of

Facebook friends: Social capital and college students
use of online social network sites. Journal of
Computer-Mediated Communication 12, 4 (2007),
1143–1168.

19. Fan, L., Cao, P., Lin, W., and Jacobson, Q. Web

Prefetching Between Low-bandwidth Clients and
Proxies: Potential and Performance. In Proceedings of
the 1999 ACM SIGMETRICS International Conference
on Measurement and Modeling of Computer Systems
(Atlanta, GA, USA, May 1999), 178–187.

20. Gibson, K., Kakekaspan, M., Kakekaspan, G.,

O’Donnell, S., Walmark, B., and Beaton, B. A History
of Everyday Communication by Community Members
of Fort Severn First Nation: From Hand Deliveries to
Virtual Pokes. In Proceedings of the 2012 iConference
(Toronto, ON, Canada, February 2012).

1271

SESSION: NON-PROFITS AND HUMANITARIAN RESPONSES

33. Milgram, S. The Small World Problem. Psychology

Today 2, 1 (1967), 60–67.

34. Molyneaux, H., O’Donnell, S., Kakekaspan, C.,

Walmark, B., Budka, P., and Gibson, K. How Women in
Remote and Rural First Nation Communities are Using
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT).
Canadian Journal of Communication 8, 2 (2013),
79–97.

35. Rahmati, A., Zhong, L., Vasudevan, V., Wickramasuriya,

J., and Stewart, D. Enabling Pervasive Mobile
Applications with the FM Radio Broadcast Data System.
In Proceedings of the Eleventh Workshop on Mobile
Computing Systems and Applications, HotMobile ’10
(Annapolis, MD, USA, February 2010), 78–83.

36. Saroiu, S., Gummadi, K. P., Dunn, R. J., Gribble, S. D.,

and Levy, H. M. An Analysis of Internet Content
Delivery Systems. vol. 36 (December 2002), 315–327.

37. Shah, S., and Joshi, A. COCO: A Web-based Data

Tracking Architecture for Challenged Network
Environments. In Proceedings of the First ACM
Symposium on Computing for Development, ACM DEV
’10 (London, United Kingdom, December 2010), 48–55.
38. Siegler, K. Radio Station KYAY is Lifeline For Apache

Tribe.
http://www.npr.org/2013/09/03/218455207/radio-
station-kyay-is-lifeline-for-apache-tribe,
September 2013.

39. Smith, A. Why Americans Use Social Media.

http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/01/09/social-m
edia-update-2014/, November 2011.

40. Smith, G. On Tribal Lands, Digital Divide Brings New

Form of Isolation.
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/04/20/digita
l-divide-tribal-lands_n_1403046.html, April 2012.
41. Vigil, M., Rantanen, M., and Belding, E. A First Look at

Tribal Web Trafﬁc. In Proceedings of the 24th
International Conference on World Wide Web, WWW
’15 (Florence, Italy, May 2015), 1155–1165.

42. Watts, D., and Strogatz, S. Collective dynamics of

small-world networks. Nature 393, 6684 (1998),
440–442.

43. Zhao, Y., Eager, D. L., and Vernon, M. K. Scalable

On-demand Streaming of Nonlinear Media. IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Networking 15, 5 (October 2007),
1149–1162.

44. Zheleva, M., Schmitt, P., Vigil, M., and Belding, E.

Internet Bandwidth Upgrade: Implications on
Performance and Usage in Rural Zambia. Information
Technologies & International Development 11, 2 (2015),
1–17.

21. Gilbert, E., Karahalios, K., and Sandvig, C. The

Network in the Garden: An Empirical Analysis of Social
Media in Rural Life. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
CHI ’08 (Florence, Italy, 2008), 1603–1612.

22. Guo, S., Derakhshani, M., Falaki, M., Ismail, U., Luk,

R., Oliver, E., Ur Rahman, S., Seth, A., Zaharia, M., and
Keshav, S. Design and Implementation of the KioskNet
System. Computer Networks 55, 1 (2011), 264 –281.

23. Guskin, E., and Mitchell, A. Innovating News in Native

Communities. http://www.stateofthemedia.org/
2012/native-american-news-media/, January 2012.

24. Ioannidis, S., Chaintreau, A., and Massoulie, L. Optimal

and Scalable Distribution of Content Updates Over a
Mobile Social Network. In IEEE INFOCOM 2009
(April 2009), 1422–1430.

25. Jaccard, P. The Distribution of the Flora in the Alpine

Zone. New Phytologist 11, 2 (1912), 37–50.

26. Jain, R., Chiu, D., and Hawe, W. A Quantitative

Measure of Fairness and Discrimination for Resource
Allocation in Shared Computer Systems. Technical
Report, Digital Equipment Corporation, DEC-TR-301
(1984).

27. Johnson, D., Pejovic, V., Belding, E., and van Stam, G.

Trafﬁc Characterization and Internet Usage in Rural
Africa. In Proceedings of the 20th International
Conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’11
(Hyderabad, India, March 2011), 493–502.

28. Johnson, D., Pejovic, V., Belding, E., and van Stam, G.

VillageShare: Facilitating Content Generation and
Sharing in Rural Networks. In Proceedings of the 2nd
ACM Symposium on Computing for Development, ACM
DEV ’12 (Atlanta, GA, USA, March 2012), 61–70.

29. Krishnamoorthi, V., Carlsson, N., Eager, D., Mahanti,

A., and Shahmehri, N. Quality-adaptive Prefetching for
Interactive Branched Video Using HTTP-based
Adaptive Streaming. In Proceedings of the ACM
International Conference on Multimedia, MM ’14
(Orlando, Florida, USA, November 2014), 317–326.

30. Liben-Nowell, D., Novak, J., Kumar, R., Raghavan, P.,

and Tomkins, A. Geographic Routing in Social
Networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 102, 33 (2005),
11623–11628.

31. McCaskill, D., and Rutherford, J. Indigenous peoples of

South-East Asia: poverty, identity and resistance. In
Indigenous Peoples and Poverty: An International
Perspective, R. Eversole, J.-A. McNeish, and A. D.
Cimadamore, Eds. Zed Books, London, UK, December
2005, 126–157.

32. McPherson, M., Smith-Lovin, L., and Cook, J. Birds of

a Feather: Homophily in Social Networks. Annual
Review of Sociology (2001), 415–444.

1272

