CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Confidence & Control: Examining Adolescent Preferences 

for Technologies that Promote Wellness 

Farnaz Irannejad Bisafar1 & Andrea Grimes Parker1,2  

1College of Computer and Information Science 

2Bouvé College of Health Sciences 

irannejadbisafar.f@husky.neu.edu, a.parker@neu.edu  

Northeastern University 
Boston, United States 

 

their  desired  degree  of  engagement  with 

ABSTRACT  
Our  work  contributes  to  the  growing  body  of  CSCW 
research  examining  how 
technology  can  encourage 
wellness.  In  a  10-week  participatory  design  study,  we 
examined  how  technology  can  help  teens  overcome  intra-
personal  and  social  barriers  to  healthy  eating  and  positive 
relationships (the wellness topics of greatest interest to our 
participants).  Our  findings  revealed  teens’  desire  for 
expressive  technology  that  helps  them  initiate  dialogue, 
negotiate conflicts, and restrict communication with family, 
and 
tools 
promoting healthy eating (passively to actively involved in 
behavior change). Our analysis further yielded crosscutting 
themes: the importance of examining issues of self-efficacy, 
locus of control, and socio-ecological context in the design 
of health technology. We use our findings to contribute new 
directions  for  CSCW  research:  developing  a  nuanced 
perspective  on  the  psychology  of  change,  designing  for 
varying  levels  of  self-efficacy  and  locus  of  control,  and 
problematizing the persuasive technology research agenda. 
Author  Keywords  
Health  Technology;  Adolescents;  Participatory  Design; 
Socio-Ecological Model; Relationships; Healthy Eating. 
ACM  Classification  Keywords  
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous.  
INTRODUCTION  
Many health behaviors are formed in adolescence and can 
predict behaviors in adulthood. Therefore, it is important to 
design  health  promotion 
facilitate 
adolescent’s  healthy  lifestyles  [12,45].  The  United  States 
(U.S.) Department of Health and Human Services specifies 
Permission  to make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all or part of this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  the  author(s)  must  be 
honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or 
republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific  permission 
from 
Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
Copyright  is  held  by  the  owner/author(s).  Publication  rights  licensed  to 
ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02$15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820028 

fee.  Request  permissions 

that  can 

and/or 

a 

tools 

five  main  areas  of  adolescent  health:  mental  health, 
physical  activity  and  nutrition,  substance  abuse,  healthy 
relationships,  and  reproductive  health.  Prior  public  health 
research  has  extensively  documented  the  importance  of 
developing interventions to address these issues [12,45]. In 
HCI  and  CSCW,  researchers  have  increasingly  examined 
how  technology  can  improve  children’s  health  behaviors, 
especially  in  the  area  of  physical  activity  [25,28,48].  This 
work  has  examined  behavioral  influences  such  as  social 
support,  social  comparison,  self-efficacy,  and  the  family. 
Prior research has often examined these various influences 
individually or in specific combinations (e.g., issues of self-
efficacy in school-based interventions).  
Our  goal  in  this  exploratory  work  was  to  identify  new 
opportunities for technology design by taking a step back to 
examine  the  complex  interplay  of  influences  on  teen’s 
health-related  behaviors.  Prior  work  has  shown 
the 
importance of ecological approaches to intervention design, 
that  is,  appreciating  not  only  intra-personal  influences  on 
wellness (e.g., motivation), but also how broader social and 
environmental influences work together to impact attitudes 
and behaviors [42]. Using this socio-ecological framing, we 
conducted a 10-week participatory study to help 7th graders 
reflect  upon  various  ways  in  which  multiple  levels  of 
influence  constrain  or  enable  them  to  engage  in  healthy 
behaviors  [42],  and  the  subsequent  implications  for  the 
design  of  technologies  that  encourage  wellness.  Through 
this  work,  we  gained  critical  insight  into  their  values, 
attitudes,  and  lived  experiences.  Our  findings  serve  as  a 
useful starting point for the design of systems that are used 
in, and reflect the social context of wellbeing. 
After  being  introduced  to  a  variety  of  health  topics,  our 
participants  were  most  interested  in  building  healthy 
relationships  with  family  members  and  nutritious  eating. 
After  learning  what  topics  our  participants  were  most 
interested  in,  we  used  the  Socio-Ecological  Model  (SEM) 
of  health  behavior  [42]  to  develop  design  activities  that 
elucidated  the  various  influences  on  their  health.  In  this 
model, there are multiple levels of influence on a person’s 
health  [36].  Participants  were  guided  in  activities  that 
helped  them  brainstorm  how  technology  could  promote 
healthy  eating  habits  and  better  relationships  with  their 
family  members  given  intrapersonal,  interpersonal,  and 
community levels of influence.  

160

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

their 

to  envision 

environmental 

(self-confidence)  and 

changes 
little  effort  required  from 

Several themes emerged from our analysis of the qualitative 
data  yielded  in  our  design  workshops.  Our  findings 
demonstrated how students wanted expressive technologies 
that  convey  their  emotions  to  help  them  manage  their 
relationships.  Furthermore,  participants  designed  systems 
that  support  active  engagement  (requiring  individuals’ 
active  effort  to  change  their  health  behaviors)  and  passive 
that 
engagement 
(involving 
influence  health  with 
the 
individuals  themselves)  with  eating  behavior  change  [42]. 
Our  findings  also  highlighted  an  interesting  additional 
category where adolescents desired a hyper-passive role in 
changing  their  eating  behavior  (exhibiting  their  lack  of 
agency in improving their habits).  
While  our  participants  explored 
two  different  health 
domains, cross-cutting themes emerged, characterizing how 
self-efficacy 
locus  of  control 
(perception that the outcome of an experience is attributed 
to the self or to others) impacted participants’ perception of 
the  role  that  health  technologies  can  play.  Limited  self-
efficacy  and  an  external  locus  of  control  seemed  to  lead 
participants 
interaction  with  health 
technologies  as  passive  or  as  a  secondary  user.  That  is, 
many of our teens’ systems were designed to “fix” others, 
their  environment,  or  themselves—without  their  active 
involvement. 
Our  research  makes  three  contributions  to  the  CSCW 
community.  First,  we  characterize  a  set  of  adolescent 
perspectives on the role that technology can have in health 
promotion. Second, we use our findings to contribute new 
directions for CSCW research more broadly: developing a 
nuanced  perspective  on 
the  psychology  of  change, 
designing  for  varying  levels  of  self-efficacy  and  locus  of 
control,  and  problematizing  the  persuasive  technology 
research  agenda.  Given  the  rapidly  growing  interest  in 
health and behavior change within the CSCW community, 
our  work  can  help  guide  future  design  and  evaluation 
research.  Finally,  our  methodological  approach,  which  is 
grounded  in  a  socio-ecological  framing,  can  help  guide 
future research examining people’s perceptions of personal, 
social, and environmental influences on wellness and how 
technology  can  help 
them  overcome  barriers  while 
leveraging resources. 
RELATED  WORK  
Of  the  five  health  topics  that  were  introduced  to  our 
participants,  we  focus  on  developing  healthy  relationships 
and eating habits, as these were the topics they identified as 
most  important  to  them.  Thus,  we  believe  them  to  be  an 
opportune  starting  point  for  promoting  adolescent  health. 
Below,  we  overview  previous  work  exploring  each  topic 
and  conclude  with  a  discussion  of  theoretical  constructs 
governing our research. 
Adolescents’  healthy  relationships  
The  importance  of  developing  healthy  relationships  in 
adolescence has been widely studied. Research has stressed 

161

in 

in 

[40], 

the  U.S.,  especially 

in  our  study  we  explored 

the  important  role  that  parent-child  relationships  and 
parental  support  play  in  teens’  disengagement  from  high-
risk behaviors, such as alcohol consumption and drug abuse 
[9,22]. While much prior work has focused on the role of 
the  parent  in  improving  parent-child  relationships,  other 
research has attempted to study children's perceptions of the 
relationship. While prior work has mostly examined how to 
ameliorate  parent-child  relationships  from  the  parents’ 
standpoint 
teens’ 
relationships with their parents from their own perspective.  
Researchers  have  explored  how  technology  can  help 
mediate  parent-child  relationships.  For  example,  Wade  et 
al. [46] examined how an online tool could support conflict 
negotiation  between  teens  with  brain  injuries  and  their 
mothers.  Much  CSCW  research  has  focused  on 
to 
supporting parent-child relationships over distance [39,49]. 
Our work contributes to CSCW by providing more insight 
into  adolescents’  perspective  on  how  technology  can 
address  a  broader  range  of  challenges  faced  with  their 
family members. 
Adolescents’  nutrition  
Obesity  and  other  diet-related  health  problems  remain 
widespread 
lower-income 
communities  such  as  those  in  which  our  research  was 
conducted [18,31]. Therefore, developing interventions that 
promote  healthy  eating  in  adolescents  is  critical.  Several 
studies in HCI have focused on helping people to improve 
their  eating  habits  through  diet  tracking  and  games  to 
educate  children  about  nutritional 
[11,16,33]. 
However,  little  research  has  explored  the  development  of 
technologies  promoting  healthy  eating  specifically  among 
adolescents.  One  notable  exception  is  [33],  where  the 
authors  designed  an  online  forum  to  help  teens  think 
critically about media messages (food advertisements). This 
research  focused  on  a  specific  environmental  barrier  in 
teen’s  lives,  namely,  media  messages.  In  [37]  the  authors 
designed  a  mobile  application  to  raise  family  members’ 
awareness about their snacking behaviors. Our exploratory 
builds on this prior work by providing a broader picture of 
our adolescents’ perspectives on the social context of their 
eating  habits  and  how  they  felt  technology  could  promote 
healthy eating. 
Theoretical  Foundations  
To help ground the discussions in this paper, we provide a 
brief overview of pertinent theoretical principles. First, our 
work is motivated by socio-ecological models, which posit 
that  health-related  behaviors  are  influenced  by  a  range  of 
psychological,  social,  economic,  geographic,  and  cultural 
influences. As such, interventions that target these multiple 
levels of influence may more effectively encourage healthy 
behaviors.  At  the  psychological  level,  there  are  two 
concepts of particular relevance to our work. First, previous 
research  has  highlighted  the  importance  of  studying  self-
efficacy  in  adolescents  (confidence  in  one’s  ability  to 
engage  in  health  behavior  change)  [25,34],  demonstrating, 

facts 

for  example,  how  users’  level  of  self-efficacy  can  impact 
the  extent  to  which  they  challenge  themselves  in  health 
games  [25].  Second,  CSCW  researchers  have  shown  how 
social  supports  and  reflective  thinking  features  in  health 
monitoring  tools  can  shift  individuals’  locus  of  control 
(perceptions of whether health behaviors are determined by 
the  self  or  external  forces).  While  prior  work  has  studied 
how  systems  can  shift  these  psychological  constructs,  our 
findings  extend  this  prior  work  by  characterizing  how 
teens’  existing  levels  of  self-efficacy  and  locus  of  control 
appeared  to  influence  their  fundamental  beliefs  regarding 
how technology can and should encourage wellness. 
METHOD  
We conducted a 10-week field study with 7th graders in a 
low-income  neighborhood  of  a  city  in  Boston,  MA.  This 
work  was  guided  by  our  interest  in  examining  which 
aspects  of  health  adolescents  are  most  interested  in,  and 
how  they  feel  technology  can  help  them  address  those 
issues.  We  partnered  with  an  organization  that  provides 
school  day  programs  in  low-income  neighborhoods.  One 
initiative is a 10-week apprenticeship program (one session 
per  week),  in  which  students  learn  a  specific  skill.  We 
taught  basic  user-centered  design  (UCD)  principles  to  a 
class  of  7th  grade  students  and  focused  specifically  on 
helping students articulate ideas for how technology could 
address  health  challenges  that  adolescent  youth  face. 
Students  were  guided  through  the  stages  of  UCD  process, 
and the program culminated with building a paper prototype 
that showcased their ideas. Our apprenticeship took place at 
one  of  the  lowest-ranked  public  schools  in  the  state; 
however after implementing strategies from the Turnaround 
Model  (an  approach  to  rehabilitating  troubled  schools  by 
changing staff members and the culture of the school) [30], 
its  performance  and  ambience  has  changed  dramatically 
over  the  past  few  years.  Our  University’s  Institutional 
Review Board approved this study. 
We  had  15  adolescents  in  our  study  (four  boys  and  11 
girls).  Seven  students  were  African  American  and  eight 
were  Latino.  All  students  were  eligible  for  free/reduced 
lunch,  a  program  that  provides  assistance  to  low-income 
families. Three participants spoke very little English; two of 
the bilingual students helped translate for them. 
Participatory  design  activities  
Six  groups  of  students  were  created,  with  each  group 
addressing one specific health issue. In each session (held 
once  per  week,  for  1.5  hours),  a  member  of  our  research 
team led students through the study activities. Up to three 
graduate students acted as assistant facilitators each week, 
helping groups with the various activities. In addition, one 
teacher  helped  throughout  the  process,  assisting  mainly 
with  class  management.  In  the  following  subsections  we 
provide an overview of our participatory design process. 
Choosing  a  health  topic  
Youth were introduced to five topics related to adolescent 
wellness:  healthy  eating,  physical  activity,  healthy 

SESSION: TOWARDS PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL WELLNESS

Figure 1: SEM Wheel Chart. Red Circle: Participants’ 

preference for chips, candy, ice-cream and fried food as their 
personal characteristics that make healthy eating hard, Yellow 

Circle: kind people (who buy ice-cream for them), hungry 
people, their friends and their families are influential people 
contributing to teens’ eating habits. White Circle: Participants 
identified Cape Verde (being one of the participants’ home 
country), Puerto Rico, Burger King and New York, as places 

they usually visit. 

relationships,  substance  abuse,  and  mental  health  [2].  We 
used a popular presentation software application (Prezi) to 
create  an  interactive  tool  through  which  students  explored 
each  topic.  Students  then  indicated  which  topics  were  of 
greatest  interest  to  them;  we  grouped  participants  based 
upon  their  stated  interests.  At  the  end  of  this  process,  we 
created six groups of students (two to three students in each 
group),  with  four  groups  of  only  girls  or  boys  and  two 
mixed gender groups. Groups then chose one health topic to 
focus  on;  most  groups  focused  on  “healthy  eating”  or 
“healthy relationships” (five groups, n=12); we focus on the 
findings from these participants in this paper. 
Identification  of  influential  factors  in  health  
We  sought  to  develop  a  tool  that  was  playful,  age-
appropriate, and helped trigger participants’ thoughts about 
the  health-related  scenarios  that  might  happen  in  their 
everyday  lives.  We  used  the  socio-ecological  model  of 
health  behavior  [42]  to  create  a  tool  that  helps  students 
think in a structured way about the factors in their everyday 
life that contribute to health challenges. We designed what 
we  call  a  Socio-ecological  Model  (SEM)  Wheel  Chart, 
which is composed of three concentric circles and an arrow. 
The center of the circles is pinned in a way that allows the 
circles to spin. Figure 1 illustrates one group’s SEM Wheel 
Chart; each circle is divided into five sections, one of which 
stays blank. We asked students to fill in each section of the 
first circle with personal characteristics that influence their 

162

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

health, the second circle with people they interact with, and 
the third circle with the places they most often visit. Then 
they  spun  the  circles,  as  depicted  in  the  picture  and 
discussed  how  the  aligned  items  from  each  circle,  could 
collectively influence their health. For instance, in Figure 1 
the students could think of a situation in which they are in 
Cape  Verde  (this  student’s  home  country),  with  friends, 
considering  they  like  chips  and  reflect  on  how  the 
aforementioned situation can affect their eating habits. One 
section  is  left  blank  in  each  circle  to allow  participants  to 
consider combinations of one, two or three different levels 
of  factors  at  a  time,  which  in  turn  helps  them  to  think  of 
more general situations compared to more specific cases in 
which all three levels of influence are considered at once. 
Brainstorming  technology  ideas  and  Building  Prototypes  
We gave each group large paper and sticky notes and asked 
them to brainstorm as many technology ideas as they could 
to  address  their  health  issue  of  interest.  Groups  were  then 
paired and asked to explain two of their best ideas to one 
another.  After  reflecting  on  the  feedback  they  received, 
groups chose what they felt was their best idea and started 
to  build  a  paper  prototype  using  materials  such  as 
cardboard,  stickers,  and  construction  paper.  Students  later 
iterated on their prototypes using the critiques provided by 
other  groups.  Figure  2  illustrates  some  of  the  technology 
ideas that the students sketched.  
Building  a  prototype  and  role-playing  with  it  helped  the 
students  to  articulate  how  they  wanted  to  interact  with 
technology. For example after they built the Galaxy Mood 
Watch,  they  were  able  to  show  situations  in  which  they 
would  use  the  watch,  how  they  would  interact  with  it  if 
their  parents  or  siblings  started  to  bother  them.  These 
activities helped bridge the gap between their thoughts and 
how  the  technology  might  work  in  practice.  Previous 
studies  have  similarly  used  participants'  game  designs  in 
order to draw out directions for future work [27]. 
All teens successfully completed the activities and appeared 
to reflect upon the various topics, engaging in dialogue with 
researchers.  They 
their 
perceived  health  barriers,  built  prototypes,  participated  in 
class  discussions,  and  presented  their  design  ideas.  The 
stories  they  shared  about  their  lives  and  the  design  ideas 
they  created,  thus,  serve  as  a  rich  dataset  to  help  us 
understand their values and attitudes towards wellness and 
technology's  role  in  mediating  health-related  behaviors. 
Prior work has documented the challenge of involving teens 
in  the  design  process  [5,15].  Teens  in  our  study  varied  in 
their level of enthusiasm with some being very engaged and 
others  being  less  engaged.  At  the  end  of  this  paper,  we 
provide methodological reflections upon our work, and use 
our  case  study  to  discuss  how  CSCW  researchers  can 
continue to engage teens in participatory design. 
Data  Collection  &  Analysis  
Throughout  the  apprenticeship,  multiple  data  collection 
methods were employed. Each session was audio-recorded 

researchers  about 

talked 

to 

 

Figure 2: Participant sketches of their technology concepts, 

including (a) Simmunication (b) Robotenator and (c) 

Galaxy Mood Watch. 

 

and  transcribed  and  each  facilitator  compiled  field  notes 
based upon their session observations. In addition, we used 
as data the information that students entered in their SEM 
Wheel  Charts,  their  technology  idea  drawings  and  notes, 
and their final paper prototypes. We used open coding [43] 
to  inductively  characterize  concepts  represented  in  this 
qualitative  data.  The  resulting  codes  were  iteratively 
clustered  to  arrive  at  higher-level  themes  across  the 
aforementioned data sources. 
We  refer  to  each  group  using  a  coding  scheme:  letters  R 
and N respectively denote the group number for participants 
working  on  healthy  Relationships  and  Nutrition  (R1-R3, 
N1-2). We use the letter P to indicate participant numbers. 
Below we overview each group’s final technology idea: 
Simmunication  (R1,  P1&P2):  A  two-player  game  for  a 
parent and child. The game has various levels in which both 
parent and child define a challenge they have had in their 
relationship.  They  then  type  their  proposed  solution  to 
overcoming  the  problem  and  advance  to  the  next  level  if 
they fix their problem. The game’s goal is to find a mutual 
solution 
the  parent-child  problem  and  encourage 
to 
conversation. 
Car FaceTime App (R2, P3&P4): This is a car application 
that  parents  would  use  to  maintain  contact  with  their 
children  and  spend  more  time  with  them  electronically. 
This tool is very similar to a FaceTime application placed in 
the car. 
Galaxy  Mood  Watch  (R3,  P5-P7):  A  smart  watch  that 
would  show  one's  feelings  towards  his  or  her  siblings,  in 

163

order  to  provide  a  nuanced  understanding  of  how  one  is 
feeling. 
Robotenator  (N1,  P8-P10):  A  pocket-sized  robot  that  has 
healthy food recipes. 
Refriehealther (N2, P11&P12): A refrigerator at school that 
serves healthy foods using a microphone as the input device 
for the user’s food preferences. 
FINDINGS  
Through  our  inductive  analysis,  several  themes  emerged, 
characterizing  how  participants  felt  technology  could  help 
them  achieve  wellness  as  they  interact  with  their  physical 
and social environment. Our findings highlight not only the 
role  participants  wanted  expressive  technology  to  play  in 
addressing  their  relationships,  but  more  importantly,  in 
many  cases  reveals  their  external  locus  of  control  (belief 
that control over behaviors is external versus internal to the 
self)  and  limited  self-efficacy  (confidence).  Moreover  we 
identified participants’ perception of themselves as actively 
versus  passively  improving  their  health  and  the  types  of 
tools  they  desired  based  on  how  much  they  wanted  to  be 
engaged. We will also expand on a third category of hyper-
passive  technologies,  which  reveal  participants’  low  self-
efficacy  and  lack  of  agency  in  changing  their  health 
behavior. Identification of participants’ locus of control and 
self-efficacy  when  using  social  tools  and  their  level  of 
desired engagement can help designers in developing tools 
that could be better received by teenagers. 
Technology’s   potential   role  
faceted  relationships  
Three  groups  (R1,  R2,  R3)  chose  the  topic  of  healthy 
relationships.  Our  findings  show  that  students’  need  for 
communication  with  parents,  their  mood,  and  feeling 
misunderstood  were  among  the  most  important  factors 
impacting  their  desire  to  initiate,  negotiate  or  shield  them 
from communication.  
Technology  as  initiator  of  communication  
Some  design  ideas  originated  from  participants’  desire  to 
communicate  more  with  their  parents.  In  this  regard,  R2 
described  their  parents  as  a  source  of  protection  and 
information and P3 pointed out that: 

in   adolescents’   multi-­

It  [a  healthy  relationship  with  parents]  is  important  ‘cause 
like  if  you  got  a  healthy  relationship  with  your  parents,  if 
[others]… bully you on the Internet or something like that, 
then [parents] could maybe give you answer or like help you 
solve the problem.  

Our  participants  brainstormed  ideas  for  how  technology 
could  initiate  communication  with  their  parents,  with  the 
goal of seeking support and information. R2 expressed their 
desire  for  increased  communication  with  their  parents 
through  spending  more  time  with  them  and  sharing  the 
events happening in their daily lives. One of their ideas was 
a  mobile  phone  application  that  would  remind  parents  to 
call  their  children  and  spend  more  time  talking  to  them. 
Their  final  design  idea  was  a  FaceTime  application  that 

164

SESSION: TOWARDS PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL WELLNESS

discussed 

conversations.  They 

enabled parents to talk to their children while driving. They 
felt that parents have some free time while driving during 
which they could talk to their children. Previous research in 
CSCW has also focused on family communications in terms 
of  family  connectedness  where  parents  and  children  are 
separated.  While  a  related  project  studying  how  work-
separated families maintain communication [49] found that 
children wait to see their parents in-person rather than using 
remote communication, our teens wanted to use technology 
to remind their parents to communicate with them and help 
parents find time to spend with their children. 
Technology  as  negotiator  
The second category of student design ideas stemmed from 
their feelings of being misjudged and misunderstood when 
communicating  with  their  parents.  R1  and  R3  mentioned 
the  trouble  they  have  establishing  two-way  and  non-
aggressive 
limited 
opportunities to express themselves in situations leading to 
conflict.  P1  described  a  time  when  her  parents  misjudged 
and yelled at her without knowing the reason for her being 
late. P1 said that her class had taken longer than usual, and 
her mother had not given her the chance to express herself 
and started to quarrel with her. In another case P5 described 
when she was in trouble with her mother because of a fight 
she had with her younger siblings. She explained how her 
mother took her siblings’ side without knowing whose fault 
it was and how she felt about it. These scenarios show their 
perception of being misjudged in communication with their 
parents, a common feeling in adolescence.  
To  overcome  this  issue,  R1’s  design  idea  was  to  use 
technology  as  a  negotiator  that  would  mediate  their 
conversations:  the  Simmunication  game  has  parents  and 
teens  articulate  a  relationship  challenge  that  they  face  and 
brainstorm  strategies  for  overcoming  it.  Prior  work  has 
described  the  importance  of  learning  conflict  resolution 
skills within the family context [6,17]. The problem-solving 
model  comprises  problem  definition,  generation  of 
solutions, negotiating an agreement, and planning solution 
implementation [6]. The students in R1 used a very similar 
model as the core idea of their technology designs, that is, 
helping parents and teens to first define their problem and 
then negotiate their solutions. In contrast, R3’s strategy was 
to design a Galaxy Mood Watch that when shown to their 
parents,  would  reveal  their  feelings  so  that  their  parents 
would have a better understanding of the situation at hand. 
In sum, R1’s design helped them to actively negotiate with 
their parents, while R3’s design helps solve their conflicts. 
Technology  as  communication  shield  
Students also expressed their desire to use technology as a 
shield  to  restrict  their  communications.  Students  who 
designed the Galaxy Mood Watch mentioned that they want 
their  siblings  to  leave  them  alone  when  they  come  back 
from school. They described their communication with their 
siblings 
to  avoid 
communication  when  they  were  in  a  bad  mood  and  play 

to  be  mood-based: 

they  wanted 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

is 

in 

them,  and 

their  mood 

with them when they are in a good mood. Their design was 
based  on  the  idea  that  one  could  non-verbally  alert  their 
younger sibling to their emotional state so that the sibling 
would leave them alone when not in a good mood. 
Child development studies have stressed the importance of 
sibling  communication as  a  contributor  to  their  wellbeing. 
Researchers  note  the  importance  of  intentional  approach 
that  helps  siblings  engage with  one  another  as  opposed  to 
interventions  that  seek  to  omit  or  avoid  conflict  [17]. 
Interestingly, some of our participants designed prototypes 
that  help  them  avoid  conflicts  altogether,  rather  than 
creating opportunities through which they can work through 
conflict. As we see, teens’ interest in using technology as a 
communication  shield 
in  contradiction  with  what 
previous  work  has  shown  to  be  beneficial.  Therefore  it  is 
important to consider how technology can help adolescents 
improve their relationships with their siblings, considering 
that  for  some,  their  preference  is  to  sever  communication 
altogether. 
As discussed above, adolescents’ need to communicate with 
their parents, their feeling of being misunderstood in their 
relationships  with 
their 
communication with their younger siblings determine how 
they  feel  technology  can  help  improve  their  familial 
relationships and their choice of technology strategy. In the 
following section we explain how most of the strategies that 
students used in their designs reveal their desire to change 
the  attitude  and  behavior  of  the  person  with  whom  they 
interact, as opposed to their own behavior. 
User  Involvement  and  Locus  of  Control  
While  participants  reflected  on  both  their  own  personal 
characteristics  and  external 
their 
relationship, most of their designs revealed that they had an 
external  locus  of  control  regarding  the  relationship  issues 
they were facing. External locus of control refers to one’s 
belief that the outcome of an experience is the result of the 
influence of environment or powerful others, as opposed to 
internal locus of control, in which an individual’s effort and 
behavior  are  perceived  as  the  main  contributors  to  the 
outcome of their experiences [21]. 
As explained in the previous section, participants suggested 
using technology as a negotiator; a strategy that would help 
them  change  the  flow  of  conversation,  potentially  shaping 
parental  reaction.  For  instance,  P1  wanted  technology  to 
stop her mother’s yelling. Participants from this group (R1) 
felt  their  parents  are  the  ones  who  initiate  conflict.  R3’s 
design  idea,  the  Galaxy  Mood  Watch,  was  conceptualized 
as a shield to avoid communication, and was designed for 
the  person  who  attempts  communication  (e.g.,  siblings). 
This  tool  attempts  to  change  the  reactions  of  the  teen’s 
siblings 
teen’s  own  communication. 
Moreover  when  P5  was  explaining  how  fighting  with  her 
younger  siblings  would  result  in  getting  into  trouble  with 
her parents, she said that she would like to create a tool that 
helps her parents understand that the source of the problem 

influences  affecting 

instead  of 

the 

the 

to  work  as  a  shield 

was  her  sibling  and  not  her.  Students  used  technology  to 
change  their  family’s  perception  of  their  inner  feelings  in 
order  to  stop  conflict.  Also,  where  the  end  goal  was  to 
design  technology  ideas  to  enhance  quality  time  with 
parents,  participants  thought  their  parents  were  the  ones 
who ought to be initiating contact. 
These  design  ideas  and  their  accompanying  discussions 
illustrate  teens'  external  locus  of  control,  where  they 
thought  their  relationships  were  controlled  by  how  their 
parents  or  siblings  were  acting.  Through  our  participatory 
design  exercises,  participants  were  able  to  vividly  express 
these developmentally-relevant concerns and preferences.  
Conveying  Emotion    
Most  groups  that  focused  on  relationships  generated 
technology  concepts  that  enabled  teens  to  convey  their 
emotions  to  their  parents  or  siblings.  Where  students 
designed  devices 
to  avoid 
communication, 
tools  used  non-verbal  means  of 
communication—visual cues, email, and haptic feedback—
to  express  emotional  range  and  intensity  to  alert  other 
families  to  their  emotional  state.  Participants’  design 
concepts employed visual cues such as trees and hearts (a 
tree  meant  that  they  felt  happy,  while  a  heart  meant  that 
they felt angry), colors (red for angry, grey for depressed), 
facial expressions (emoticons) and combinations of these to 
signify  different  types  of  feelings.  Participants  also  used 
text-based  messaging  such  as  email  to  convey  their 
emotional state to others. They also envisioned using haptic 
feedback  such  as  vibrations  to  convey  high  intensity 
emotion, such as extreme happiness or sadness. 
Conversely,  students  conceptualized  using  verbal  channels 
in 
initiates  communication  or  helps 
negotiate  conflict.  For  tools  that  initiated  communication, 
participants  mostly  envisioned 
technology  supporting 
dialogue  through  audio  and  video  channels.  Where  they 
wanted  to  use  technology  as  a  negotiator,  their  system 
concepts employed writing as the means of communication. 
Students also felt text-based communication can help them 
to  express  and  negotiate  their  feelings.  Previous  research 
has  highlighted 
text-based 
communication  in  assisting  adolescents  at  exposing  their 
thoughts in a less-censored way [4]. 
These findings highlight how technology can ostensibly act 
as  a  third  party,  helping  adolescents  in  expressing  their 
feelings.  This  third  party  would  in  some  cases  sense  their 
feelings automatically and communicate them, or moderate 
their  conversations  by  asking  them  appropriate  questions 
and avoiding scenarios where they would be misjudged. 
From  Active  to  Hyper-­Passive  User  Involvement  
In addition to relationships, participants were interested in 
exploring how technology could promote healthy eating in 
youth. Their ideas can be grouped in terms of the extent to 
which the system supports individual versus environmental 
change. In a paper focused on the application of the social 

the  potential  of 

technology 

such 

that 

165

two 

behavioral 

behaviors, 

interventions 

health-related 

of  which  were 

ecological  theory  in  health  promotion  [42],  the  author 
grouped  health  promotion 
in  distinct 
categories, 
and 
third,  social  ecological,  described 
environmental  (the 
interventions 
that 
employed  both  behavioral 
and 
environmental  strategies).  To  differentiate  the  behavioral 
and environmental interventions, he compared the level of 
effort  that  people  put  into  changing  their  behavior.  While 
behavioral  interventions  need  users’  active  engagement  in 
changing 
environmental 
interventions  are  passive,  not  requiring  a  person’s  active 
involvement.  Our  participants  envisioned  both  active  and 
passive approaches to systems promoting healthy eating. In 
addition, they brainstormed another subset of ideas, which 
we  term  hyper-passive.  Participants’  ideas  highlight  their 
perceptions  of  family  and  other  environmental  influences 
on what they eat and their self-efficacy and locus of control 
regarding making a change. 
Active  Interventions  
The two groups who worked on the topic of healthy eating 
expressed their desire to eat unhealthy food and mentioned 
that fast food is their favorite type of food. They expressed 
limited  self-efficacy,  saying  they  could  not  help  eating 
unhealthily.  Many  participants’  design  concepts  sought  to 
help  users  overcome  their  personal  tendencies  to  eat 
unhealthily. In these concepts, students were the ones who 
eventually decided what to eat, and technology was a tool 
that assisted them in making healthier decisions. Thus, we 
consider  these  active  interventions,  reflecting  participants’ 
internal locus of control (i.e., perception that their wellness 
is dependent upon their own choices). 
We  grouped  these  strategies  into  two  main  categories: 
informational  and  monitoring  devices.  As  informational 
devices,  participants  developed 
that 
served as companions for users telling them what to eat and 
what  not  to  eat.  One  group  conceived  of  a  pocket-sized 
robot that would provide healthy recipes, and another group 
designed  a  device  that  entered  into  dialogue  with  the 
students, answering their questions about what to eat. The 
second group of technology ideas supported diet monitoring 
and  provided  tangible  assistance  to  students.  One  of  these 
ideas  was  an  augmented  jacket  that  would  automatically 
count their calories. Another concept was a device that used 
charts  to  visually  display  a  user's  food  intake  on  the 
refrigerator. We infer that these monitoring devices would 
help raise users’ awareness of what they are eating. 
Passive  Interventions  
Through  the  SEM  wheel-chart  activity,  students  identified 
environmental  influences  on  their  eating  habits.  One 
participant shared how her family stresses the importance of 
healthy eating. 
Conversely, other participants described the lack of healthy 
eating  support  they  received  from  their  family.  One 
participant  discussed  her  sister,  who  works  at  a  restaurant 
and  brings  unhealthy  food  home  to  the  family.  While 

technology 

ideas 

SESSION: TOWARDS PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL WELLNESS

another participant was responsible for family cooking and 
seemed to have control over what she eats, both participants 
live  in  neighborhoods  with  abundant  unhealthy  eating 
choices  (e.g.,  fast  food)  and  eat  lunch  at  the  same  school. 
The  influence  of  the  environment  is  similar  for  both,  and 
they  both  said  that  if  they  are  in  a  situation  where  they 
would have to choose between healthy and unhealthy foods, 
they would choose unhealthy food. For example P8 said: 
When you are at home and you go to the fridge. We are kids 
and of course we choose the junk food.  

into 

ideas 

We  grouped  students’  passive 
two  main 
subcategories:  changing  availability  of  healthy/unhealthy 
food  in  the  students’  environment  and  altering  food.  One 
system concept from the changing availability category was 
a refrigerator that provides healthy food at school. Another 
idea  was  a  pair  of  pants  with  pockets  that  could  shrink 
healthy foods and make them available everywhere the user 
goes. The second subset of participants’ passive technology 
ideas  focused  on  food  alteration.  The  common  theme  in 
these  ideas  is  that  the  tool  would  change  the  foods  that 
participants are eating to make them healthier. One concept 
involved  a  device  that  removed  extra  sugar  from  food  to 
make it healthier, while the second idea is about changing 
the  appearance  of  healthy  food  such  that  it  resembles 
unhealthy food, thereby tricking the user into eating it. Both 
of  these  ideas  acknowledge  the  users’  tendencies  towards 
eating  unhealthy.  We  consider  these  ideas  to  be  passive 
interventions,  since  the  core  functionality  focuses  on 
changing the food environment.  
Together, these passive system concepts represent ideas that 
differ from those traditionally focused on in CSCW. Much 
of the prior work on healthy eating has explored the design 
of  active 
interventions  [16,44].  While  some  of  our 
participants’  concepts  are  not  realistic  to  implement,  they 
do  highlight  the  need  for  more  work  exploring  how 
technology  might  more  directly  address  environmental 
barriers to wellness. 
Hyper-­passive  Interventions  
While  the  passive  systems  we  just  described  focused  on 
environmental change, they do require some level of effort 
from  users  in  the  end.  Our  analysis  uncovered  additional 
ideas  that  we  deem  hyper-passive,  in  which  users  do  not 
play  an  active  role  in  their  behavior  change  whatsoever. 
One design idea was a device implanted in a baby’s body 
that  decides  what  the  person  eats.  A  similar  idea  was  a 
refrigerator that would calculate the amount of calories and 
nutrients in foods and decide for the user what to eat. One 
additional concept was a device that would aspirate fat from 
different parts of the user’s body without the user needing 
to change his or her behavior. These design ideas shared the 
same characteristics: the tool makes decisions for the user, 
leaving the user without any control over their choices. 
Students’ discussions during the SEM wheel-chart activity 
shed insight into the reason behind the design of those kinds 

166

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

the 

types  of 

restaurants  available 

of  interventions.  When  one  of  the  groups  was  thinking 
about 
their 
neighborhood,  the  people  they  interact  with,  their  own 
eating  tendencies,  and  how  all  of  these  together  might 
collectively  impact  their  health  behavior,  they  argued  that 
in those situations, they would be helpless about the choices 
they would make. For instance, P8 said: 

in 

When you are at … [fast food restaurants] and you’re with 
your friends and fried food is around, when you’re with your 
friends, you always want to try something new… [and] when 
you’re around fried chicken you have no choice but eat it. 

She also mentioned that: 

When  you  are  at  …  [a  fast  food  restaurant]  with  a  kind 
person  and  there  is  ice  cream,  they  will  buy  it  for  you  and 
when you are hungry you want to eat it. And when you are 
around  your  friends  they  encourage  you  to  eat  unhealthy 
because  they  bring  unhealthy  food  to  school  and  once  you 
tried it, you are hooked for life. 

that 

the  role 

technology  can  play 

Another participant said that she knows that if she goes to 
restaurants, it might be good for her to order healthy foods, 
but she will not do this because she likes junk food. In all of 
these  scenarios  participants  seem  to  express  helplessness, 
and  mention  that  they  have  no  other  choice  than  to  eat 
unhealthy. This feeling of helplessness may be one reason 
why  participants  envisioned  tools  that  make  decisions  for 
them, helping them to get through those situations without 
any effort required on their part. Understanding this lack of 
agency  and  self  efficacy  is  critical  for  designing  systems 
that aim to help teens engage in healthy behaviors. 
DISCUSSION  
Our findings characterized our participants’ perspectives on 
wellness  and 
in 
encouraging healthy behaviors. Across our findings, issues 
of  self-efficacy,  locus  of  control,  and  socio-ecological 
context  arose.  Together,  these  issues  suggest  important 
directions  for  future  CSCW  research  on  adolescent  health 
promotion. Beyond this particular domain, our results also 
intersect  with  and  enrich  critical  areas  of  discourse  within 
the  CSCW  community  more  broadly.  We  next  discuss 
directions for future work on the design and evaluation of 
technologies  that  promote  healthy  behaviors  across  the 
lifespan—from childhood to adulthood. 
A  Nuanced  Perspective  on  the  Psychology  of  Change  
CSCW research is increasingly examining how technology 
can help people—adults and children alike—to change their 
behaviors. Much of this work has examined how increased 
self-awareness,  social  influence,  and  support  can  shift 
people’s  desire  and  motivation  to  engage  in  healthier 
behaviors such as physical activity [7,23,27]. However, this 
prior work reflects a constrained view of the psychology of 
change.  While  motivation  certainly  influences  decision-
making,  another  critical  interpersonal  factor  influencing 
behavior  is  a  person’s  locus  of  control  [1,10,41].  Our 
findings  highlight  the  importance  of  attending  to  locus  of 
control as a psychological construct; it raises the issue that 

167

to 

issue) 

(a  motivation 

for some people barriers to change go beyond not wanting 
to  change 
feeling  more 
fundamentally that one cannot change the situation because 
change is in the hands of external factors such as powerful 
others, 
luck,  or  environmental  constraints.  For  our 
participants,  an  external  locus  of  control  was  evident  in 
their  desire  for  relationship  technologies  that  change  how 
their parents and siblings behave and the helplessness they 
expressed  when  discussing  external  barriers  to  healthy 
eating.  Several  studies  have  shown  that  people  with  an 
internal  locus  of  control  are  more  likely  to  engage  in 
healthy  behaviors.  For  example  regular  physical  exercise 
has mostly been positively associated with an internal locus 
of control and negatively associated with beliefs that one’s 
ability  to  exercise  are  influenced  by  chance  and  powerful 
others[10,41]. 
For  CSCW  research,  a  focus  on  locus  of  control  raises 
underexplored  questions:  What  kinds  of  technological 
supports  can  help  people  who  do  not  feel  that  it  is  within 
their  power  to  change?  How  might  these  systems  differ 
from  systems  that  focus  more  on  issues  of  motivation  and 
desire to change? StepStream is one successful social tool 
that  helps  teens  collaboratively  pursue  increased  physical 
activity [28]. Using the tool was associated with improved 
self-efficacy in users with the lowest activity levels. As the 
authors  mention,  much  of  the  prior  HCI  research  on  teen 
health has tried to improve participants’ self-efficacy [28]. 
We  argue  that  researchers  should  also  investigate  how 
internal  locus  of  control  can  help  adolescent  behavior 
change. In fact, research has shown that locus of control is 
an  important  construct,  which  when  combined  with  other 
constructs  such  as  self-efficacy,  can  have  a  significant 
effect on behavior [1]. The study of locus of control can be 
especially important when interventions are targeting low-
SES populations, who are more likely to have an external 
locus of control [38,47].  
For  example,  while  considering  how  to  improve  self-
efficacy,  the  StepStream  design  could  be  extended  by 
explicitly  identifying  users  who  have  an  external  locus  of 
control and helping them develop a more internalized locus 
of control. One approach would be to integrate attribution 
training  methods  in  which  people  are  given  repeated 
messaging that reminds them that behaviors are within their 
control  [32].  This  method  has  helped  athletes  to  attribute 
success and failure to controllable elements, which can help 
encourage  persistence  [32].  StepStream  could  integrate  a 
feature  that  creates  “buddy  pairings”  of  users  who  face 
similar  external  barriers  to  physical  activity  (e.g.,  limited 
access  to  green  space).  The  system  could  encourage  the 
buddy  with  a  more  internalized  locus  of  control  to  share 
how she has overcome this barrier to be physically active. 
This type of focused sharing of content could both provide 
teens with ideas of what to share in a tool like StepStream 
and  provide  directed  encouragement  that  helps  address 
users’ psychological needs.   

that  add  nuance 

Another question raised by focusing on locus of control is: 
How  can  we  generate  empirical 
findings  unpacking 
perceptions  of  control 
to  CSCW’s 
treatment  of  the  psychology  of  change?  Who  are  these 
powerful  “others”  that  people  feel  control  their  wellness 
destiny,  and  how  might 
technology  mediate  users’ 
relationship  with  these  entities? For  example,  future  work 
could conduct technology trials comparing how individuals 
with  an  internal  versus  external  locus  of  control  engage 
with health promotion tools such as the prevalent diet and 
exercise monitoring applications that exist today. Observing 
how  such  tools  are  appropriated  and  rejected  can  help 
surface individuals’ values and perspectives on the ways in 
which technology can help them pursue wellness. 
Furthermore, technology probes can provide a provocative 
means  of  opening  up  dialogue  around  the  perceived 
external factors that inhibit wellness[14]. Examples of these 
external  forces  include  caregivers  (e.g.,  children’s  belief 
that  their  parents  control  their  food  environment)  and 
employers.  For  example, 
inflexible  work  schedules 
characterize  low-wage  employment,  and  can  lead  workers 
to  feel  that  their  work  schedule—something  viewed  as 
immutable—restricts  opportunities  to  eat  healthfully  [8]. 
Examining these external forces opens up opportunities for 
CSCW  research  to  design  technologies  that  go  beyond 
targeting the individual to targeting the individual and the 
social  and  institutional  forces  that  impact  perceptions  of 
control  over  behavior.  For  example,  research  might 
examine how to help mediate the relationship between low-
wage workers and their employers, to open up opportunities 
for  healthier  behaviors.  While  prior  work  has  yielded 
technologies that encourage physical activity in white-collar 
settings (e.g., [23,29]), how can such tools be designed for 
low-wage  workers  who  may  be  more  likely  to  have  an 
external 
[38,47]?  How  can  such 
technologies  be  designed  to  not  only  persuade  healthier 
behaviors,  but  help  shift  perceptions  around  locus  of 
control, and scaffold the necessary workplace changes that 
enable  those  shifts?  These  are  large  issues  that  are  not 
solvable by any one technology. However, research in this 
space  can  examine  the  role  that  technology  might  play  in 
concert  with  larger,  multi-level  interventional  strategies 
[13,19]. 
Furthermore, thinking of how such tools could be designed 
for adolescents is critical for shaping youth’s perception of 
themselves  as  important  contributors  to  change.  As  youth 
transition from childhood into adulthood, such development 
can have a critical influence on their behaviors. We suggest 
future  work  explore  social 
that 
adolescents  use  with  authority  figures  (such  as  parents  or 
school officials) who influence their decision making, such 
as  their  parents  or  teachers.  Future  work  should  examine 
how such tools could gradually help teens to become more 
actively involved in making healthy choices, helping them 
develop an internal locus of control.  

technology  designs 

locus  of  control 

168

SESSION: TOWARDS PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL WELLNESS

Designing  for  Varying  Levels  of  Self-­efficacy  and  Locus  
of  Control  
One  important  issue  for  designers  is  to  understand  how 
health technology can support users with different levels of 
self-efficacy and loci of control. In the MAHI system [26], 
the flexible and open-ended design supported users with an 
internal  and  external  locus  of  control,  engaging  them  in 
different ways. While new users with an external locus of 
control engaged with the system to trouble-shoot problems, 
users who had already developed a more internal locus of 
control used the system to construct their identities. Future 
work  should  continue  to  explore  how  technology  can  be 
tailored to meet the needs of individuals with varying needs 
and attitudes. Acknowledging that one system cannot be all 
things  to  all  people,  it  is  critical  to  examine  how  systems 
can  support  users  with  differing  attitudinal  characteristics, 
particularly  accounting  for  how  these  attitudes  (and  thus, 
needs) may shift over time. Another important issue in the 
design  of  social  tools  is  how  systems  can  facilitate 
engagement  between  individuals  with  differing  attitudes. 
For example, how might a tool scaffold interaction between 
a user with an internal locus of control and a user who has 
an  external  locus  of  control?  Innovative  system  designs 
could facilitate peer mentorship opportunities that empower 
users  to  feel  that  barriers  to  wellness  are  surmountable 
(such as the StepStream example provided above). 
Problematizing  the  Persuasive  Technology  Agenda    
Researchers  have  critically  questioned 
the  persuasive 
technology  movement,  for  example,  in  terms  of  how  it 
privileges  designers’  values  and  imparts  technological 
control  into  people’s  lives  [24,35].  We  argue  that  more 
interventions 
by 
investigating how technology can  meet people where they 
are  at—appreciating  and  explicitly  designing  for  the  level 
of  self-efficacy  and  locus  of  control  that  users  bring  with 
them  as  they  interact  with  technology.  In  contrast  to 
persuading  people  to  reach  predefined  goals,  CSCW 
researchers have begun to explore how open-ended systems 
can help users to define what health means to them, setting 
personally-meaningful  wellness  goals  [3].  Building  upon 
this  prior  work,  researchers  can  further  explore  how 
technology  can  help  users  reflect  upon  their  level  of 
confidence  and  locus  of  control,  reasons  behind  these 
attitudes, and how change can happen. For example in [20], 
designers created a game based upon young girls’ interests, 
which  served  as  an  “emotional  rehearsal”  for  real  life. 
Future work could investigate the possibility of developing 
systems  that  serve  as  self-efficacy  and  control  “rehearsal 
environments.” Such tools could explicitly provide support 
for  reflection  about  users’  level  of  self-efficacy  or  their 
locus of control and help them to develop actionable goals 
for  pursuing  wellness,  given  their  existing  perceptions  of 
self-efficacy and locus of control [24,35].  
CONCLUSION  
In  summary,  our  exploratory  approach  helped  us  examine 
adolescent  perspectives  on  how  technology  can  mediate 

prioritize 

should 

users’ 

values 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

family  relationships  and  eating  practices.  The  socio-
ecological  model  (SEM)  broadened  our  focus  on  context 
beyond  what  happens 
immediately  around  a  health 
behavior.  Our  contributions  extend  beyond  our  specific 
findings  regarding  these  wellness  topics.  Themes  arising 
across our findings highlight important directions for future 
CSCW research that incorporates a nuanced examination of 
self-efficacy,  locus  of  control,  and  the  socio-ecological 
context  of  wellness.  We  highlighted  the  importance  of 
expanding  our  thinking  beyond  the  shifting  of  discrete 
behaviors to helping transform people’s thinking and their 
psychological, 
social,  environmental,  and  emotional 
resources for change. Our findings point to the importance 
of  understanding  adolescents’  self-efficacy  and  locus  of 
control,  and  how  health  tools  can  meet  youth  where  they 
are at, helping them to increase their self-efficacy and see 
themselves  as  important  contributors  to  change.  We  have 
discussed the implications of our findings for the design of 
systems  for  adolescents  as  well  as  adults,  highlighting 
several  trajectories  of  work  that  can  help  push  CSCW 
research in new directions. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
We thank our partner organization for supporting this work, 
the  teachers  and  staff  who  provided  invaluable  assistance 
with  the  project,  and  the  teens  who  participated  in  our 
study.  We  also 
in  Northeastern 
University’s  Computer-Human  Interaction  course  and 
Yixuan Zhang for providing assistance with this research. 
REFERENCES  
1.   Rayane AbuSabha, & Cheryl Achterberg. 1997. 

the  students 

thank 

Review of Self-Efficacy and Locus of Control for 
Nutrition- and Health-Related Behavior. Journal of the 
American Dietetic Association, 97(10), 1122-1132. doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0002-8223(97)00273-3 

2.   Adolescent Health Topics.). from 

http://www.hhs.gov/ash/oah/adolescent-health-topics/ 
3.   Eric PS Baumer, Sherri Jean Katz, Jill E Freeman, Phil 

Adams, Amy L Gonzales, John Pollak, Daniela 
Retelny, Jeff Niederdeppe, Christine M Olson, & Geri 
K Gay. 2012. Prescriptive persuasion and open-ended 
social awareness: expanding the design space of 
mobile health Proceedings of the ACM 2012 
conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work. 

4.   Meyran Boniel-Nissim, & Azy Barak. 2013. The 
therapeutic value of adolescents’ blogging about 
social–emotional difficulties. Psychological Services, 
10(3), 333-341. doi: 10.1089=cyber.2009.0215 

5.   http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0026664 
6.   Simon Bowen, Helena Sustar, Daniel Wolstenholme, & 
Andy Dearden. 2013. Engaging teenagers productively 
in service design. International Journal of Child-
Computer Interaction, 1(3–4), 71-81. doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcci.2014.02.001 

169

7.   P. D. Bright, & A. L. Robin. 1981. Ameliorating 
parent-adolescent conflict with problem-solving 
communication training. J Behav Ther Exp Psychiatry, 
12(3), 275-280.  

8.   Sunny Consolvo, David W. McDonald, Tammy 
Toscos, Mike Y. Chen, Jon Froehlich, Beverly 
Harrison, Predrag Klasnja, Anthony LaMarca, Louis 
LeGrand, Ryan Libby, Ian Smith, & James A. Landay. 
2008. Activity sensing in the wild: a field trial of ubifit 
garden. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, Florence, Italy.  
9.   C. M. Devine, M. Jastran, J. Jabs, E. Wethington, T. J. 

Farell, & C. A. Bisogni. 2006. "A lot of sacrifices:" 
work-family spillover and the food choice coping 
strategies of low-wage employed parents. Soc Sci Med, 
63(10), 2591-2603. doi: 
10.1016/j.socscimed.2006.06.029 

10.   Ralph J. DiClemente, Gina M. Wingood, Richard 
Crosby, Catlainn Sionean, Brenda K. Cobb, Kathy 
Harrington, Susan Davies, Edward W. Hook, & M. 
Kim Oh. 2001. Parental Monitoring: Association With 
Adolescents' Risk Behaviors. Pediatrics, 107(6), 1363-
1368. doi: 10.1542/peds.107.6.1363 

11.   Karen Glanz. 2002. Health Behavior and Health 

Education : Theory, Research, and Practice: Jossey-
Bass. 

12.   Andrea Grimes, Desney Tan, & Dan Morris. 2009. 

Toward technologies that support family reflections on 
health. In Proceedings of the ACM 2009 international 
conference on Supporting group work, Sanibel Island, 
Florida, USA.  

13.   Guidelines for school health programs to promote 

lifelong healthy eating. Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention. 1996. MMWR Recomm Rep, 45(RR-9), 
1-41.  

14.   P. A. Hannon, K. Hammerback, G. Garson, J. R. 

Harris, & C. J. Sopher. 2012. Stakeholder perspectives 
on workplace health promotion: a qualitative study of 
midsized employers in low-wage industries. Am J 
Health Promot, 27(2), 103-110. doi: 
10.4278/ajhp.110204-QUAL-51 

15.   Hilary Hutchinson, Wendy Mackay, Bo Westerlund, 

Benjamin B. Bederson, Allison Druin, Catherine 
Plaisant, Michel Beaudouin-Lafon, Stéphane Conversy, 
Helen Evans, Heiko Hansen, Nicolas Roussel, Björn 
Eiderbäck. 2003. Technology probes: inspiring design 
for and with families. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
Ft. Lauderdale, Florida, USA.  

16.   Ole Sejer Iversen, Christian Dindler, & Elin Irene 

Krogh Hansen. 2013. Understanding teenagers’ 
motivation in participatory design. International 
Journal of Child-Computer Interaction, 1(3–4), 82-87. 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcci.2014.02.002 

17.   Hyungsin Kim, Anya Kogan, Chandan Dasgupta, 

Michael Misha Novitzky, & Ellen Yi-Luen Do. 2011. 
Grocery hunter: a fun mobile game for children to 
combat obesity. In Proceedings of the fifth 
international conference on Tangible, embedded, and 
embodied interaction, Funchal, Portugal.  

18.   Laurie Kramer. 2010. The Essential Ingredients of 

Successful Sibling Relationships: An Emerging 
Framework for Advancing Theory and Practice. Child 
Development Perspectives, 4(2), 80-86. doi: 
10.1111/j.1750-8606.2010.00122.x 

19.   S. Kumanyika, & S. Grier. 2006. Targeting 

interventions for ethnic minority and low-income 
populations. Future Child, 16(1), 187-207.  

20.   Sharon S. Laing, Peggy A. Hannon, Barbara Williams, 
Jeffrey R. Harris, Amber Talburt, & Sara Kimpe. 2012. 
Increasing Evidence-Based Workplace Health 
Promotion Best Practices in Small and Low-Wage 
Companies, Mason County, Washington, 2009. 
Preventing Chronic Disease, 9, E83.  

21.   Brenda Laurel. 2008. Notes from the utopian 

entrepreneur. Beyond Barbie and mortal kombat: New 
perspectives on gender and gaming, 21-32.  

22.   H.M. Lefcourt. 1982. Locus of Control: Current Trends 

in Theory and Research: L. Erlbaum Associates. 

23.   Xiaoming Li, Susan Feigelman, & Bonita Stanton. 
2000. Perceived parental monitoring and health risk 
behaviors among urban low-income African-American 
children and adolescents. Journal of Adolescent 
Health, 27(1), 43-48. doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1054-139X(99)00077-4 

24.   JamesJ Lin, Lena Mamykina, Silvia Lindtner, Gregory 

Delajoux, & HenryB Strub. 2006. Fish’n’Steps: 
Encouraging Physical Activity with an Interactive 
Computer Game. In Paul Dourish & Adrian Friday 
(Eds.), UbiComp 2006: Ubiquitous Computing (Vol. 
4206, pp. 261-278): Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 

25.   Deborah Lupton. 2014. Self-tracking cultures: towards 
a sociology of personal informatics. In Proceedings of 
the 26th Australian Computer-Human Interaction 
Conference on Designing Futures: the Future of 
Design, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.  

26.   Andrew Macvean, & Judy Robertson. 2013. 

Understanding exergame users' physical activity, 
motivation and behavior over time. In Proceedings of 
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, Paris, France.  

27.   Lena Mamykina, Elizabeth Mynatt, Patricia Davidson, 

& Daniel Greenblatt. 2008. MAHI: investigation of 
social scaffolding for reflective thinking in diabetes 
management. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
Florence, Italy.  

170

SESSION: TOWARDS PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL WELLNESS

28.   A. D. Miller, J. Pater, & E. D. Mynatt. 2013, 5-8 May 

2013. Design strategies for youth-focused pervasive 
social health games Pervasive Computing 
Technologies for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth), 2013 
7th International Conference on. 

29.   Andrew D. Miller, & Elizabeth D. Mynatt. 2014. 

StepStream: a school-based pervasive social fitness 
system for everyday adolescent health. In Proceedings 
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.  

30.   Dan Morris, A.J. Bernheim Brush, & Brian R. Meyers. 

2008. SuperBreak: using interactivity to enhance 
ergonomic typing breaks. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, Florence, Italy.  

31.   Obama Administration Announces Historic 

Opportunity to Turn Around Nation's Lowest-
Achieving Public Schools. (2009). from 
http://www2.ed.gov/news/pressreleases/2009/08/08262
009.html 

32.   Cynthia Ogden, & Margaret Carroll. (2010). 
Prevalence of Obesity Among Children and 
Adolescents: United States, Trends 1963–1965 
Through 2007–2008. from 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hestat/obesity_child_07_
08/obesity_child_07_08.htm 

33.   Iris Orbach, R Singer, & Milledge Murphey. 1997. 

Changing attributions with an attribution training 
technique related to basketball dribbling. Sport 
Psychologist, 11, 294-304.  

34.   Andrea Grimes Parker, Ian McClendon, Catherine 

Grevet, Victoria Ayo, WonTaek Chung, Veda Johnson, 
& Elizabeth D. Mynatt. 2013. I am what i eat: identity 
& critical thinking in an online health forum for kids. 
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, Paris, France.  

35.   Erika Shehan Poole, Andrew D Miller, Yan Xu, Elsa 

Eiriksdottir, Richard Catrambone, & Elizabeth D 
Mynatt. 2011. The place for ubiquitous computing in 
schools: lessons learned from a school-based 
intervention for youth physical activity Proceedings of 
the 13th international conference on Ubiquitous 
computing. 

36.   Stephen Purpura, Victoria Schwanda, Kaiton Williams, 
William Stubler, & Phoebe Sengers. 2011. Fit4life: the 
design of a persuasive technology promoting healthy 
behavior and ideal weight. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, Vancouver, BC, Canada.  

37.   James F Sallis, Neville Owen, & Edwin B Fisher. 

2008. Ecological models of health behavior. Health 
behavior and health education: Theory, research, and 
practice, 4, 465-486.  

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

38.   Christopher L. Schaefbauer, Danish U. Khan, Amy Le, 

Garrett Sczechowski, & Katie A. Siek. 2015. Snack 
Buddy: Supporting Healthy Snacking in Low 
Socioeconomic Status Families. In Proceedings of the 
18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work & Social Computing, Vancouver, 
BC, Canada.  

39.   C. Sheffer, J. Mackillop, J. McGeary, R. Landes, L. 
Carter, R. Yi, B. Jones, D. Christensen, M. Stitzer, L. 
Jackson, & W. Bickel. 2012. Delay discounting, locus 
of control, and cognitive impulsiveness independently 
predict tobacco dependence treatment outcomes in a 
highly dependent, lower socioeconomic group of 
smokers. Am J Addict, 21(3), 221-232. doi: 
10.1111/j.1521-0391.2012.00224.x 

40.   Madeline E. Smith, Duyen T. Nguyen, Charles Lai, 
Gilly Leshed, & Eric P.S. Baumer. 2012. Going to 
college and staying connected: communication 
between college freshmen and their parents. In 
Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work, Seattle, 
Washington, USA.  

41.   Laurence Steinberg. 2001. We Know Some Things: 
Parent–Adolescent Relationships in Retrospect and 
Prospect. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 11(1), 
1-19. doi: 10.1111/1532-7795.00001 

42.   A. Steptoe, & J. Wardle. 2001. Locus of control and 
health behaviour revisited: a multivariate analysis of 
young adults from 18 countries. Br J Psychol, 92(Pt 4), 
659-672.  

43.   D. Stokols. 1996. Translating social ecological theory 
into guidelines for community health promotion. Am J 
Health Promot, 10(4), 282-298.  

 

44.   A. Strauss, & J.M. Corbin. 2008. Basics of Qualitative 
Research: Techniques and Procedures for Developing 
Grounded Theory: SAGE Publications. 

45.   Christopher C. Tsai, Gunny Lee, Fred Raab, Gregory J. 

Norman, Timothy Sohn, William G. Griswold, & 
Kevin Patrick. 2007. Usability and feasibility of 
PmEB: a mobile phone application for monitoring real 
time caloric balance. Mob. Netw. Appl., 12(2-3), 173-
184. doi: 10.1007/s11036-007-0014-4 

46.   Russell Viner, & Aidan Macfarlane. 2005. Health 

promotion (Vol. 330). 

47.   S. L. Wade, N. C. Walz, J. Carey, K. M. McMullen, J. 

Cass, E. Mark, & K. O. Yeates. 2011. Effect on 
behavior problems of teen online problem-solving for 
adolescent traumatic brain injury. Pediatrics, 128(4), 
e947-953. doi: 10.1542/peds.2010-3721 

48.   Kenneth A Wallston, & Barbara Strudler Wallston. 

1981. Health locus of control scales. Research with the 
locus of control construct, 1, 189-243.  

49.   Diane Watson, Regan L. Mandryk, & Kevin G. 
Stanley. 2013. The design and evaluation of a 
classroom exergame. In Proceedings of the First 
International Conference on Gameful Design, 
Research, and Applications, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.  

50.   Svetlana Yarosh, & Gregory D. Abowd. 2011. 

Mediated parent-child contact in work-separated 
families. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, Vancouver, 
BC, Canada.  

171

