CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Ask the Instructors: Motivations and Challenges of 

Teaching Massive Open Online Courses 

1Saijing Zheng, 2Pamela Wisniewski, 1Mary Beth Rosson, 1John M. Carroll

1College of Information Sciences and Technology 

2College of Engineering and Computer Science 

The Pennsylvania State University 

{suz128, mrosson, jcarroll}@ist.psu.edu

The University of Central Florida 

pamwis@ucf.edu 

ABSTRACT 
Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) have experienced 
rapid growth and attracted significant attention within aca-
demia. However, despite widespread acceptance of MOOCs 
as a unique opportunity to transform educational practices, 
many questions remain regarding their sustainability, given 
the high dropout rates and challenges related to collabora-
tive learning support [12]. Recent research has attempted to 
address these concerns by analyzing students’ MOOC expe-
riences  and  how  MOOCs  may  fall  short  in  meeting  stu-
dents’ learning needs [41]. However, very little research has 
approached the problem from an instructor perspective. We 
report an interview study of 14 MOOC instructors in which 
we used grounded theory to uncover the complex processes, 
motivations,  and  challenges  associated  with  teaching  a 
MOOC.  A  key  finding  is  that  we  should  provide  support 
through  the  whole  instruction  process.  By  enhancing  sup-
port for instructors and their MOOC collaborators, we may 
improve  outcomes  for  all  MOOC  stakeholders,  including 
students.  
Author Keywords 
Massive Open Online Courses; MOOCs; online learning; 
MOOC instructors; collaboration; motivation; challenges 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5 [Information Interfaces and Presentation] (e.g. HCI); 
K.3.1 [Computer Uses in Education]: Distance Learning; 
J.4 [Social and Behavioral Sciences] 
General Terms  
Human Factors; Design 
INTRODUCTION 
Compared  with  traditional  online  courses,  Massive  Open 
Online  Courses  (MOOCs)  are  larger  in  scale,  distributed 
worldwide,  clear  of  financial  barriers,  and  without  geo-

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not 
made or distributed for profit or commercial ad-vantage and that copies bear 
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components 
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with 
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to 
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request 
permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW  '16,  February  27-March  02,  2016,  San  Francisco,  CA,  USA  
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820082 

206

graphic  constraints.  MOOCs  provide  an  opportunity  to 
teach interesting or critical content to new groups of learn-
ers who may not otherwise have the chance to receive high-
quality education [21, 31]. As such, MOOCs have inspired 
rethinking and innovation in university education. Tens of 
thousands of enrolled students create a disruptive scale fac-
tor that raises both new possibilities and challenges, while 
inviting new visions and agendas.  
Although  MOOCs  have  been  broadly  recognized  and  are 
considered  to  be  an  innovation  in  online  education,  re-
searchers and practitioners have little understanding of what 
the  best  practices  are  for  students,  instructors,  or  even 
MOOC carriers because of the newness of the MOOC par-
adigm  [41,  42].  The  novelty  of  MOOCs  has  inspired  a 
growing  body  of  research  on  education  and  technology; 
example topics include new tools [10], adaptations to teach-
ing  practices,  information,  and  course  management  [30]; 
and  the  experiences,  motivations,  learning  activities,  and 
outcomes for MOOC students [19, 41, 20].  
To date, however, the majority of MOOC research focuses 
on understanding student motivations and behavior patterns 
[8, 19, 41, 20], and on enhancing teaching practices to best 
serve students’ needs [41]. Surprisingly, little attention has 
been  given  to  MOOC  instructors,  who  play  a  significant 
role in making MOOCs happen. Thus, it is essential to un-
derstand MOOC instructors’ experiences, their motivations 
to teach within this novel learning format, their associated 
challenges, and how they deal with these challenges, so that 
we, as researchers and designers, can help them more effec-
tively teach MOOCs. In this paper, we report the results of 
an  in-depth  interview  study  of  14  MOOC  instructors.  The 
study was guided by the following research questions:  
1) How  does  teaching  a  MOOC  differ  from  non-MOOC

2) What motivates MOOC instructors to teach in this for-

3) What are the key challenges associated with teaching a

online courses?

mat?

MOOC?

4) How can we better support MOOC instructors in a way
that enhances their experiences, as well as facilitating
positive student outcomes?

Using thematic analysis and grounded theory, we first de-
scribe the steps involved in administering a MOOC through 
a  process  model  abstraction:  MOOC  instruction  involves 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES
 

preparation,  implementation,  and  feedback.  We  further 
describe  the  complex  and  iterative  nature  of  this  process. 
Second,  we  identify  four  main  motivations  that  influence 
instructors to teach MOOCs: worldwide impact on students, 
professional growth, research opportunities, and enhanced 
name  recognition.  Third,  we  discuss  five  important  chal-
lenges  associated  with  administering  a  MOOC:  logistical 
complexities of collaborative work,  crises of time manage-
ment,  scaling  to  meet  expectations,  extreme  criticism  and 
reputation risk, and insufficient support. 
Our  findings  give  insight  into  how  we  can  better  support 
MOOC instructors. For instance, we find that the collabora-
tive ecosystem between instructors and other MOOC actors 
(e.g., curriculum designers, video producers, teaching assis-
tants, etc.) is often overlooked within the MOOC platform, 
as most course management systems tend to emphasize the 
student learning experience, leaving the larger collaboration 
efforts of administering a MOOC to be managed externally.  
Overall,  our  study  provides  actionable  guidance  for  sup-
porting  instructors  as  part  of  the  MOOC  community.  We 
offer  suggestions  for  enhancing  collaboration  support,  as 
well  as  provide  other  recommendations  for  supporting  in-
structors based on their stated motivations and challenges. 
Our work also advocates for a view of MOOCs as complex 
collaborative  ecosystems,  as  a  complement  to  existing  re-
search  that  examines  MOOCs  as  a  novel  learning  peda-
gogy. We discuss implications and future directions for our 
research, with the goal of helping improve the activities and 
outcomes  for  all  MOOC  stakeholders  through  enhanced 
instructor support. 
BACKGROUND  
MOOCs as a Novel Virtual Learning Environment 
MOOCs are a part of the open education movement, which 
is  an  initiative  to  broaden  access  to  learning  by  removing 
geographic and financial barriers often present in the tradi-
tional  university  system  [18].  Open  education  platforms 
(e.g., Coursera, edX, Udacity, etc.) leverage advanced tech-
nologies  such  as  interactive,  streaming  videos  to  connect 
subject-matter experts to learners, virtually worldwide [15]. 
Although  MOOCs  share  some  functional  similarities  with 
other  Virtual  Learning  Environments  (VLEs;  e.g.,  regular 
online courses), the pedagogical and sociotechnical dispari-
ties  in  terms  of  the  massiveness  and  openness  of  MOOCs 
are  likely  to  lead  to  distinctive  teaching  experiences  for 
MOOC instructors and considerations for the design of both 
curricula and systems [41]. Generally, MOOCs are distinct 
from  other  VLEs  by  their  primary  goal  of  making  course 
content  freely  available  to  a  massive  number  of  students, 
while retaining the quality of the curricula.  
Specifically,  MOOCs  differ  from  VLEs  in  several  ways: 
scalability,  students’  flexibility  and  extent  of  control  over 
the  learning  environment,  student  motivations  and  out-
comes, and the relative roles of instructors [41]. Typically, 
the class size for a VLE is comparable to that of a tradition-
al  classroom,  allowing  instructors  to  play  a  hands-on  role 

207

with  personal  feedback  to  their  students  [21].  MOOCs,  in 
contrast, are designed to accommodate a very large number 
of students, and thus change the primary role of the instruc-
tor. A MOOC instructor performs more as a facilitator, cul-
tivating  a  space  for  learning  connections  to  occur  [9,  27, 
40]. 
MOOCs  can  be  divided  into  two  different  types  based  on 
different pedagogies: Connectivist MOOCs (cMOOC) em-
phasize  connected,  collaborative  learning  [12,  36,  37].  In 
contrast,  content-based,  extended  MOOCs  (xMOOCs)  ap-
ply  a  traditional  learning  approach  through  video  lectures, 
short  quizzes  and  peer  assessment  [12,  36,  37,  40]. 
xMOOCs  (edX,  Coursera,  Udacity,  etc.)  and  cMOOCs 
share the notion of free worldwide participation in a course 
without credit. However, xMOOCs differ in that they em-
ploy  a  well-defined  course  management  platform.  Our  re-
search focuses on xMOOCs, which have recently emerged 
quickly  and  at  a  tremendous  scale,  gaining  rapid  attention 
from  students  and  institutions  [12].  All  subsequent  men-
tions of ‘MOOCs’ in this paper refer to xMOOC variation. 
For  a  more  in-depth  overview  of  the  differences  between 
VLEs, cMOOCs, and xMOOCs, see [41]. 
The MOOC as a Collaborative System 
As researchers and educators have developed a greater un-
derstanding  of  the  MOOC  phenomena,  they  have  recog-
nized that this novel form of a VLE is not simply an online 
system for the widespread broadcast of learning materials, 
but  instead  it  involves  a  variety  of  interactions,  collabora-
tions,  learning  processes,  and  social  activities  among  stu-
dents and between students and instructors. Indeed, a num-
ber of researchers have suggested that MOOCs be consid-
ered  as  a  collaborative  learning  environment  [10,  23,  41, 
42].  
Once we consider a MOOC as a collaborative system, ques-
tions concerning the structure and dynamics of that system 
arise. Who are the stakeholders and what are their motiva-
tions for participation? What are their activities and collab-
orative  dependencies?  For  years  CSCW  researchers  have 
investigated such questions in a variety of domains, docu-
menting  the  often  invisible  and  nuanced  activities  and 
handoffs  that  enable  real  world  collaborations  to  succeed, 
even  in  unexpected  and  complex  activity  structures  [32, 
38]. In the case of MOOCs, we can begin to list some of the 
main actors (e.g., students, teachers, instructional designers) 
but know little about their collaborative relationships, inde-
pendent  or  shared  responsibilities,  and  dependencies.  We 
offer our qualitative study of instructors as one step toward 
understanding MOOCs as a collaborative system. 
Although MOOCs are offered for “free” to students world-
wide,  the  online  course  development  and  administration 
clearly requires many resources from people and host insti-
tutions. Thus, one way to understand the collaborative sys-
tem that underlies MOOC operations is to consider the as-
sociated  business  processes  [28],  with  an  eye  toward  im-
proving the smoothness or efficiency of the same. In gen-

 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

eral a business process can be analyzed across three dimen-
sions: workflows, roles, and acts. By considering MOOCs 
from  the  perspective  of  such  factors,  we  may  anticipate 
potential  “breakdowns”  or  failures  to  reach  satisfactory 
completion;  alternately,  we  may  discover  opportunities  to 
improve MOOC outcomes [28, 33]. 
The  business  process  perspective  suggests  that  we  might 
use a process model to better understand instructors’ expe-
riences in the MOOC environment, focusing on instructors’ 
workflow,  as  well  as  the  roles  and  activities  involved.  By 
decomposing  the  workflow,  we  might  understand  how  in-
structors coordinate with each other, what are the relation-
ships  among  their  different  roles,  and  supporting  systems. 
This  understanding  should  help  us  to  characterize  the  gap 
between MOOC instructors’ needs and current support. 
 
The Central Role of MOOC Instructors 
Although MOOC students are expected to play a more ac-
tive role in learning than those in traditional VLEs, we ar-
gue that MOOCs cannot be successful if the instructors are 
not supported. MOOC instructors play the crucial roles of 
both teacher and facilitator. In addition to developing cur-
ricula, MOOC instructors must orchestrate many secondary 
tasks (e.g., recording lectures, guiding discussions, upload-
ing  course  content,  etc.)  to  facilitate  the  primary  task  of 
student learning. But MOOCs platforms, websites, and col-
laboration  tools  focus  primarily  on  providing  contexts  for 
students to perform their learning activities, not on support-
ing instructors. Teaching a MOOC can be extremely diffi-
cult when classes are massive, students are diverse in their 
learning backgrounds and motivations, and contributors are 
highly distributed in terms of geographic location. In order 
to  design  appropriate  support  for  MOOC  instructors,  we 
must first understand their motivations for teaching and the 
challenges they face during the process. 
Several  studies  have  briefly  addressed  MOOC  instructors’ 
within their research agendas but have done this as a sec-
ondary  consideration  to  a  main  focus  on  students’  experi-
ences  and  outcomes.  For  instance,  one  study  surveyed  in-
structors about their teaching motives prior to asking ques-
tions related to their students [17]. Other studies have out-
lined  general  reasons  why 
teach 
MOOCs,  including  intrigue  [1,  26,  30],  personal  rewards 
[17], and altruism [22]. Other research has identified some 
challenges  during  teaching,  including  heavy  workload  [4, 
16,  22],  difficulty  evaluating  students’  work,  lack  of  re-
sponse from students [2, 5, 24], and lack of student partici-
pation  [12,  30].  These  student-focused  findings  provide 
little explanation of the rationales behind instructors’ moti-
vations and challenges, and thus offer only limited insight 
about support for MOOC instructors. Our work is the first 
qualitative study that examines MOOC instructors’ teaching 
experiences in a holistic fashion. 
Moreover,  prior  literature  has  focused  on  the  implementa-
tion  period  of  MOOCs  (i.e.,  teaching  students)  without 

instructors  want 

to 

looking  at  the  whole  process  of  MOOC  instruction  (See 
Figure 1). As a result, these studies have limited implica-
tions  for  helping  MOOC  instructors  solve  problems  they 
face  in  the  process  of  teaching  MOOCs  or  for  enhancing 
their teaching experiences, thus improving MOOC quality. 
By understanding the entire process of teaching a MOOC, 
from initial preparation to subsequent MOOC iterations, we 
are  able  to  identify  challenges  and  present  solutions  that 
support instructors throughout the entire process. 
In this paper, we first describe our interview methods and 
data  analysis  approach.  Then,  we  present  a  process  model 
of  MOOC  teaching  that  emerged  from  our  analysis.  We 
continue our results by describing three categories of find-
ings: 1) instructors’ motivations to teach a MOOC; 2) chal-
lenges they encountered; and 3) practical implications and 
possible  design  solutions  that  support  MOOC  instructors 
and their collaborators. 
RESEARCH METHOD  
Recruitment and Data Collection 
We recruited MOOC instructors through our home institu-
tion,  a  large  public  university  in  the  Northeastern  United 
States.  We  also  reached  out  individually  to  publicly  listed 
MOOC instructors via email and through professional con-
nections  at  academic  conferences.  We  had  two  inclusion 
criteria for participation: 1) instructors should have at least 
two sessions of MOOC teaching experience; 2) instructors 
should  also  have  experience  in  more  traditional  teaching 
formats,  such  as  regular  online  courses  and  in  the  class-
room.  We  chose  these  criteria  to  ensure  that  the  motiva-
tions, challenges, and coping strategies that emerged from 
our interviews were unique artifacts of teaching MOOCs, as 
opposed to general struggles associated with prepping new 
courses or more generally teaching college-level courses. 
Our  data  were  collected  in  the  form  of  semi-structured, 
face-to-face interviews. At the beginning of each interview, 
we gathered demographic information about the participant 
(e.g.,  gender,  age,  general  teaching  duration).  We  then 
asked  participants  about  their  general  MOOC  experiences 
(e.g.,  how  many  MOOC  sessions  they  have  taught,  the 
MOOC general information, the platforms used to teach the 
online  courses,  how  long  they  have  been  using  MOOCs, 
etc.).  Our  particular  focus  was  on  the  tasks  involved  in 
teaching  a  MOOC,  the  motivations  for  teaching,  and  the 
associated  challenges.  We  also  asked  participants  to  com-
pare their prior teaching experiences within other contexts 
(i.e.,  classroom  or  VLE)  to  their  experience  teaching 
MOOCs. Interviews ranged from approximately 40 minutes 
to 2.5 hours. All interviews were audio-recorded, annotated 
and  transcribed  for  further  data  analysis.  The  interviews 
produced  a  rich  set  of  recollections  and  descriptions  ad-
dressing many issues in the MOOC experience, which have 
been summarized as a number of emergent themes.  

208

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES
 

Data Analysis Approach 
We  employed  thematic  analysis  and  grounded  theory, 
which emphasizes the concurrent processes of data collec-
tion and analysis [11]. After we conducted a small number 
of  interviews,  we  conducted  a  preliminary  data  analysis 
session  to  identify  core  themes.  For  example,  instructors’ 
teaching  load  and  processes,  motivations,  and  challenges 
emerged as key concepts in the first stage of analysis. After 
these main themes were identified, we used axial coding to 
further delineate categories and sub-categories. Themes and 
categories were further refined by an iterative coding pro-
cess  that  involved  the  first  two  authors.  The  initial  results 
provided a coding guideline, which was applied to the next 
round of coding for each new set of interviews. When sub-
sequent  rounds  of  analyses  were  not  able  to  uncover  new 
themes or categories, this demonstrated saturation of theory 
[11]. This occurred after we conducted our 13th interview, 
and  our  14th  interview  further  confirmed  that  theoretical 
saturation had been reached. In presenting our main emer-
gent  themes,  we  use  participant  percentages  or  counts  to 
convey prevalence of each theme among our participants. 
Participant Profiles 
Our 14 interviewees included 2 Full Professors, 6 Associate 
Professors, 5 Assistant Professors, and 1 Senior Researcher. 
Our participants spanned various disciplines, such as Geog-
raphy, 
Interaction 
(HCI),  Computer  Sciences,  and  Information  Sciences.  All 
instructors  had  college-level  teaching  experience  through 
resident teaching, online teaching, and MOOCs. Among our 
14  participants,  we  interviewed  five  females  and  nine 
males. Their ages ranged from 30 to 70. Nine participants 
were  from  the  United  States,  and  five  were  from  China. 
When referring to our participants in the following text, we 
use a consistent pseudonym to protect their identities.  
RESULTS 
The Process of Teaching a MOOC 
From our interviews, we first abstracted the tasks and activ-
ities described by our participants into higher-level process-
es, creating a model that depicts the complex nature of their 
work (Figure 1). MOOC instructors need to complete three 
stages for each MOOC they teach: preparation, implemen-
tation, and feedback. In the following sub-sections, we dis-
cuss these stages and the associated tasks in more detail. 

Innovation,  Art,  Human-Computer 

(cid:5)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:11)(cid:10)(cid:1)(cid:22)(cid:21)(cid:1)
(cid:4)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:18)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:12)(cid:17)(cid:16)(cid:1)

(cid:5)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:11)(cid:10)(cid:1)(cid:24)(cid:21)(cid:1)
(cid:2)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:9)(cid:7)(cid:6)(cid:8)(cid:13)(cid:1)

(cid:5)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:11)(cid:10)(cid:1)(cid:23)(cid:21)(cid:1)
(cid:3)(cid:15)(cid:18)(cid:14)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:12)(cid:17)(cid:16)(cid:1)

Figure 1: Process Model for Administering a MOOC 

 

209

Stage 1: Preparation 
A MOOC instructor’s initial job is to establish and prepare 
the curriculum for the course. The instructor often must first 
submit a teaching proposal to the MOOC advisory office or 
committee  within  his  or  her  university.  For  our  sample  of 
instructors,  permission  to  teach  a  MOOC  was  granted  be-
cause the proposal aligned with university requirements and 
strategic plans. After getting permission, the instructor de-
signs the MOOC curricula by preparing teaching materials.  
All of our MOOC instructors emphasized how challenging 
it is to organize appropriate content into 4-8 weeks of lec-
tures that are clear and concise, especially when the antici-
pated  audience  varies  so  drastically.  This  stage  usually 
takes  a  very  long  time  to  finish.  Most  of  our  participants 
believed they contributed at least 400 hours to preparation 
even before teaching a MOOC.  
“I have gone through a long and tough period to prepare 
the  course.  Five  minutes  of  lecture  notes  needs  several 
times  of  modification.  Lecture  shooting  consumes  a  huge 
amount  of  time  ‘cause  I  didn’t  have  much  experiences  of 
working  in  front  of  the  camera  and  I  also  hoped  I  could 
have a good image in the video.” – Dr. Williams 
Stage 2: Implementation 
In  the  second  stage,  an  instructor’s  primary  duty  is  to 
launch the MOOC and ensure that it proceeds well. In do-
ing so, instructors need to upload lectures, assignments, and 
announcements  each  week;  solve  problems  (e.g.,  correct 
broken links of course materials, deal with students who are 
disruptive); answer questions raised by students; and update 
the  social  media  account  of  the  MOOC.  One  participant 
said he felt like a “firefighter” and was prepared at any time 
to solve problems as they arose. 

“I  always  keep  myself  alerted  because  there  were  always 
something unpredictable happening. After making sure the 
lecture and other related materials are uploaded, I always 
keep an eye on the forum and even social media accounts. I 
need to discover the problems as early as possible to avoid 
a pile of complaints.” – Dr. Hill 
Although this stage does not demand as much time as the 
preparation  stage,  instructors  experience  mental  pressure 
because they fear that their MOOC may fail if they do not 
deal with problems in a timely and appropriate manner.  
Stage 3: Feedback 
The instructor’s job is not over when the MOOC ends. Our 
participants believed it was crucial to collect and organize 
the  feedback  and  comments  they  received  from  students 
during the MOOC. They often tried to document comments 
from  forum  discussions,  social  media  posts,  and  even  stu-
dent blogs. Then, the instructors incorporated this feedback 
into the redesign of the course for the next MOOC imple-
mentation, making this process iterative in nature. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

 

“It is a tedious process to collect and select all the useful 
comments from tens of thousands of posts and discussions. 
But  I  have  to  do  this  because  it’s  valuable  for  my  future 
teaching.” – Dr. Miller 
Instructors  spend  much  time  manually  filtering  useful 
comments  from  the  noise,  but  generally  believe  that  this 
process is worthwhile for improving their future MOOCs. 
Summary: Tasks and Collaborations 
By analyzing instructors’ descriptions of their activities and 
concerns into the three stages summarized in Figure 1, we 
were able to construct a broad picture of the lifecycle of a 
MOOC. Table 1 summarizes the three stages of teaching a 
MOOC and lists various tasks associated with each.  
Table 1: MOOC instructors’ working procedures and tasks 
Stages 

Tasks 

Stage 1:  
Preparation 

Stage 2:  
Implementation 

Stage3:  
Feedback 
 

(cid:1)  Submit proposal 
(cid:1)  Design course 
(cid:1)  Prepare teaching materials  
(cid:1)  Shoot Lecture 
(cid:1)  Monitor course process  
(cid:1)  Launch lecture and announce-

ment each week 
(cid:1)  Solve problems  
(cid:1)  Answer questions  
(cid:1)  Charge social media platforms 
(cid:1)  Go through forum posts and So-
cial media posts to collect feed-
back from students 

(cid:1)  Redesign course based on 

(cid:1)  Prepare for the next MOOC ses-

comments 

sion 

Importantly, we also found that instructors do not complete 
the  tasks  summarized  above  on  their  own.  Collaboration 
across a larger team is an important and necessary part of a 
successful MOOC administration. According to our partici-
pants, the entire MOOC team ranged in size from 30 people 
to  200.  For  example,  instructors  need  to  collaborate  with 
the  MOOC  committee  of  their  institutions,  curriculum  de-
sign team, video production team, project manager, teach-
ing  assistants,  technology  coordinators,  and  the  university 
MOOC strategy team. Table 2 describes key activities and 
responsibilities performed by these collaborators. 
Table 2: MOOC collaborators’ responsibilities and activities 
Collaborator Role  Responsibilities/Activities 
Curriculum De-
sign Team 
Video Production 
Team 
Project Manager 

teaching instruction 
(cid:1)  Manages the project 
(cid:1)  Makes sure the course is on time 

(cid:1)  Facilitates digital recording of the 

(cid:1)  Assists in preparation of course 

materials 

and on budget.  

(cid:1)  Note: Only two participants said 

they have a project manager. 

(cid:1)  Helps answer students’ questions 
(cid:1)  Grades student assignments 
(cid:1)  Help solve technical problems on 

MOOC platforms 

Teaching Assis-
tants 
Technology Coor-
dinators 
University MOOC 
Strategy Team 

(cid:1)  Ensures that MOOCs offered by 
instructors align with university 
goals 
Motivations to Teach a MOOC 
While  institutions  often  create  teams  to  support  MOOC 
instructors, the ultimate success or failure of a MOOC rests 
solely on the instructor. And, as shown in Tables 1 and 2, 
the complexity and hefty workload required to administer a 
MOOC  is  significant.  Yet,  all  our  participants  voluntarily 
teach  MOOCs  even  though  their  universities  do  not  pay 
them additional money to take on this extra responsibility. 
One of our participants even covered part of the course ex-
penses out of his own pocket. So what exactly is the appeal 
of teaching a MOOC?  
We identified four broad types of(cid:1)motivations that influence 
instructors  to  teach  MOOCs:  global  impact  on  students, 
professional growth, research opportunities, and enhanced 
name recognition. We present the motivations in descend-
ing order based how many instructors reflected the theme. 
Note  that  although  the  following  discussion  treats  each  of 
these  themes  separately,  most  instructors  choose  to  be  a 
MOOC instructor for multiple reasons.  
Global Impact on Students  
All of our MOOC instructors (14 out of 14) were motivated 
by  the  unprecedented  opportunity  to  impact  an  enormous 
population of students. As college instructors, they usually 
teach  classes  with  enrollments  that  range  from  15  to  100 
students.  In  a  MOOC,  they  might  teach  over  45,000  stu-
dents during one session! Moreover, these students are from 
different countries from all over the world. Instructors felt 
“thrilled” and “fruitful” because they could broadcast their 
knowledge  globally  to  students  who  are  learning  on  their 
own  volition;  they  enjoy  the  opportunity  to  positively  im-
pact the lives of students who otherwise may not have such 
learning opportunities. 
“You never have such a good opportunity to teach so many 
students! I still feel excited and incentivized to be a MOOC 
instructor,  though  I  have  taught  three  sessions.  I  still  re-
member  when  I  saw  the  enrolled  student  population  had 
been so large that could fill a football stadium, I screamed! 
Every effort became so worthwhile that I never regret being 
a MOOC instructor.” – Dr. Alberts 
All  of  our  participants  are  passionate  about  teaching  and 
they believe that teaching more students during their career 
will  add  to  their  sense  of  achievement.  They  hope  more 
people  can  benefit  from  their  courses,  and  they  see  the 

210

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES
 

MOOC  paradigm  as  aligning  with  their  altruistic  goals  of 
giving back to society.  
“I spent a very long time to figure out how to effectively and 
efficiently search information we need. I have taught many 
people  and  want  to  teach  more  people  how  to  search  be-
cause these are really good techniques that everyone needs 
and can help them save lots of valuable time. I hope every-
one knows. MOOC makes this become true. One of my ses-
sion  reached  8  million  students  that  can  never  happen  by 
teaching regular classes.” – Dr. Rosenberg 
Professional Growth  
All 14 instructors also shared that MOOCs provide them a 
testbed  to  improve  the  effectiveness  of  their  teaching  and 
help  them  to  refine  their  teaching  practices.  For  example, 
Dr. Philip has taught three times on Coursera. He collected, 
carefully  analyzed,  and  categorized  student  comments 
(Stage 3 in Figure 1) at the end of his courses and adjusted 
and improved his teaching in the next round of his MOOC. 
Although he has taught regular college courses for several 
years, he has never been able to receive so many and such 
comprehensive comments from students.  
“I  love  hearing  feedback  from  them  [students].  I  want  to 
see how they respond to my teaching material and course 
arrangement. This is the first time I have had so many stu-
dents who can provide me valuable comments. It’s definite-
ly good for my teaching and my career.” – Dr. Philip 
Research Opportunities 
Most  (13  or  93%)  of  our  instructors  felt  that  the  MOOC 
environment  provides  unique  opportunities  for  conducting 
research.  The  MOOC  student  population  is  large  and  di-
verse  enough  to  be  an  excellent  (i.e.,  generalizable)  re-
search sample. Instructors have a subject pool in which they 
can launch experiments associated with their research pro-
jects  during  the  course.  Instructors  who  act  as  researchers 
can readily collect data on students’ behaviors, perceptions, 
and attitudes. For example, a MOOC instructor in geogra-
phy may use an interactive map to see whether and to what 
extent  this  technology  could  help  enhance  peer  awareness 
and even build a sense of community.  
“MOOC  is  a  very  attractive  paradigm.  It  provides  us  a 
huge lab. Student behaviors are a large data set. I do enjoy 
exploring  this  magic  world!  I  can  find  lots  of  interesting 
research topics from there.” – Dr. Brit 
Enhanced Name Recognition 
Finally, 12 instructors (86%) said that they are motivated to 
teach  a  MOOC  to  enhance  the  name  recognition  of  their 
institutions  and  themselves.  From  an  institutional  perspec-
tive,  MOOCs  are  a  good  opportunity  for  a  university  or 
other  institutions  to  advertise  their  programs  globally.  For 
example,  some  instructors  were  approached  by  their  pro-
grams  to  organize  and  teach  a  MOOC  to  support  student 
recruitment. Dr. Hill believes that MOOCs are a very effec-
tive means to introduce a program or an institution to stu-

dents.  He  found  that  his  many  MOOC  students  later  en-
rolled into other programs offered by his university. 
“Our  department  head  said  ‘you  should  teach  a  MOOC. 
It’s  the  right  time  and  good  way  to  let  more  people  know 
us.’” – Dr. Hill 
Taking a career perspective, running a preeminent MOOC 
helps  a  university  professor  gain  wide  prestige,  not  only 
from  students,  but  also  from  peers  in  the  same  field.  Dr. 
Dong  has  taught  a  MOOC  three  times,  and  his  MOOC 
ranked as one of the top ten popular courses on Coursera. 
As a result, he has been invited to many universities from 
different countries to give talks and has even been asked for 
his autograph by students:  
“I  was  surprised  people  began  to  ask  for  my  autograph. 
From  that  moment,  I  knew  my  MOOC  had  become  well 
known.” – Dr. Dong 
At least in part due to his renowned MOOCs and enhanced 
name  recognition  in  his  field,  Dr.  Dong  has  been  able  to 
foster many new research collaborations with peers at other 
institutions around the globe.  
Challenges of Teaching a MOOC 
We identified five key challenges associated with adminis-
tering  a  MOOC:  logistical  complexities  of  collaborative 
work,  crises of time management,  scaling to meet expecta-
tions, extreme criticism and reputation risk, and insufficient 
support. In the next section, we will describe each of these 
challenges  in  more  detail;  later  in  our  discussion,  we  will 
summarize the relationships we  observed between the dif-
ferent motivations and challenges. 
Logistical Complexities of Collaborative Work 
As  shown  in  Figure  1,  MOOC  instructors  have  to  go 
through three stages to complete teaching a MOOC, includ-
ing preparation, implementation and feedback. Also, Table 
1  lists  activities  and  tasks  they  have  to  complete  in  each 
stage. As such, all 14 instructors felt that they initially un-
derestimated  the  amount  and  complexity  of  the  work  re-
quired to teach a MOOC.  
“Teaching a MOOC is much more complicated than I im-
agined. When I planned to teach a MOOC, I thought I just 
needed to record my lectures and put them online, but when 
I really got involved in the process, I found I oversimplified 
the procedures in my mind.” – Dr. Alison 
Before  teaching  their  first  MOOCs,  instructors  had  little 
sense  of  how  many  tasks  and  people  they  would  need  to 
manage, nor the best way how to accomplish this. 
“No one told me what I should do and the best strategies to 
make everything in order. I had to explore everything on my 
own. I really hope our university could draft a document or 
build  a  tutorial  to  show  us  the  overall  process  and  things 
we  have  to  involve  and  the  procedures  we  can  follow,  in 
doing  so  we  can  have  a  rough  estimation  of  the  teaching 
load.” – Dr. Jason 

211

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

 

As shown in Table 2, MOOC instructors must collaborate 
with various professionals in order to teach a MOOC. In a 
typical classroom setting, instructors are more able to take 
on many of these roles on their own, essentially becoming a 
one person operation. But the scale of a MOOC necessitates 
that instructors manage different collaborators to make their 
MOOCs work. For most instructors, this was the first time 
they  had  to  orchestrate  a  collaborative  effort  at  this  scale. 
Most  instructors  needed  a  trial  period  and  experienced  a 
steep learning curve for dealing with both new technologies 
and new people.  
For instance, one instructor recorded a lecture for the first 
time in a professional recording studio. The video director 
had  many  suggestions  for  how  to  produce  a  good  “show” 
and portray a professional image to the audience, including 
how to dress, apply proper make-up, and face the camera. 
To finish recording a five-minute lecture, the instructor was 
asked  to  repeat  the  lecture  at  least  10  times  and  was  ex-
posed  to  the  spotlight  for  three  hours.  Because  of  the  ex-
tended  amount  of  time  under  very  hot  spotlights,  the  in-
structor had to change shirts three times and reapply make-
up multiple times because she had become so sweaty. 
“I  had  experience  recording  lectures  during  teaching 
online courses, but it was not as professional as this time. 
We  didn’t  need  to  make  it  so  serious,  but  we  wanted  the 
best effect. The first several shots were miserable because I 
didn’t have experience, and I was nervous. I wanted to pass 
with  one  shot,  but  things  went  contrary  to  my  wishes 
[laugh].  It’s  a  tough  but  memorable  collaboration  with 
them.”  – Dr. Dong 
Sometimes,  our  participants  had  conflicting  opinions  with 
collaborators,  such  as  curriculum  designers,  which  caused 
heated disagreements. Our participants were used to design-
ing the curriculum on their own, but for MOOCs they are 
often  required  to  collaborate  with  trained  instructional  de-
signers, which required negotiation and caused delays.  
“We have lots of back and forth discussions or even ‘fights’ 
to argue our curriculum plan. We have our own considera-
tions  and  it  was  very  hard  to  reach  agreement.  We  did 
waste a lot of time…At last, we compromised to each other, 
and otherwise our work could not proceed. ” – Dr. Cheng 
For  instructors  who  are  used  to  being  their  own  bosses  in 
their normal classrooms, it was difficult to give up this level 
of control, especially when they worried that their personal 
reputations  were  at  stake.  Any  unsuccessful  collaboration 
could  put  the  MOOC  in  danger.  For  instance,  one  of  our 
participants hired a teaching assistant (TA) whose primary 
responsibilities were to report and solve technical problems 
and upload learning materials. Unfortunately, this TA sud-
denly quit the job after two days after launching the MOOC 
without  giving  any  notice  or  explanation  to  the  instructor. 
The  instructor  was  very  frustrated  and  lost  two  nights  of 
sleep while handling this emergency situation. 

“I never thought this would happen! He left without any pre 
notice. He was very important to keep the MOOC proceed-
ing. I was shocked and extremely frustrated. I even cried to 
my  husband,  but  I  still  needed  to  take  over  everything  to 
avoid worse consequences.” – Dr. Miller  
Only two of the instructors had a project manager to help 
them organize the tasks, for instance, making budgets, hir-
ing  teaching  assistants,  tracking  course  design  processes, 
making schedules with different groups of people, and en-
suring  the  course  was  ready  before  the  deadline.  Most  of 
our  participants  had  to  organize  all  these  tasks  by  them-
selves. Moreover, without prior experiences and guidance, 
the process proved overwhelmingly difficult. 
We  found  that  some  universities  have  their  own  MOOC 
committees  to  provide  general  guidelines  for  instructors, 
but these guidelines are often too vague to tangibly follow. 
Even within the same university, different instructors expe-
rienced  very  different  procedures.  For  example,  some  in-
structors shoot and edit their videos themselves, but others 
have  professional  video  producers.  Some  instructors  man-
age MOOC platform data on their own, but some rely on IT 
support. Lack of consistent and unified constitution makes 
the  complicated  logistics  more  difficult  to  organize.  Our 
participants felt overwhelmed to deal with these procedures.   
“It would be great if university could develop a document 
or a tutorial to walk us through the whole process and pro-
vide us a consistent logistical procedure. Everyone involv-
ing in the MOOC group would have a rule to follow.” – Dr. 
Jason 
Crises of Time Management  
Not surprisingly, all 14 of our participants believe that the 
time they invested into MOOCs had been far beyond their 
expectations. Recall that our participants reported they vol-
unteered at least 400 hours to prepare a MOOC. Teaching 
MOOCs brought big challenges for our participants regard-
ing both work-work and work-life balance. As one instruc-
tor joked, “the MOOC ate me!” –Dr. Sandy. 

Work-Work-Balance 
13 (93%) of our participants told us it was very difficult to 
strike a balance between teaching the MOOC and fulfilling 
other routine job responsibilities, especially during the first 
and  second  stages  of  administering  a  MOOC  (See  Figure 
1). Because managing the MOOC was extra work on top of 
their  primary  work  responsibilities  (e.g.,  teaching  regular 
college courses, having meetings, doing research, providing 
services for the affiliated institution, etc.), they felt conflict-
ed about how to prioritize their time. 
“I was struggling regarding how to divide my time. On one 
hand, for example, my students [in regular classes] paid a 
large amount of money to learn. So I must take care of them 
very well. On the other hand, I am a teacher, and I want to 
give the best to all my students [including MOOCs], though 
I wasn’t paid by them or my university.” – Dr. Cheng 

212

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES
 

Work-Life-Balance  
11 (79%) of the instructors reported that MOOCs took up a 
large  portion  or  even  all  of  the  spare  time  they  normally 
spent with their families. Working on the MOOC was very 
time  consuming  with  no  stopping,  particularly  after  the 
course was launched.  
“I almost didn’t have time to take care of my five year old 
son for almost six weeks. My husband took all my [parent-
ing]  responsibilities  during  that  time.  I  felt  very  sorry  for 
my  family,  but  it’s  the  only  way  I  could  finish  my  job.”  – 
Dr. Miller  
Instructors often struggled to maintain a separation between 
negative  experiences  they  had  while  teaching  the  MOOC 
and  their  personal  lives.  Instructors  experienced  a  lot  of 
pressure during teaching a MOOC, and they needed to find 
an outlet to vent their emotions. Their families became the 
most convenient channel:  
“I  didn’t  realize  I  had  brought  so  much  emotional  [bag-
gage]  to  my  family  until  my  husband  persuaded  [me]  to 
stop teaching MOOCs to avoid torturing myself and him.” 
– Dr. Alison 
In  an  attempt  to  solve  the  work-work  and  work-life  time 
crises, some participants chose to teach MOOCs only when 
they had reduced or no teaching loads at their universities. 
They  also  tried  to  avoid  MOOC  engagements  around  im-
portant conference submission deadlines and family events. 
Some participants found another colleague in the same field 
to teach the MOOC together to split pressure and workload. 
Scaling to Meet Expectations 
Due to the large-scale nature of MOOCs, all 14 of the in-
structors  struggled  when  attempting  to  maintain  realistic 
expectations  of  both  their  students  and  themselves  when 
transitioning  from  regular-sized  classrooms  to  teaching 
MOOCs.  As  a  result,  they  often  tried  to  apply  traditional 
teaching  norms  to  their  MOOCs  and  ended  up  feeling  an 
undue  sense  of  failure.  The  most  prominent  ways  instruc-
tors struggled to scale their expectations included focusing 
on  student  retention  numbers,  handling  unexpected  situa-
tions once the course was launched, and feeling pressure to 
attend to each individual student. 

Focusing on Student Retention 
All  of  our  instructors  believe  that  retention  rate  is  a  very 
important  index  of  their  students’  satisfaction  and  overall 
course success. Unlike other teaching formats, retention is 
particularly  problematic  for  MOOCs  [8,  41].  On  average 
only 10% of enrolled students finish a MOOC course once 
they register [12]. High drop-off rates become a concern for 
MOOC instructors who spend a large portion of their time 
trying  to  constantly  engage  students  so  that  they  remain 
enrolled.  Although  our  instructors  understand  that  MOOC 
students  have  different  motivations  to  join  MOOCs  and 
may  accomplish  these  goals  even  if  they  do  not  complete 

the course, instructors still hope to retain as many students 
as possible.  
“As a teacher, I wish every student could finish the course 
and benefit from the course. In our regular courses, almost 
90%  of  the  students  can  finish  the  course.  Even  in  online 
courses, our record is that we can keep 75% students to the 
end. When I saw 90% students leave my MOOC within two 
weeks, to be honest, I was not feeling good. I began to think 
about whether it was because of something I did wrong.” – 
Dr. Gold 
All of our participants believe it is very difficult to retain all 
students to the end, given that there is so much competing 
information on the Internet and that students are easily dis-
tracted.  Thus,  they  tried  various  methods  to  make  the 
course interesting and to continuously reminded students to 
return to the course to learn. For example, some instructors 
use social media (i.e. Facebook, Twitter) to attract students 
and  often  posted  interesting  content  to  maintain  students’ 
enthusiasm. They also held online office hours, for example 
using Google hangouts, to connect with students.  
“I was always thinking how to keep them [students] in the 
class, but it’s really not an easy job! MOOCs are optional 
to students, so I feel like my course needs to compete with 
other huge amounts of interesting information on the Inter-
net.  Thus,  it’s  critical  to  make  the  content  attractive  and 
interesting…I  found  Facebook  and  Twitter  are  very  good 
places  to  post  something  interesting  and  can  also  remind 
them go back to course in a timely way.” – Dr. Carroll 
Because  retention  was  a  concern  for  the  instructors,  they 
invested a lot of time and effort into making sure students 
did not drop their classes. If a large number of students did 
drop, then they experienced a sense of failure. 
Dealing with the “Massive” Unknowns  
Because MOOCs are extremely large in scale and impossi-
ble to test-run prior to implementing the course, instructors 
must be ready for a multitude of surprises, at a scale they 
have never had to deal with before. Due to unexpected is-
sues that arose during MOOC implementation, 86% (12) of 
our participants reported being intensely stressed out on the 
days  their  MOOCs  were  launched.  Recounting  still-fresh 
memories of that launch day, many of them said they could 
not sleep on the first night after the course went live. They 
monitored  the  system  (i.e.  Coursera)  closely  to  see  how 
many students joined the course, how many began to talk or 
discuss the course content, and whether the course worked 
properly.  For  the  first  time  in  his  life,  Dr.  Miller  faced  a 
very large audience, and he did not know what would hap-
pen.  For  example,  would  students  like  the  course  and  be 
satisfied with the course schedule?  
“The most scary thing is you cannot pilot run the MOOCs, 
so you don’t know what will happen and how students will 
respond.  There  are  so  many  students  joining  a  MOOC.  It 
means  that  hundreds  of  people  are  not  happy  with  the 

213

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

 

course,  even  if  only  1%  students  are  not  satisfied  with  it. 
That is pretty serious to me! ” – Dr. Carroll 
The large scale of potential unpredictability makes instruc-
tors feel a loss of control: 
“The  huge  population  really  gives  me  a  lot  of  pressure.  I 
have  taught  college  courses  online  and  offline  for  several 
years, but the number of audience [members] never exceeds 
one hundred. I have gotten used of having everything under 
control. But in MOOCs, the huge population makes me feel 
out of control.” – Dr. Miller 

Attending to Each Individual Student 
Another reason scalability is such a big issue for instructors 
is that there is a misalignment between teaching norms that 
have emerged within regular-sized classes versus those ap-
propriate for MOOCs. 79% (11) of the instructors we inter-
viewed expressed their desire to give personalized attention 
to each of their students. In classes of normal size (whether 
offline or online) an instructor usually knows every student 
in the classroom. At this more manageable scale, instructors 
are able to help students when they have difficulties, easily 
demonstrating  responsiveness  to  students’  needs.  Indeed, 
this sort of responsiveness to students’ individualized needs 
is  a  standard  teaching  norm  within  the  typical  classroom. 
From  an  interaction  perspective,  this  can  be  viewed  as  a 
type of “hub and spoke” network [3, 34], where the teacher 
enjoys  direct  contact  with  each  student.  In  contrast  a 
MOOC  might  be  better  conceived  as  a  fully  (or  largely) 
connected graph, where many nodes are connected to many 
other  nodes,  and  in  particular,  where  no  one  node  is  con-
nected  to  all.  Other  studies  of  complex  coordination  sys-
tems  (e.g.,  emergency  rooms)  have  demonstrated  the  im-
portance of these more complex coordination networks [3, 
34].  
Yet, when MOOC instructors do try to apply the individual-
ized attention norm (i.e., “hub and spoke” model) to thou-
sands of students, they quickly find it is not feasible. When 
instructors  cannot  physically  or  mentally  take  care  of  stu-
dents who need help, they feel frustrated and disappointed 
in  their  own  performance  as  a  teacher,  even  though  they 
realize that at a rational level that this degree of responsive-
ness is simply unattainable: 
“Although  it’s  impossible  to  take  care  of  every  student  in 
my course given the huge population, I still feel bad when I 
cannot finish going through all the discussion on the forum 
or  answering  all  the  questions  they  raised.  I  know  I 
shouldn’t  feel  guilty.  But  as  a  teacher,  I  feel  like  it’s  my 
responsibility to help everyone in my class.” – Dr. Williams 
All participants felt a little bit better after their first experi-
ence  in  teaching  a  MOOC.  Experience  gave  them  some 
psychological preparation to face a large scale audience, as 
well  as  physical  and  mental  preparation  to  handle  the  un-
known challenges and high demands of their time.  

Extreme Criticism and Reputation Risk 
MOOCs provide instructors more visibility to audiences but 
also force them to bear more accountability and suffer more 
criticism. All our participants (14) said they have received 
considerable  criticism  from  their  MOOC  students.  While 
some  of  criticism  is  about  the  course  itself  (e.g.,  errors  in 
slides,  course  schedule,  course  contents,  quality  of  the 
course, etc.), some students criticize the instructor directly 
(e.g.,  teaching  skills,  strategies,  instructor’s  involvement, 
etc.).  Our  participants  (14)  even  received  comments  that 
were rude or vulgar, with no specific bearing on the course 
or their instruction. Some instructors felt that this might be 
due to the large, semi-anonymous, and impersonal nature of 
MOOCs.  Unfortunately,  instructors  need  to  process  all  of 
this  “feedback,”  whether  real  or  fictitious,  constructive  or 
destructive.  Sometimes  our  instructors  felt  wronged  and 
hurt  because  students  made  false  accusations  (based  on 
misperceptions) about them being of derelict of their duties: 
“I welcome good comments to help improve the course. But 
some comments are very rudely spoken without any respect. 
Some comments are very unfair, like they thought we earn a 
lot  of  money  personally  from  MOOCs  but  we  didn’t,  not 
even  a  penny!  I  become  very  emotional  when  I  saw  such 
kind  of  comments.  They  really  should  show  us  gratitude 
since we really put lots of effort in MOOCs, and we provide 
the course for free.” – Dr. Gold 
We found that instructors take comments – especially nega-
tive  ones  –  very  seriously.  Even  if  positive  feedback  out-
weighs  the  negative,  instructors  tended  to  have  a  difficult 
time  guarding  their  feelings  from  the  negative  comments. 
Instructors would overestimate the influence of the negative 
comments and believed these comments could lead to very 
bad consequences.  
“When I think back of the comments, I actually did not see 
many of them. But there are so many discussions that I can-
not go through all of them. So I might only find 1% of them. 
If those untrue comments were continually spread, my ca-
reer would be ruined!” – Dr. Alison 
According to 93% (13) of our instructors, extremely nega-
tive criticism from students also implied more serious con-
sequences, such as potential career risks. As we mentioned 
earlier,  name  recognition  is  one  of  the  important  motiva-
tions for instructors to teach MOOCs. Like a double-edged 
sword, the risk of ruining their reputation and jeopardizing 
their careers is a major concern for instructors. Some partic-
ipants  discontinued  teaching  MOOCs  or  fear  teaching  an-
other MOOC because of the potential risks to their personal 
reputations. According to one participant, some of his jun-
ior  colleagues  decided  not  to  teach  a  MOOC  in  the  first 
place to avoid possible damage to their tenure cases:  
“My career might end if the MOOC failed. I did take a high 
risk  when  I  decided  to  teach  a  MOOC.  Some  of  my  col-
leagues who have tenure pressure gave up the opportunity 
to teach a MOOC because they were afraid that the failure 

214

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES
 

of a MOOC might have very negative impact on their ten-
ure process.” – Dr. Philip 
Insufficient Support  
Overall,  93%  (13)  of  our  MOOC  instructors  stated  that 
were  not  receiving  enough  support  from  their  institutions 
(e.g., resources and policy support) or through the technol-
ogy  (i.e.,  MOOC  platform)  in  order  to  perform  their  jobs 
effectively.  One  participant  was  very  eager  to  tell  us  his 
stories about the difficulties he met when teaching MOOCs 
and helping us recruit other participants to do the same. His 
rationale  was  that  MOOC  instructors  need  help,  and  he 
hopes our research will attract much needed attention from 
academic institutions and MOOC carriers.  
“Our  MOOC  instructors  do  need  help,  support,  and  peo-
ple’s understanding of our work. I know the MOOC system 
is  not  mature,  but  I  hope  it  can  improve  quickly.  I  really 
expect the research focusing on instructors can let the edu-
cation  system  understand  difficulties  and  challenges  we 
face.” – Dr. Brit 
Instructors’  comments  regarding  lack  of  support  fell  into 
three broad categories: resources, policy support, and tech-
nological support. 
Lack of Resources 
86% (12) MOOC instructors experience difficulties due to 
general  deficiencies  in  human  resources  and  funding  pro-
vided by their institutions. For example, many of our partic-
ipants believe that they could not manage huge classes well 
by  themselves,  largely  due  to  the  challenges  discussed  in 
prior  sections.  Hiring  a  set  of  teaching  assistants  to  help 
them would contribute to MOOC success, but they often do 
not have enough funding. 
“Can you imagine how I teach a massive class but with no 
TA’s help? But we usually have a TA even in a regular uni-
versity class.” – Dr. Cheng 
“I only have one TA to help me manage so many students. I 
really need more, but I don’t have funding to hire more.” – 
Dr. Sandy 
Indeed, only two instructors reported being able to hire sev-
eral  TAs  to  help  them,  which  made  teaching  a  MOOC 
much  easier.  But  for  our  other  participants,  only  one  or 
even no TAs were provided. 
Lack of Policy Support  
79% (11) of our participants mentioned MOOC teaching is 
not  officially  counted  toward  their  teaching  loads;  thus, 
instructors  need  to  use  their  own  time  when  teaching 
MOOCs, making it even harder to balance MOOC teaching, 
their  work, and  their personal lives (see the time manage-
ment discussion above). Therefore, our participants strongly 
hope their universities can establish corresponding policies 
to  give  them  appropriate  teaching  credit.  For  instance, 
teaching  a  MOOC  should  not  only  be  counted  as  part  of 
one’s  teaching  load  but  also  considered  as  a  double  load 

relative  to  other  courses,  given  the  heavy  workload  and 
number of students.  
“It does not work in a long run. It’s impossible and not fair 
for  MOOC  instructors  to  teach  a  massive  class  not  even 
being  accounted  into  teaching  load.  I  think  it  is  urgent  to 
solve this problem.” – Dr. Carroll 
Our MOOC instructors, who have also taught in the class-
room and online, consider teaching MOOCs to be especial-
ly  difficult.  They  hope  the  education  system  will  come  to 
consider MOOC teaching as a special factor when consider-
ing tenure or promotion.   
Lack of Technological Support 
MOOC  platforms  (e.g.  Coursera,  edX)  provide  places  to 
broadcast MOOC lectures and also offer some basic func-
tionalities to enrich the content broadcasting, such as a dis-
cussion  forums,  self-tests,  peer  evaluations,  pre-  and  post-
surveys,  and  so  on.  Nonetheless,  our  participants  believe 
that  some  important  features  are  missing  or  should  be  re-
placed by improved services.  
For  example,  all  of  the  instructors  were  unhappy  with  the 
integrated MOOC discussion forums. Numerous discussion 
posts and comments are threaded together making it diffi-
cult for instructors to discover important or urgent questions 
and  problems  raised  by  students.  As  a  result,  instructors 
must spend an excessive amount of time sifting through the 
discussion  forums  to  find  and  respond  to  pertinent  infor-
mation. To cope with this problem, instructors have appro-
priated a variety of familiar social media services (e.g. Fa-
cebook,  Google+,  Twitter)  to  complement  the  discussion 
within  the  MOOC  forum.  Some  instructors  even  told  stu-
dents  to  report  course  related  problems  (e.g.  a  bad  links) 
using a Facebook message instead of the forum. 
Next,  other  instructors  hoped  that  improved  versions  of  a 
MOOC  platform  could  have  better  services  for  collecting 
and  analyzing  student  comments  and  questions.  As  we 
mentioned  earlier,  instructors  consider  students’  feedback 
to be very valuable in refining their MOOCs; unfortunately, 
collecting and synthesizing this feedback is not an easy job. 
Also,  some  instructors  noted  that  the  current  MOOC  plat-
form provides no guidance concerning the best practices for 
when instructors should post important content for students 
across multiple time zones.  
“I hope when I post a message that it can be seen by stu-
dents,  as  many  as  possible.  In  doing  so,  my  message  may 
have  bigger  impact  and  my  students  will  feel  I  am  with 
them.” – Dr. Dong 
Finally,  some  instructors  expressed  that  they  wanted  the 
MOOC  platform  or  another  unified  system  provided  by 
their universities to help them with their responsibilities that 
fell outside of teaching students but were necessary for or-
chestrating MOOC related activities. 
“It would be a lot easier if our university had a unified sys-
tem on which we could contact and make appointments with 

215

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

 

video professionals, could post TA positions, could find IT 
support regarding technology problems we met, etc.” – Dr. 
Jason 
DISCUSSION  
In this paper, we interviewed 14 MOOC instructors to gain 
deeper  insights  into  what  it  takes  to  teach  a  MOOC,  why 
instructors are motivated to take on this massive responsi-
bility,  and  the  challenges  they  must  overcome  to  make  a 
MOOC successful. First, we presented a high-level process 
model of teaching a MOOC (preparation, implementation, 
and feedback. See Figure 1 and Table 1). Second, we iden-
tified  four  main  sources  of  motivation  for 
teaching 
MOOCs,  which  included  worldwide  impact  on  students, 
professional growth, research opportunities,  and  enhanced 
name  recognition.  Third,  we  outlined  five  challenges 
MOOC instructors face while teaching a MOOC (logistical 
complexities of collaborative work,  crises of time manage-
ment,  scaling  to  meet  expectations,  extreme  criticism  and 
reputation  risk,  and  insufficient  support)  as  recounted  in 
detail above. Our findings provide insight into the emerging 
practices  and  experiences  of  MOOC  teaching,  so  that  we 
can identify actionable ways to address potential issues. We 
turn now to a discussion of the key themes and their impli-
cations from both theoretical and practical perspectives. 
Redefining (cid:2)Teaching(cid:3) in MOOCs 
Ours is the first qualitative study to investigate MOOC in-
structors’ experiences in a holistic fashion, from preparing a 
MOOC, to delivering it, and integrating student feedback to 
improve  the  next  iteration.  Based  on  the  reflections  from 
our  instructors  regarding  their  work  procedures,  we  ab-
stracted  the  individual  tasks  to  develop  high-level  process 
model of MOOC administration. We also had a close look 
at different groups of collaborators associated with this pro-
cess and their duties (Table 1 & 2). 
These  findings  present  an  overall  picture  of  the  complex 
logistics  of  the  tasks  associated  with  MOOC  instruction 
and,  in  general,  uncover  the  heavy  workload  MOOC  in-
structors  take  on.  These  reflections  clearly  demonstrate 
“teaching” a MOOC is totally different from teaching regu-
lar  college  classes.  The  massive  scale  causes  instructors’ 
huge emotional stress (due to extreme criticism, reputation 
risks, retention concerns, etc.) and heavy physical workload 
(due  to  time  crises,  complicated  logistics,  collaboration 
challenges, etc.). Also, current university policies and infra-
structures do not provide them the support they need.   
Moreover,  the  ultimate  success  of  a  MOOC  depends  on 
quality results at each stage in the cycle, and a breakdown 
in any part of this process could mean MOOC failure in the 
eyes  of  instructors.  The  preparation  stage  demands  the 
longest  time  and  heaviest  workload  and  also  involves  the 
most  collaboration.  The  implementation  stage  primarily 
requires extensive work to monitor, interpret and respond, 
and remind. It is difficult for instructors of normal courses 
to  appreciate  the  huge  burden  of  maintaining  any  sort  of 
instructor-student  connection  in  an  enormous  course  such 

216

as  this.  The  feedback  stage  is  the  most  relaxed,  but  most 
valuable  period,  and  is  critical  to  the  future  MOOC  ses-
sions.  
Thus, we need a new view of what “teaching” infers when 
considering  MOOCs  relative  to  teaching  in  other  course 
formats.  Teaching  a  MOOC  is  more  like  resourcing  and 
implementing  a  large  project,  from  drafting  a  proposal  to 
receive funding, hiring assistants, looking for collaborators, 
to  making  sure  every  person  in  the  project  produces  the 
right deliverable at the right time and with good quality . . . 
not  to  mention,  creating  course  materials  and  providing 
quality instruction! MOOC instructors have a monumental 
amount of responsibilities that if not shared, have a limited 
chance of being done well. And, in the end, the collabora-
tive work that results from a MOOC project may be evalu-
ated by tens of thousands of people. In this sense, “manag-
ing”  a  MOOC  might  be  a  more  accurate  depicting  of  an 
instructors’  job  than  “teaching.”  If  we  hope  to  support 
MOOC instructors, we must expand our scope to the whole 
process instead of focusing on the student-facing “course” 
as a bounded object. Of course, any teaching activities may 
be  analyzed  from  a  pedagogical  perspective,  but  it  is  the 
massive size and complex coordination of work associated 
with “teaching” a MOOC that demands this more expansive 
view. 
MOOC Sustainability 
In order to ensure that MOOCs are sustainable, the motiva-
tions  to  teach  a  MOOC  need  to  outweigh  the  challenges 
faced by instructors.  However, our interviews suggest that 
the opposite may be true. Among 14 participants, two have 
decided  not  to  teach  MOOCs  again;  four  were  teaching  a 
MOOC when we interviewed them and considering a break 
from MOOCs after finishing this current session; four have 
concerns  about  the  excessive  demands  on  their  time  but 
believe  the  situation  will  become  better  when  the  whole 
MOOC system become mature. Only four participants think 
they  would  regularly  teach  a  MOOC  regardless  of  its  de-
mands. 
The main concern emerging from participants was that what 
they “pay out” is much more than they can afford. Teaching 
a  MOOC  costs  them  too  much  time,  energy  and  emotion, 
and this has taken a toll on their normal life and work.  
“One of my colleagues told me that I should make this deci-
sion  [whether  teaching  a  MOOC]  very  carefully  because 
from his opinion, costs was much more than benefits, so he 
quit after teaching one session. Now I understand what his 
words  meant.  I  actually  have  told  my  colleagues  who  are 
assistant  professors  that  they  should  not  teach  MOOCs 
until they get tenured. I think teaching a MOOC would at 
least slow them down for half a year. ” –Dr. Rosenberg 
“After teaching MOOC twice, I really feel exhausted. So I 
quit. Although I really enjoy interacting with so many stu-
dents, I felt I put too much into my MOOC, my heart, my 
energy, my time, and even my emotions. I feel like I could 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES
 

not  afford  it.  I  really  feel  exhausted.  I  might  teach  again 
when I can get enough support and help from my university 
and Coursera. Teaching may become easier. ” –Dr. Alberts 
Not  surprisingly,  the  motivations  to  teach  a  MOOC  often 
lead  directly  or  indirectly  to  the  challenges  instructors  en-
countered. For example, as part of seeking worldwide im-
pact, instructors discovered challenges associated with time 
management, scaling of their expectations, and managing a 
complex coordination process with collaborators. Leverag-
ing a MOOC to garner professional growth meant the pos-
sibility  of  extreme  criticism  from  students,  and  gaining 
worldwide  name  recognition  came  at  a  great  risk  to  ones 
reputation and career.  
If instructors (or their supporting organizations) cannot ad-
dress the challenges we have discussed, the instructors will 
naturally begin to reconsider their original motivations and 
may decide the benefits are simply not worth the cost. Even 
worse, a single large failure could cause their professional 
reputations to be ruined. For example, if instructors are un-
able to manage their time when teaching a MOOC, the po-
tential  opportunities  for  MOOC-embedded  research  could 
disintegrate and their professional growth could be stalled. 
If extreme criticism from students are made public, an in-
structor’s reputation may be tarnished, perhaps putting him 
or her at risk for tenure or other career milestones. Finally, 
a  breakdown  in  communication  between  the  MOOC  in-
structor and any of the MOOC collaborators could jeopard-
ize the success of the MOOC. Thus, we must recognize and 
leverage  instructors’  motivations  while  alleviating  their 
concerns and difficulties. 
Supporting Instructors(cid:1) Motivations 
Prior  literature  has  also  discussed  reasons why  instructors 
choose  to  teach  MOOCs,  including  intrigue,  personal  re-
wards,  and  altruism  [17].  Our  results  generally  align  with 
this classification, but our findings also provide the under-
lying  rationales  that  go  along  with  these  motivations. 
Therefore,  our  work  provides  anecdotal  evidence  that  can 
be used more easily to incentivize MOOC instructors based 
on their needs. For example, to support instructors’ motiva-
tion to conduct research during a MOOC, platform design-
ers  might  provide  instructor-friendly  APIs  to  help  them 
more  easily  deploy  research  studies  within  their  MOOCs. 
University  Institutional  Review  Boards  (IRBs)  can  also 
support such endeavors by developing standard procedures 
for  conducting  research  experiments  within  MOOC  set-
tings. These mechanisms would reinforce their motivations 
for teaching MOOCs by helping their professional growth, 
research productivity, and better valuing their overall con-
tributions. 
Maximizing Benefits over Costs 
We  found  that  a  number  of  MOOC  instructors  have  quit 
teaching or contemplating doing so in the future. From their 
perspectives,  the  costs  (e.g.,  workload,  emotional  distress, 
reputation risks, etc.) are higher than the incentives or bene-
fits gained. Ultimately, if MOOC instructors feel that these 

challenges  are  insurmountable,  they  will  quit  teaching 
MOOCs  or  their  teaching  quality  will  suffer.  Currently, 
most universities do not to offer extra incentives, monetary 
or  otherwise,  to  teach  MOOCs,  so  instructors  must  draw 
upon  their  intrinsic  motivations  to  teach,  even  though  the 
costs  of  doing  so  are  high.  Simply  put,  if  the  cost-benefit 
equation  of  teaching  MOOCs  remains  at  the  status  quo, 
MOOC instructor turn over may increase and MOOC quali-
ty will suffer. 
We can help avoid such outcomes by addressing the chal-
lenges instructors experience and reinforcing the initial rea-
sons  why  they  chose  to  teach  MOOCs  in  the  first  place. 
Scaling expectations, for instance, is a prominent challenge 
for instructors; it is also, of course, the unique hallmark of 
MOOC teaching. While technology is a massively scalable 
resource, the instructor’s attention and human resources are 
not. On one hand, universities should provide more funding 
and human resources to support MOOC instructors; on the 
other  hand,  MOOC  platforms  should  design  services  for 
better managing and connecting to a massive student popu-
lation. A few researchers are beginning to reconceptualize 
MOOC  platforms  to  better  deal  with  scale  [41,  42],  but 
more research is needed in this particular area.  
Reframing MOOCs as a Collaborative Ecosystem  
MOOC  teaching  is  about  more  than  the  instructors,  the 
course  delivery  platform,  and  the  students.  Our  analysis 
revealed  a  number  of  otherwise  “invisible”  systems  and 
actors. To illustrate our point, we offer a model (Figure 2) 
that illustrates the multiple subsystems that are necessary to 
support  MOOC  administration,  noting  that  many  of  these 
systems  are  not  currently  supported  through  technology. 
Within  current  MOOC  platforms,  instructors  mainly  inter-
act  with  students,  TAs,  and  technical  coordinators  during 
the implementation phase of a MOOC.  

(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:6)(cid:14)(cid:7)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:15)(cid:1)

(cid:26)(cid:12)(cid:25)(cid:9)(cid:25)(cid:24)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:18)(cid:9)(cid:17)(cid:6)(cid:24)(cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:8)(cid:22)(cid:24)(cid:1)(cid:9)(cid:19)(cid:7)(cid:27)

(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:7)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:9)(cid:27)(cid:28)(cid:15)(cid:16)(cid:23)(cid:27)(cid:26)

(cid:26)(cid:12)(cid:25)(cid:9)(cid:25)(cid:24)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:7)(cid:12)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:14)(cid:9)(cid:8)(cid:12)(cid:6)(cid:24)(cid:1)

(cid:21)(cid:12)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:14)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:19)(cid:12)(cid:15)(cid:10)(cid:1)(cid:18)(cid:23)(cid:18)(cid:19)(cid:9)(cid:14)(cid:24)(cid:1)

(cid:3)(cid:8)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:23)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:15)(cid:20)

(cid:9)(cid:19)(cid:7)(cid:27)

(cid:5)(cid:23)(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:14)(cid:27)(cid:24)(cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:26)(cid:32)

(cid:5)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:14)(cid:12)(cid:16)(cid:9)(cid:1)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:13)(cid:12)(cid:16)(cid:11)(cid:1)(cid:18)(cid:14)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:20)
(cid:26)(cid:12)(cid:25)(cid:9)(cid:25)(cid:24)(cid:1)(cid:5)(cid:12)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:16)(cid:1)(cid:18)(cid:11)(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:12)(cid:15)(cid:10)(cid:24)(cid:1)
(cid:18)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:8)(cid:12)(cid:16)(cid:24)(cid:1)(cid:14)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:19)(cid:12)(cid:15)(cid:10)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:18)(cid:24)(cid:1)

(cid:9)(cid:19)(cid:7)(cid:27)

(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:26)

(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:18)(cid:23)(cid:24)(cid:21)(cid:24)(cid:17)(cid:30)(cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:24)(cid:24)(cid:25)(cid:15)(cid:19)(cid:23)(cid:13)(cid:27)(cid:24)(cid:25)

(cid:3)(cid:28)(cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:19)(cid:14)(cid:28)(cid:21)(cid:28)(cid:22)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:26)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:23)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:13)(cid:22)

(cid:12)(cid:19)(cid:15)(cid:16)(cid:24)(cid:1)(cid:8)(cid:25)(cid:24)(cid:15)(cid:28)(cid:14)(cid:27)(cid:19)(cid:24)(cid:23)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:13)(cid:22)

(cid:11)(cid:23)(cid:19)(cid:29)(cid:16)(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:19)(cid:27)(cid:30)(cid:1)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:7)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:9)(cid:27)(cid:25)(cid:13)(cid:27)(cid:16)(cid:17)(cid:30)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:13)(cid:22)

(cid:8)(cid:25)(cid:24)(cid:20)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:27)(cid:1)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:23)(cid:13)(cid:17)(cid:16)(cid:25)

 

Figure 2: MOOCs Ecosystem 

The  MOOC  ecosystem  represents  the  supplemental  tech-
nologies that support the entire process of MOOC teaching. 
This  includes  student  engagement  outside  the  platform 
(e.g., social media pages and virtual meeting platforms), as 
well as interactions with other actors in the overall system. 
For instance, instructors may collaborate with TAs or some 
other technical coordinator to make their social media page 
attractive  or  run  virtual  office  hours.  Instructors  must  col-
laborate  with  many  other  people  (e.g.,  for  curriculum  de-

217

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

 

sign,  lecture  shooting,  etc.)  during  the  preparation  and 
feedback  phases  of  MOOC  administration.  Some  of  these 
collaborations may take place online (using tools like social 
media  or  virtual  meetings),  but  they  often  occur  in  offline 
working  places  with  little  technology  support.  From  this 
model,  we  can  see  that  instructors  need  to  interact  with  a 
range  of  collaborators,  but  that  the  system  support  only 
exists  for  collaborations  that  are  student-facing.  This  may 
be  because  of  the  student-centered  emphasis  of  MOOC 
implementation, design, and research.  
Because our study emphasizes a new perspective, from that 
of  the  instructor  and  the  holistic  process  of  teaching  a 
MOOC, our findings provide new insights for MOOC sys-
tem design and administration support. Indeed, prior litera-
ture  has  analyzed  MOOCs  as  a  collaborative  system  [41, 
42]; here we expand this view to view MOOCs as a collab-
orative ecosystem, one that involves many actors, process-
es, and support systems. As designers and practitioners, our 
attention  should  not  be  limited  to  MOOC  platforms  and 
student  outcomes,  but  also  extend  to  ecosystems  that  pro-
vide  support  for  MOOC  instructors  and  their  associated 
collaborators during all stages of MOOC administration.  
IMPLICATIONS 
Based on our findings and key themes as discussed above, 
we  present  recommendations  to  improve  MOOC  instruc-
tors’  teaching  experiences.  Many  of  these  are  directed  at 
redesign or extensions of technology infrastructure, where-
as others are aimed at education institutions. 
Facilitating Work and Collaboration  
Our  data  shows  that  instructors  have  difficulty  managing 
the  complicated  logistics  of  MOOC  teaching.  One  factor 
contributing to this is the lack of pre-defined coordination 
rules to follow. As we mentioned in the challenge section, 
the guidelines provided by universities are often too vague 
to  tangibly  follow.  Different  instructors  experienced  very 
different procedures even within the same university.  
Lack of consistent and unified constitution makes the com-
plicated  logistics  more  difficult  to  organize.  Moreover, 
without prior experiences and guidance, the process proved 
tremendously difficult. This causes considerable uncertain-
ty to emerge as logistical issues arise. For example, there is 
no suitable place for instructors to obtain a MOOC-trained 
a TA, nor is there a consistent facility for video production. 
According  to  prior  literature,  uncertainty  has  a  negative 
effect  on  organizational  effectiveness  [3].  One  approach 
would  be  to  define  coordination  rules  [3]  that  instructors 
can  reference  when  they  are  uncertain  of  what  or  how  to 
proceed.  
Another  logistical  challenge  is  unsuccessful  or  difficult 
collaborations. Collaborating with colleagues should effec-
tively distribute responsibilities, reduce pressure by reduc-
ing  workload,  and  solve  time  management  problems 
through  human  scaling.  Unfortunately,  we  found  that  the 
challenges  of  managing  the  many  collaborations  involved 

218

in MOOCs can get in the way of the main goal of teaching. 
Further,  the  collaborative  norms  associated  with  MOOC 
administration are misaligned: Instructors feel that they lose 
teaching  autonomy,  but  at  the  same  time,  they  also  feel 
solely  responsible  for  the  MOOC’s  success.  This  is  the 
classic problem of having “responsibility without power.”  
The  norms  for  MOOC  teaching  must  change.  Either  the 
responsibility should be better distributed across all parties 
involved, or the MOOC instructor should be viewed as the 
final authority in all decisions. One way to accomplish this 
is through business rules and systems that guide coordina-
tion practices. For example, an organization might create a 
collaborative project management system where instructors 
assign tasks to collaborators, and in turn, collaborators are 
responsible  for  accomplishing  these  tasks.  Such  a  system 
could also enhance collaboration awareness, enabling more 
effective  and  efficient  collaborations  [7,  13].  Of  course, 
upper-level  administration  and  incentive  structures  within 
institutions  would  have  to  support  a  hierarchical  structure 
for MOOC administration and to clearly and publicly define 
roles and responsibilities.  
Alleviating Retention Concerns 
Retention of students in MOOCs differs from that in tradi-
tional  courses  [19].  One  reason  is  that  students  have  very 
diverse  motivations  for  enrolling  in  a  MOOC,  and  their 
view  of  “finishing”  is  often  not  based  on  whether  they 
complete all activities offered [41]. Although the instructors 
we  interviewed  know  that  students  have  different  motiva-
tions for enrolling in their course, most of them still take the 
drop-out rate very seriously and perceive low retention rates 
as  failure.  MOOC  platforms  currently  only  provide  sum-
mary reports for retention based on the number of students 
who  enroll  and  drop  out;  there  has  yet  been  no  effort  to 
provide a more nuanced view that considers students’ moti-
vations and goals as a measure of MOOC success. For ex-
ample,  if  MOOC  offerings  were  modularized  by  different 
learning  objectives  (instead  of  viewed  as  a  monolithic 
course),  instructors  may  be  able  disentangle  students’  ob-
jectives for learning instead of focusing on overall dropout 
rates.  If  such  views  can  be  constructed,  instructors  might 
feel less panicked because they can formulate a better un-
derstanding of why student drop-outs occur. 
Designing a Feedback Service  
Collecting feedback is a very important step for instructors 
seeking  to  improve  a  MOOC.  However,  current  platforms 
(e.g., Coursera, Edx) neglect this activity. Thus, one impli-
cation is that MOOC platform designers should investigate 
opportunities for supporting the feedback stage. For exam-
ple, the platforms could provide a streamlined approach for 
collecting  student  feedback  throughout  a  MOOC’s  imple-
mentation and use intelligent algorithms to compile mean-
ingful summaries for instructors during or at the end of the 
course.  In  fact,  current  research  has  begun  to  explore  this 
issue,  developing  tools,  sensors  and  algorithms  that  allow 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES
 

instructors to gather student feedback quickly and accurate-
ly [25, 39].  
Embracing the Larger Ecosystem 
MOOC instructors use various social media platforms, such 
as  Facebook,  Google+,  and  Twitter  to  help  them  better 
manage  their  course  (part  of  the  MOOC  ecosystem).  We 
see  this  as  a  classic  example  of  appropriation  [6],  in  that 
both instructors and students are reaching out and adapting 
existing and familiar systems to new needs, such that they 
become a part of the overall system [29, 34]. In our case, 
MOOC  instructors  mainly  used  social  media  to  maintain 
student  engagement  and  to  better  organize  discussions  to 
identify urgent messages. MOOC platform designers might 
reach out to popular social media platforms to enhance in-
tegration  and  simplify  linkages.  Alternatively,  the  MOOC 
carriers  might  build  or  enhance  the  features  it  offers,  for 
instance, an instant notification center for urgent messages. 
Building a Community for MOOC Instructors 
Educators  and  researchers  often  encourage  the  building  or 
enhancing of learning communities for students in a course 
[30], hoping to offer them a more friendly and helpful envi-
ronment  to  learn.  We  wish  to  point  out  that  constructing 
similar  communities  for  instructors  is  equally  meaningful 
and urgent. Within such a MOOC instructors’ community, 
individuals  might  psychological  and  practical  support,  re-
ducing stress levels and improving teaching quality.  
Improving Policies and Guidance  
In some cases, technology will not be the solution. Instruc-
tors  also  need  more  support  in  offline  environments  since 
many  important  collaborations  happen  face-to-face.  For 
example, institutions could offer video production training 
to MOOC instructors, preparing them for the challenges of 
recording  lectures.  Universities  could  also  provide  policy 
support  for  MOOC  instructors,  such  as  reduced  teaching 
loads  or  added  resources  (e.g.,  time  management  or  team 
building  courses,  student  retention  counselors,  marketing 
and reputation management consultant). Systematic training 
on  how  to  administer  a  successful  MOOC  could  be  very 
beneficial  for  instructors  teaching  a  MOOC  for  the  first 
time. Alternatively, for instructors who want to focus solely 
on  teaching,  universities  might  hire  “project  managers”  to 
offload the main orchestration tasks associated with MOOC 
teaching. In short, our mission should be to make the eco-
system surrounding MOOC administration one that is sup-
portive  and  collaborative  to  ensure  the  success  of  MOOC 
instructors.  
LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
Before we conclude, we would like to discuss some of the 
limitations  of  our  current  research,  which  can  be  used  to 
inform  future  areas  of  inquiry.  First,  saturation  of  theory 
given our sample size does not necessarily imply generali-
zability  of  our  results.  Future  studies  with  larger  sample 
sizes and more varied populations should empirically vali-
date our findings through more confirmatory methods, such 
as surveys or experimental designs. Second, our intention is 

219

not to advocate for MOOC instructors over students or oth-
er MOOC stakeholders. Instead, we simply emphasize that 
instructors  be  given  equal  attention  when  evaluating  the 
benefits, challenges and design implications associated with 
the rapidly emerging and evolving MOOC paradigm. Final-
ly,  our  practical  recommendations  are  based  solely  on  the 
comments  of  instructors  and  the  implications  we  have 
drawn  require  additional  scrutiny  to  determine  if  they  are 
viable solutions for overall MOOC success. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we applied grounded theory to make sense of 
an  in-depth  interview  study  with  MOOC  instructors.  We 
have decomposed the steps of administering a MOOC as a 
process model: preparation, implementation, and feedback. 
We also described the complex and iterative nature of this 
process. We identified four motivations that inspire instruc-
tors to teach MOOCs and five challenges they experienced 
in  organizing,  delivering,  and  managing  their  MOOCs.  A 
main  finding  is  that  successful  MOOC  administration  re-
quires  a  team  effort  (e.g.,  instructors,  curriculum  design, 
video production, teach assistants, etc.), and that often the 
support  needed  for  collaboration  is  lacking.  By  enhancing 
support for collaboration, we may be able to improve out-
comes for all MOOC stakeholders. Our study provides ac-
tionable  guidance  for  supporting  instructors  as  part  of  the 
MOOC community. It also advocates for a view of MOOCs 
as complex collaborative ecosystem, in addition to existing 
research  that  examines  MOOCs  as  a  novel  learning  peda-
gogy. We discuss implications and future directions for our 
research, with the general goal of helping improve the ac-
tivities and outcomes for all MOOC participants. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
First, we would like to thank all our participants—MOOC 
instructors—for  accepting  our  interviews.  Also,  this  re-
search  is  supported  by  COIL  Research  Initiation  Grants. 
Third, we appreciate reviewers’ very helpful comments on 
the previous version of the paper. 
REFERENCES 
1.  Anant Agarwal. 2012. ‘Circuits and Electronics’, 
MITx. Chronicle of Higher Education, 59(6), B10. 

2.  Gad Allon. 2012. ‘Operations Management’, Udemy. 

Chronicle of Higher Education, 59(6), B10–11. 

3.  Linda Argote. 1982. Input uncertainty and organiza-
tional coordination in hospital emergency units. Ad-
ministrative science quarterly, 420-434. 

4.  Yvonne Belanger & Jessica Thornton. 2013. Bioelec-
tricity: A quantitative approach. Retrieved on May 7 
from 
http://dukespace.lib.duke.edu/dspace/bitstream/handle/
10161/6216/Duke_Bioelectricity_MOOC_Fall2012.pdf 
5.  Lori Breslow, David Pritchard, Jennifer DeBoer, Glen-

da S. Stump, Andrew D. & Daniel T. Seatoon. 2013. 
Studying learning in the worldwide classroom. Re-

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

 

6. 

7. 

search into edX’s first MOOC. Research & Practice in 
Assessment, 8, 13–25. 
John M. Carroll. 2004. Completing Design in Use: 
Closing the Appropriation Cycle, In Proc. of the ECIS. 
John M. Carroll, Mary Beth Rosson, Gregorio Convert, 
& Graig H. Ganoe. 2006. Awareness and teamwork in 
computer-supported  collaborations.  Interacting  with 
computers, 18(1), 21-46. 

8.  Doug Clow. 2013. MOOCs and the Funnel of Partici-

pa-tion, in: Proceedings of the Third International Con-
fer-ence on Learning Analytics and Knowledge, pages 
185-189. 

9.  Dave Cormier & George Siemens. 2010. The Open 

Course: Through the Open Door--Open Courses as Re-
search, Learning, and Engagement, Educause Review 
(45:4), pages 30-32. 

10.  Derrick Coetzee, Armando Fox, Marti A. Hearst, & 

Bjorn Hartmann. 2014. Should your MOOC forum use 
a reputation system? In Proc. CSCW 2014 (pp.1176-
1187. 

11.  Juliet Corbin & Anselm Strauss. 2007. Basics of Quali-
tative Research: Techniques and Procedures for Devel-
oping Grounded Theory. Sage Publications, Incorpo-
rated. 

12.  John Daniel. 2012. Making Sense of MOOCs: Musings 
in a Maze of Myth, Paradox and Possibility. Journal of 
Interactive Media in Education.  

13.  Paul Dourish, & Victoria Bellotti. (1992, December). 
Awareness and coordination in shared workspaces. In 
Proceedings of the 1992 ACM conference on Comput-
er-supported cooperative work (pp. 107-114). ACM. 
14.  Mitchell Duneier. 2012. Teaching to the world from 
central New Jersey. Chronicle of Higher Education, 
59(2), 24. 

15.  Armando Fox & Patterson Dean. 2012. Crossing the 
Software Education Chasm, Communications of the 
Acm (55:5) (pp. 44-49). 

16.  Keith Head. 2013. Massive open online adventure. 

Chronicle of Higher Education, 59(34), B24–25. 

17.  Khe Foon Hew, & Cheung Wing Sum. 2014. Students’ 

and instructors’ use of massive open online courses 
(MOOCs): Motivations and challenges. Educational 
Research Review, Volumn 12, pages 45-58. 

18.  Toru Iiyoshi, MS Vijay Kumar, and J. Seely Brown. 

2008. Opening up Edu-cation: The Collective Ad-
vancement of Educa-tion through Open Technology, 
Open Content, and Open Knowledge. Mit Press. 

19.  René F Kizilcec, Chris Piech, & Emily Schneider. 

2013. Deconstructing disengagement: analyzing learner 
subpopulations in massive open online courses. In Pro-
ceedings of the third international conference on learn-
ing analytics and knowledge, pages 170-179. 

20.  René F Kizilcec, & Emily Schneider. 2015. Motivation 

as a lens to understand online learners: Toward data-
driven design with the OLEI scale. ACM Transac-tions 
on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI), 22(2), 6. 

21.  Jeremy Knox, Siân Bayne, Hamish MacLeod, Jen 

Ross, & Christine Sinclair. 2012. MOOC Pedagogy: 
the challenges of developing for Coursera. Internation-
al Conference on Networked Learning 2010 (pp. 266–
275). University of Lancaster: Lancaster. 

22.  Steve Kolowich. 2013. The professors who make the 

MOOCs. Chronicle of Higher Education, 59(28), A20–
A23. 

23.  Jeremy Knox, Siân Bayne, Hamish MacLeod, Jen 

Ross, & Christine Sinclair. 2012. MOOC Pedagogy: 
the challenges of de-veloping for Coursera. Interna-
tional Conference on Networked Learning 2010 (pp. 
266–275). University of Lancaster: Lancaster. 

24.  Apostolos Koutropoulos, Michael Sean Gallagher, 
Sean C. Abajian, Inge de Waard, Rebecca Joanne 
Hogue, Nilgun Ozdamar Keskin, & Osvaldo Rodri-
guez. 2012. Emotive Vocabulary in MOOCs: Context 
& Participant Retention. European Journal of Open, 
Distance and E-Learning, 1. 

25.  Dalit Levy. 2011. Lessons learned from participating in 
a connectivist massive online open course (MOOC). In 
Proceedings of the Chais conference on instructional 
technologies research 2011: Learning in the technolog-
ical era (pp. 31-36). 

26.  Jenny Mackness, Sui Mak, & Roy Williams. 2010. The 

ideals and reality of participating in a MOOC. In L. 
Dirckinck-Holmfeld et al. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 
7th International Conference on Networked Learning 
(pp. 266–275). University of Lancaster: Lancaster. 

27.  Alexander McAuley, Bonnie Stewart, George Siemens, 
& Dave Cormier. 2010. The MOOC Model for Digital 
Practice. Re-trieved from 
http://www.elearnspace.org/Articles/MOOC_Final.pdf 
28.  Raul  Medina-Mora,  Terry  Winograd,  Rodrigo  Flores, 
&  Fernando  Flores.  (1992,  December).  The  action 
workflow approach to workflow management technol-
ogy.  In  Proceedings  of  the  1992  ACM  conference  on 
Computer-supported  cooperative  work  (pp.  281-288). 
ACM. 

29.  Sun Young Park, & Yunan Chen (2012, May). Adapta-

tion as design: learning from an EMR deployment 
study. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 2097-
2106). ACM. 

30.  Michael S. Roth. 2013. My Modern Experience Teach-
ing a MOOC. Chronicle of Higher Education, 59(34), 
B18–21. 

31.  Daniel M Russell, Scott Klemmer, Armando Fox, 

Celine Latulipe, Mitchell Duneier, & Elizabeth Losh. 

220

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES
 

2013. Will Massive Online Open Courses (MOOCs) 
Change Education?, In Proc. CHI 2013 Extended Ab-
stracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 
2395-2398. 

32.  Susan Leigh Star, & Anselm Strauss. 1999. Layers of 
silence, arenas of voice: The ecology of visible and in-
visible work. Computer supported cooperative work 
(CSCW), 8(1-2), 9-30 

33.  Kjeld Schmidt, & Liam Bannon. 1992. Taking CSCW 

seriously. Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
(CSCW), 1(1-2), 7-40. 

34.  Marvin E Shaw. 1964. M Communication networks. In 

L. Berkowitz (Ed.) Advances in experimental social 
psychology. New York: Academic Press (pp. 111-147). 
35.  Leif Singer, Fernando Figueira Filho, Brendan Cleary, 

Christoph Treude, Margaret-Anne Storey, & Kurt 
Schneider (2013, February). Mutual assessment in the 
social programmer ecosys-tem: an empirical investiga-
tion of developer profile aggregators. In Proceedings of 
the 2013 conference on Computer supported coopera-
tive work (pp. 103-116). ACM. 

36.  George Siemens. 2011. The race to platform education. 

eLearnspace. 
http://www.elearnspace.org/blog/2011/10/13/the-race-
to-platform-education/accessed 2012-09-21 

 

37.  George Siemens. 2012. MOOCs are really a platform. 

eLearnspace. 
http://www.elearnspace.org/blog/2012/07/25/moocs-
are-really-a-platform/accessed 2012-09-21 

38.  Lucy Suchman. 1995. Making work visible. Commu-

nications of the ACM, 38(9), 56-ff. 

39.  Haohan Wang, Yiwei Li, Xiaobo Hu, Yucong Yang, 

Zhu Meng, & Kai-min Chang. (2013, June). Using 
EEG to Improve Massive Open Online Courses Feed-
back Interaction. In AIED Workshops. 

40.  Li Yuan, Stephen Powell, & JISC CETIS. 2013. 

MOOCs and open education: Implications for higher 
education. Cetis White Paper. 

41.  Saijing Zheng, Mary Beth Rosson, Patrick C. Shih, & 
John M. Carroll. 2015. Understanding Student Motiva-
tion, Behaviors and Perceptions in MOOCs, In the Pro-
ceedings of the 2015 ACM Conference on Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work. 

42.  Saijing Zheng, Mary Beth Rosson, Patrick C. Shih & 

John M. Carroll. 2015. Designing Massive Open 
Online Courses as Interactive Places for Collaborative 
Learning. In the Proceedings of the 2015 ACM Con-
ference on Learning at Scale. 
 

221

