CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

What’s in a Like? Attitudes and behaviors around 

receiving Likes on Facebook 
Lauren Scissors, Moira Burke, Steven Wengrovitz 

Facebook 

1 Hacker Way, Menlo Park, CA, 94025 USA 
{laurenscissors, mburke, stevew}@fb.com  

ABSTRACT 
What  social  value  do  Likes  on  Facebook  hold?  This 
research examines people’s attitudes and behaviors related 
to receiving one-click feedback in social media. Likes and 
other kinds of lightweight affirmation serve as social cues 
of acceptance and maintain interpersonal relationships, but 
may  mean  different  things  to  different  people.  Through 
surveys and de-identified, aggregated behavioral Facebook 
data, we find that in general, people care more about who 
Likes  their  posts  than  how  many  Likes  they  receive, 
desiring  feedback  most  from  close  friends,  romantic 
partners,  and  family  members  other  than  their  parents. 
While  most  people  do  not  feel  strongly  that  receiving 
“enough” Likes is important, roughly two-thirds of posters 
regularly receive more than “enough.” We also note a “Like 
paradox,” a phenomenon in which people’s friends receive 
more  Likes  because  their  friends  have  more  friends  to 
provide those Likes. Individuals with lower levels of self-
esteem and higher levels of self-monitoring are more likely 
to think that Likes are important and to feel bad if they do 
not  receive  “enough”  Likes.  The  results  inform  product 
design  and  our  understanding  of  how 
lightweight 
interactions shape our experiences online. 
Author Keywords 
Social network sites; Facebook; Likes; Like paradox; self-
esteem; self-monitoring 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous 
INTRODUCTION 
Giving  and  receiving  feedback  is  a  fundamental  part  of 
people’s  experiences  on  social  media.  Incoming  and 
outgoing feedback signal investment in social relationships 
by  maintaining 
interpersonal  bonds,  keeping  older 
relationships active, and grooming new ones [9]. Yet social 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work owned by  others  than ACM must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or republish,  to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.  
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02...$15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820066

1501

network  sites  afford  many  forms  of  feedback  between 
audience  and  poster,  including  comments,  replies,  and 
private  messages;  or  more  lightweight  actions  such  as 
Likes,  Favorites,  or  +1s.    In  this  paper  we  focus  on  the 
social  value  of  these  lightweight  actions,  which,  though 
highly  prevalent  [24],  may  be  interpreted  in  a  variety  of 
ways.  
Lightweight,  one-click  feedback  actions  occur  on  Twitter, 
Flickr,  Google  Plus,  and  many  other  platforms.  We  focus 
on  Facebook  Likes  because  of  the  site’s  size  and  scope. 
Roughly half (44%) of Facebook users Like content posted 
by their friends at least once a day [24], generating around 
4.5 billion Likes daily as of 2013 [10]. In addition, for some 
people, “getting feedback on content you have posted” is a 
major reason for using Facebook [24]. Because a Like takes 
only  one  click  to  produce,  it  may  be  an  easy  way  for 
acquaintances  and  more  distant  friends 
to  maintain 
relationships without requiring a lot of effort or context. On 
the other hand, Likes may be perceived as less meaningful 
than comments or posts directly on friends’ walls since they 
are  so  easy  to  generate.  For  instance,  previous  research 
shows  that  receiving  “composed”  content  (comments  and 
wall posts) from friends is associated with improvements in 
relationship  strength,  perceived  social  support,  happiness, 
bridging social capital, mood, and loneliness, but receiving 
Likes alone is not [2, 3].  
Despite being a less effortful form of communication than 
comments or messages, we view Likes as social cues  that 
send  a  signal  both  to  the  person  who  created  the  post  as 
well as to the poster’s network of friends. In online settings, 
individuals use the cues available to “reduce interpersonal 
uncertainty, form impressions, and develop affinity” ([33], 
p.535). As such, Likes may signal social appropriateness or
social acceptance. They may signify psychological support 
and  empathy.  Or,  in  a  context  where  the  audience  is 
unclear,  they  could  simply  signal  that  a  friend  has  seen  a 
post. Peyton writes “the like button is a chimera, meaning 
multiple things to many people” ([25], p. 116). Likes may 
be  interpreted  and  valued  differently  by  the  Liker,  the 
recipient, and the recipient’s friends. Given the ubiquity of 
Likes on Facebook, their theoretical importance as a social 
grooming 
their 
significance, it is important to understand the value people 
ascribe 
that  we  can  better  understand 

this  ambiguity  around 

tool  [9],  and 

to  Likes  so 

and  other 

comments,  messages, 

motivations for sharing and the role of lightweight feedback 
in the social media ecosystem. 
There are many open questions about people’s perceptions 
of Likes on Facebook. For instance, how important is it for 
people  to  get  Likes  on  their  posts?  Do  people  hope  for  a 
certain  number  of  Likes?  If  so,  what  is  that  number?  Or 
does it matter more who Likes a post rather than how many 
Likes a post receives? Is a Like from a close friend valued 
as  much  as  a  Like  from  an  acquaintance?  Using  a  survey 
and de-identified, aggregated Facebook log data, this paper 
explores  the  extent  to  which  Likes  are  meaningful  to 
people,  what  aspect  of  the  Likes  are  meaningful,  and 
whether  different  kinds  of  people  view  Likes  differently.  
Answering  these  questions  contributes  both  to  product 
design  and  to  our  understanding  of  how  lightweight 
interactions shape our experiences online. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Feedback on Social Media 
Likes, 
types  of 
communication  play  several  roles  in  social  network  sites. 
The  warranting  principle  suggests  that  when  making 
judgments about a person, we weigh information generated 
by that person less strongly than information generated by 
other  people,  since  other-generated  information  is  less 
prone  to  manipulation  [33].    Therefore,  visible  actions 
performed by others shape the impressions we make about 
a  person.  For  example,  friends’  posts  and  comments  on  a 
person’s wall influence others’ assessments of that person’s 
attractiveness [34, 35] more than that person’s own content. 
Although  a  Like  may  contain  less  text-based  information 
than  a  comment  or  wall  post,  it  is  still  a  form  of  other-
generated  content  and  thus  has  information  value.  In 
particular,  the  number  of  Likes  a  person  receives  may 
indicate  popularity  or  personality  characteristics.  For 
instance, the more Likes a person’s status updates receive, 
the more strangers perceive that person as extraverted [15]. 
People who post also feel this association with popularity. 
For  instance,  a  2014  Pew  survey  found  that  12%  of 
Facebook  users  strongly  dislike  “pressure  to  post  content 
that  will  be  popular  and  get  lots  of  comments/likes”  [24], 
and a Pew focus group found that teens sometimes remove 
photos  they’ve  posted  if  the  photos  receive  too  few  Likes 
[21].  
Since  people  can  see  whom  a  Like  is  from,  Likes  also 
contain information important to relationships. Ellison and 
Vitak describe Likes as “micro-transactions” that can “help 
create  an  environment  in  which  reciprocal  attention  and 
low-level  social  grooming  is  productively  enacted”  ([8], 
p.220). On the other hand, empirical research demonstrates 
that  receiving  Likes  is  not  associated  with  increases  in 
relationship  closeness,  while  other  forms  of  interaction 
(such as comments) are [4]. Therefore, simply receiving a 
Like may be less important than whom it comes from and 
other relationship factors.  

1502

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

the 

rate  of 

feedback  and 

People also use Likes and other feedback to estimate how 
many people see the content they share [1]. However, they 
often  overestimate 
thus 
underestimate their audience size [1]. One possible reason 
for overestimating how much feedback they should receive 
is  what  we  call  a  “Like  paradox,”  a  corollary  to  the 
“friendship  paradox”  (that  people’s  friends  have  more 
friends  than  they  do  [12,  16]).  It  is  possible  that  people’s 
friends may receive more Likes than they do, and thus skew 
their perspective on how much feedback to expect on their 
own posts.  
Previous  work  examining  motives  for  Facebook  use 
suggests additional research is needed on the role of Likes 
(e.g.,  [23],  [29]).  For  instance,  Smock  and  colleagues 
examined  what  motives  (e.g.,  social  interaction,  relaxing 
entertainment,  expressive  information  sharing)  predict  the 
use  of  various  Facebook  features  such  as  comments,  wall 
posts, and status updates, but did not examine what motives 
predict using Likes [29]. In addition, Burke and colleagues 
found that newcomers’ use of certain Facebook features is 
associated with their friends’ use of those features, though 
the  study  also  did  not  specifically  examine  Likes  [5]. 
Furthermore,  little  empirical  research  has  focused  on  the 
experience  of  receiving  feedback  on  Facebook,  how 
important people perceive it to be, and how different types 
of people may value feedback differently. 
We  investigate  the  experience  of  receiving  Likes  on 
Facebook posts via the following research questions:  
To what extent do people care about getting Likes?  
How many Likes on posts are “enough” and how does this 
compare to the number of Likes people actually receive?  
How  do  people  think  the  number  of  Likes  they  receive 
compares to the number of Likes their friends receive? How 
accurate are people’s perceptions? 
To what extent do people care about number of Likes they 
receive vs. from whom they receive the Likes? 
What types of people (e.g., close friends, acquaintances) do 
people care most about getting Likes from?  
Self-Esteem,  Self-Monitoring  &  Technology-Mediated 
Communication 
Given  that  Likes  and  other  feedback  affect  impression 
formation  and  are  a  publicly  displayed  element  of  one’s 
online presence, people with certain personality traits may 
view and value Likes differently than others. One trait that 
may  impact  people’s  orientation  towards  Likes  is  self-
esteem  since  it  is  largely  based  on  perceptions  of  social 
acceptance (e.g., [18]). 
Previous  research  suggests  that  in  some  contexts,  people 
with lower levels of self-esteem may prefer to communicate 
via 
since  mediated 
communication  can  be  less  face-threatening.  For  instance, 
in hypothetical situations involving interpersonal risk (e.g., 

face-to-face) 

technology 

(vs. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

for 

face-to-face 

asking for a pay raise, asking for a date), people with low 
self-esteem  showed  a  stronger  preference  for  email  and  a 
weaker  preference 
communication 
compared to people with higher levels of self-esteem [17]. 
A  more  recent  study  demonstrated  that  people  with  lower 
self-esteem  felt  more  strongly  compared  to  people  with 
higher  self-esteem  that  Facebook  was  a  safe  place  to 
express  themselves  [13].  People  with  lower  self-esteem 
were also more likely to see advantages to disclosing their 
thoughts  and  feelings  via  Facebook  rather  than  in  person. 
Additionally,  regardless  of  trait-level  self-esteem  (a  more 
constant  personality  characteristic),  people  who  visit 
Facebook in times of low self-worth (such as after receiving 
a  poor  performance  review)  feel  increases  in  shorter-term 
state self-esteem [32]. 
Yet, while people with lower self-esteem may be drawn to 
sharing  on  Facebook,  they  may  share  thoughts  that  use 
more negative language, which in turn makes them appear 
less  likable,  at  least  to  strangers  assessing  their  posts,  and 
garners  them  less  feedback  in  the  form  of  Likes  and 
Comments  [13].  Furthermore,  another  study  found  that 
people with lower levels of self-esteem were more likely to 
prefer  the  use  of  text-based  communication  like  text 
messaging or social network sites to discuss a conflict with 
a  romantic  partner  even  though  the  use  of  mediated 
communication  was  associated  with  negative  outcomes 
[28]. Other research, however, has found that more intense 
use  of  Facebook  was  associated  with  gains  in  bridging 
social capital for people with lower self-esteem but not for 
higher self-esteem [7] suggesting that technology-mediated 
communication  can  provide  benefits  to  individuals  with 
lower levels of self-esteem. While findings on the benefits 
of Facebook use for people with low self-esteem is mixed, 
it  is  important  to  examine  how  people  with  lower  self-
esteem orient toward different Facebook features, including 
Likes, so that we can better understand which features and 
interactions are harmful and which are helpful.  
Another  characteristic  that  may  influence  attitudes  about 
Likes  is  self-monitoring,  or  the  extent  to  which  people 
monitor  or  control  how  they  present  themselves  in  social 
situations. People who are high self-monitors are concerned 
with  acting  in  ways  that  are  socially  appropriate  [30].  On 
the  other  hand,  low  self-monitors  tend  to  exhibit  more 
consistent behavior and do not adapt their behavior across 
social  contexts.  In  addition,  high  self-monitors  want  to 
appear  social  and  extraverted,  and  aim 
to  present 
themselves  in  a  way  that  demonstrates  social  status  (see 
[14] for a review).  
Self-monitoring  has  been  associated  with  various  online 
experiences  and  behaviors.  People  who  are  higher  self-
monitors  are  more  likely  to  experience  episodes  of  online 
turbulence,  an  instance  where  their  personal  information 
exists beyond the boundaries that person expects or desires 
[1].  This  may  be  due  to  context  collapse;  since  there  are 
often  multiple  audiences  in  online  spaces,  high  self-

monitors may have a hard time trying to fit their behavior to 
multiple  audiences  at  once  [1].  Another  study  found  that 
high  self-monitors  also  tend  to  post  a  profile  picture  at  a 
younger age, post more frequently, and receive more Likes 
on their status updates than do low self-monitors [15]. Since 
high  self-monitors  are  more  concerned  with  feedback 
signals in social contexts, it may be that they attend to and 
care more about Likes on Facebook than low self-monitors 
do.  Given  previous  research  on  self-esteem  and  self-
monitoring,  we  aim  to  explore  this  additional  research 
question: 
How  are  self-esteem  and  self-monitoring  associated  with 
attitudes and behaviors around Likes?  
METHOD  
Participants 
Survey participants (N = 2,109; 56% female; ages 13 to 90, 
mean = 40.3) were recruited through a banner on Facebook 
displayed  to  English  speakers  in  the  U.S.  who  had  a 
Facebook account for at least 12 weeks, posted any type of 
content at least twice, and received at least two Likes in the 
past  12  weeks.  Since  the  questionnaire  focused  largely  on 
the experiences of receiving Likes on one’s posts, we first 
asked  participants  how  often  they  post  to  Facebook.  Five 
percent  (N  =  114)  of  participants  reported  that  they  never 
post  to  Facebook  and  thus  were  excluded  from  analyses, 
leaving a sample of N = 1,996. Participants had an average 
of 491 friends (min = 1, max = 4,912) and had been using 
Facebook  for  5.9  years  (min  =  97  days,  max  =  11  years). 
During the 28 days prior to the survey, participants logged 
in to Facebook on an average of 27.4 days (min = 2, max = 
28).  Compared  to  a  random  sample  of  US,  English-
speaking  Facebook  users,  our  sample  was  about  3  years 
older,  had  13%  more  friends,  was  active  on  Facebook  2 
more  days  out  of  the  previous  28,  and  had  a  Facebook 
account  for  9  months  longer  on  average  (all  p’s  <  0.05). 
Our  sample  had  3.5%  more  women.  There  was  no 
significant  difference  in  Likes  received  per  post  between 
our respondents and the random sample (M = 18.2 vs. M = 
17.8, p = 0.06). 
Behavioral data 
Survey  responses  were  matched  to  behavioral  data  from 
Facebook’s server logs for the prior 12 weeks. All data was 
de-identified  and  analyzed  in  aggregate  by  Facebook 
employees.  Behavioral  data  included  the  number  of  posts, 
number of Likes and comments given and received, and the 
average  number  of  Likes  and  comments  received  per  post 
across  participants’  970,135  friends.  No  post  or  comment 
content was analyzed as part of the research. 
Procedure 
Participants  filled  out  an  online  survey  with  two  sections: 
(1) attitudes and behaviors about Likes on Facebook and (2) 
personal  characteristics;  sections  were  presented 
in 
counterbalanced  order.  The  median  respondent  finished  in 
eight minutes, and there was no compensation. 

1503

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

•  “In general, how much do you care about receiving Likes 

from the following types of people?” (random order: 
Parents; Family members other than my parents; Close 
friends; Coworkers; Acquaintances; My spouse, romantic 
partner, or love interest; A former romantic partner; My 
manager, teacher, or supervisor; Potential employers or 
professional contacts; People I don't know). 

Finally, we asked three questions about receiving “enough” 
Likes per post:  
•  “If one of your posts were to get ‘enough’ Likes, how 
many Likes would that be? Please write in a number 
below.” 

•  “How did you arrive at that number?” (open-ended) 
•  “How important is it for you to get ‘enough’ Likes on 
your posts?” (1 = not at all important to 5 = extremely 
important) 

RESULTS 
In  the  12  weeks  prior  to  taking  the  survey,  the  median 
participant  made  5.25  posts  per  week  (mean  =  11.8), 
“Posts” include photos, text, links, check-ins, and re-shares; 
multi-photo  posts  were  batched  and  counted  as  a  single 
post. The median person received 12.8 Likes per post (min 
= 0.07, mean = 18.2, max = 692.1). Figure 1 shows the 12-
week averages for all participants. 
How  much  do  people  care  about  getting  “enough” 
Likes? 
About  half  (52.7%)  of  participants  said  that  getting 
“enough”  Likes  was  important  to  some  extent.  Yet  only 
16% of participants agreed with the statement “If my post 
does  not  receive  enough  Likes,  it  makes  me  feel  bad.” 
Though  most  respondents  did  not  feel  badly  about  not 
getting  enough  Likes,  in  open-ended  responses  they  noted 
they  think  their  friends  Like  their  posts  for  a  number  of 
self-affirming reasons. Responses included: 
•  Agreement (e.g., “Sometimes because they like or agree 

with what I’ve said”) 

•  Attention  (e.g.,  “Because  they  are  interested  in  what  I 
have to say and what my feelings are about a particular 
subject”) 

•  Supportiveness  (e.g.,  “If  they  want  to  be  considerate  or 

kind … or simply to be supportive”) 

•  Empathy  (e.g.,  “They  understand  and/or  relate  to  what 

I’ve posted”). 

Measures 
Items were measured on a 5-point Likert scale (1 = strongly 
disagree to 5 = strongly agree) unless otherwise indicated.  
Personal Characteristics 
Self-esteem: Participants completed the 10-item Rosenberg 
self-esteem  scale  [26],  which  included  items  like  “On  the 
whole,  I  am  satisfied  with  myself,”  and  “I  take  a  positive 
attitude toward myself” (M = 4.14, SD = .85, α = .91).  
Self-monitoring:  Participants  completed  a  modified 
version  of  the  self-monitoring  scale  [19].  The  four  items 
participants completed were: “When I am uncertain how to 
act in a social situation, I look to the behavior of others for 
cues”; “At parties I usually try to behave in a manner that 
makes me fit in”; “I try to pay attention to the reactions of 
others to my behavior in order to avoid being out of place”; 
“If I am the least bit uncertain as to how to act in a social 
situation,  I  look  to  the  behavior  of  others  for  cues.”  (M  = 
3.06, SD = 1.02, α = .85). 
Extraversion: Several studies have previously investigated 
the role of extraversion and Facebook use, including its role 
in  group  membership  [27]  and  its  relationship  with  self-
monitoring [15]. Therefore, we also included a measure of 
extraversion  in  this  study.  Participants  completed  the  four 
extraversion questions from the Big Five personality scale 
[6] (M = 3.22, SD = 1.01, α = .82). 
Relationship  Maintenance  Behaviors:  Participants  filled 
out  the  Facebook  Relationship  Maintenance  Behaviors 
scale  [9].  Example  items:  “When  I  see  a  friend  or 
acquaintance  sharing  bad  news  on  Facebook,  I  try  to 
respond” (M = 3.94, SD = .78, α = .81). 
Attitudes and Behaviors about Likes 
We  asked  people  a  series  of  questions  related  to  their 
experiences with Likes on Facebook:  
•  “How often do you post on Facebook (e.g., status update, 
photo, video, link)?” (1 = never, 5 = multiple times a day) 

•  “Why do you think people ‘Like’ your posts?” (open-

ended) 

•  “If my post does not receive enough Likes, it makes me 

feel bad” (5pt agreement scale) 

•  “There are certain people whose Likes I care about more 

than others.” (5pt agreement scale) 

•  “On average, how many Likes do your posts get 

compared to your friends' posts?” (1 = my posts get far 
fewer Likes, 3 = our posts get about the same number of 
Likes, 5 = my posts get far more Likes) 

•  “Which is usually more important to you, the number of 
Likes you get or which people Like your posts?” (1 = The 
number of Likes I get is much more important, 3 = 
They're both equally important, 5 = The people who Like 
my posts is much more important) 

1504

Figure 1. Average Likes received per post. 

 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Figure 2. Responses to “enough” Likes per post. 

How many Likes are enough? 
Participants proposed a wide range of values for “enough” 
Likes per post, with the median person volunteering that 8 
Likes was “enough” (see Figure 2; numbers larger than 500 
were  omitted,  excluding  3.4%  of  the  sample  from  that 
question).  Many  of  the  participants  who  said  they  did  not 
care  about  getting  enough  Likes  wrote  “0”  in  response  to 
this question. Roughly ¼ of respondents reported that 1 or 2 
Likes  was  enough,  commenting  in  open-ended  responses 
that  they  wanted  to  be  sure  someone  had  seen  their  posts 
(e.g.,  “If  it  gets  at  least  one  or  two  likes,  then  I  know 
someone saw it, and that is good enough for me." and “If 
my post can impact at least one person then I'm happy.”)  
Beyond 1-2 Likes, people had a variety of reasons for the 
numbers they chose:  
“Well,  I  thought  about  how  many  I  receive  before  I  stop 
really paying attention to how much the number increases 
after that.” (enough = 3)  

“That's how many people I would think would be interested 
in my posts.” (enough = 5) 

“6  is  probably  what  I  average,  and  I  feel  bad  when  I  get 
less than that. With at least 6, I can get a better grasp as to 
what different kinds of people "Like".” (enough = 6) 

“15  likes  means  that  definitely  15  people  have  SEEN  that 
post    /  But  it  also  slightly  ensures  me  that  More  than  15 
people have SEEN the post  / People seeing my posts are 
whats most important” (enough = 15) 

“I arrived at this number by thinking about when i'm not on 
my computer,.... it will go to my phone and blow it up lol... 
so when my Facebook ringtone goes off 30 times i will have 
enough...” (enough = 30) 

“Anything  below  that  seems  underwhelming  since  I  don't 
post  often  and  since  I  put  a  lot  of  thought  into  my  posts 
(note: actual posts. not shared links)” (enough = 50) 

Do people receive “enough” Likes per post?   
Roughly  two-thirds  (62.5%)  of  participants  received  what 
they consider to be “enough” Likes per post in the previous 
12  weeks  (see  Figure  3).  Of  the  remaining  third,  they  fell 

Figure 3. Average Likes received per post by responses to 

"enough" Likes per post. (Jitter added for visibility). 

short by an average of 27.9 Likes (median = 8.9). (Note that 
this  statistic  omits  3.4%  of  respondents  who  had  values 
greater than 500 for “enough.”) But only some people care 
about Likes. When removing participants who said they did 
not  care  “at  all”  about  receiving  enough  Likes,  49.9%  of 
participants  received  what  they  consider  to  be  “enough” 
Likes per post, with the average person receiving 6.5 more 
likes  than  his  or  her  threshold,  and  the  median  person 
receiving  exactly  enough  (a  difference  of  0.04  Likes  per 
post).  For  those  who  felt  they  didn’t  receive  “enough” 
Likes,  what  might  have  led  to  their  inflated  expectations? 
One factor may be the Like paradox. 
The Like Paradox 
Similar to the friendship paradox, where most people have 
fewer friends than their friends have [12], in this work we 
demonstrate a “Like paradox:” people receive fewer Likes 
on  their  posts  than  their  friends  get.  During  the  12  weeks 
prior  to  the  survey,  participants’  friends  received  roughly 
twice as many Likes per post (median = 23.8) as they did 
(median = 12.8). Figure 4 shows the difference between the 
two.  Why  did  their  friends  receive  more  Likes?  Those 
friends  had  roughly 
twice  as  many  friends  as  our 
participants (see Figure 5).   
Only some participants perceived this discrepancy in Likes 
between themselves and their friends: 28% reported on the 
survey  receiving  fewer  Likes  than  their  friends  and  56% 
thought  they  got  about  the  same  number  of  Likes.  This 
suggests  that  there  may  be  other  factors  that  influence 
people’s  impressions  of  the  number  of  Likes  they  should 
receive, not just how many their friends receive.  
Preferences for who Likes your Posts 
What matters more – how many Likes one receives or who 
the Likes are from?  
Participants were generally more concerned with receiving 
Likes  from  certain  people,  rather  than  receiving  a  certain 
number of Likes: 42.5% of participants said that who Likes 
their posts is more important than the number of Likes on 
their posts while only 10.5% said that the number was more 
important;  47.0%  said 
important. 
Furthermore, 58.1% agreed to some extent that “There are 
certain people whose Likes I care about more than others” 
(25.1% disagreed, 16.8% were neutral). 

they  were  equally 

1505

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Figure 5. The friendship paradox: Most respondents have 

smaller networks than their friends have. 

 

Figure 4. Average Likes per post received by survey 

 

 

respondents (x-axis) and by their friends (y-axis). Their friends 

typically receive roughly twice as many Likes per post. 

Who do people want Likes from? 
Participants  most  wanted  to  receive  Likes  from  close 
friends  (73%  “want”  or  “really  want”),  romantic  partners 
(60%), and family other than parents (50%) (see Figure 6). 
On the other hand, people least want to receive Likes from 
people  they  don’t  know  (34%),  potential  employers  or 
professional  contacts 
(25%),  and  managers/teachers/ 
supervisors (24%). 
Individual differences in caring about Likes 
There  are  a  number  of  psychological  traits  that  influence 
the  extent  to  which  people  care  about  getting  Likes  on 
Facebook.  Table  1  shows  three  regressions  estimating 
responses 
the 
importance of getting enough Likes, (2) whether people feel 
bad  if  they  don’t  receive  enough  Likes,  and  (3)  whether 
they think they receive more Likes than their friends. 
All three models control for age, gender, friend count, and 
the number of days in the past month the participant logged 
in  to  Facebook.  Each  model  includes  self-esteem,  self-
monitoring,  extraversion,  and  Facebook 
relationship 
maintenance behaviors. Correlation between the scales was 
low  (max  r  =  .37  between  extraversion  and  self-esteem). 
The third regression includes an additional binary variable 
indicating  whether  a  person  actually  received  more  Likes 
per post than his or her friends. All continuous independent 
variables  except  for  age  were  standardized  (age  was  only 

three  survey  questions  about 

(1) 

to 

average 

self-esteem, 

centered), and friend count was logged base 2 to control for 
skew and then standardized. 
The intercept in the first model, 1.90 (on a 5 point scale), 
represents the response of an average woman, age 41, with 
491 friends who logged into Facebook 27 days in the past 
self-monitoring, 
month  with 
extraversion,  and  Facebook 
relationship  maintenance 
behaviors.  Her  response  means  that  she  thinks  receiving 
enough likes is “slightly” important. Similarly, her intercept 
in  the  second  model,  2.12,  means  that  she  “Somewhat 
disagrees”  with  the  idea  that  not  receiving  enough  Likes 
causes her to feel bad. Both of these values further confirm 
the  finding  that  people  generally  do  not  feel  strongly  that 
receiving  a  certain  number  of  Likes  is  important.  The 
intercept  in  the  third  model,  -0.23  (on  a  scale  from  -2  to 
+2),  means  that  she  thinks  her  posts  get  about  the  same 
number of Likes as her friends’ posts. 
Some of the control variables were significantly related to 
the  outcomes.  Older  respondents  believed  they  received 
slightly  more  Likes  than  their  friends  (β  =  0.007,  all 
subsequent  p’s  <  0.001  unless  otherwise  specified),  and 
gender was not significantly related to any of the outcomes. 
Friend  count  was  positively  associated  with  all  three 
outcomes; a one-unit increase in friend count (roughly 295 
friends)  is  associated  with  small  increases  in  believing 
Likes  are  important  (β  =  0.18),  feeling  bad  about  not 
receiving  enough  Likes  (β  =  0.10),  and  believing  you 

Figure 6. Preferences for Likes from different types of Facebook friends. 

 

1506

  

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

 

Importance of getting 

enough Likes 

Feel bad if don’t get 

enough Likes 

Perception of # Likes 
received compared to 

β 

β 

SE 
.03 
.03 
.02 
.03 
.03 
.00 
.05  
.03 

1.90 ** 
−.14 ** 
.20 ** 
−.01 
.09 ** 
−.00 
.09 
.18 ** 

Variable 
Intercept 
Self-esteem 
Self-monitoring 
Extraversion 
FB Relationship Maintenance 
Age 
Gender 
Friend Count (Log2) 
# of days logged in over the 
past month 
Friends receive more Likes per 
post  
Adj. R-squared 
N = 1996; * = p < .01, ** = p < .001 
Table 1. Models predicting (1) importance of getting enough Likes, (2) feeling bad about not getting enough Likes, and 

−.23 ** 
.09 ** 
.02  
.16 ** 
.05 * 
.01 ** 
−.02  
.20 ** 
.07 ** 

2.12** 
−.23** 
.28** 
−.05 
−.02 
−.00 
−.00 
.10** 
.01 

SE 
.03 
.03 
.03 
.03 
.03 
.00 
.05 
.03 

.03 

.27 ** 

.05 

 

 

.09  

−.04 

.02 

 

 

.12  

 

.19  

friends 
SE 
β  
.03 
.02 
.02 
.02 
.02 
.00 
.04 
.02 

.02 

 

 

(3) perception of the # of Likes received compared to friends’ Likes received. 

receive  more  Likes  than  your  friends  (β  =  0.20).  After 
controlling for friend count, number of login days was only 
significantly  associated  with  believing  you  receive  more 
Likes  than  your  friends  (β  =  0.07).  Overall,  this  indicates 
that  people  with  many  friends  have  higher  expectations 
about how many Likes they’ll receive. 
Self-esteem 
The  lower  someone’s  self-esteem,  the  more  people  think 
getting enough Likes is important (β = -0.14) and feel bad if 
a  post  doesn’t  get  enough  Likes  (β  =  -0.23).  Conversely, 
people  with  high  self-esteem  believe  they  receive  more 
Likes than their friends. A one-unit increase in self-esteem 
was associated with a β = -0.14 drop in believing receiving 
enough Likes is important, and a β = -0.23 drop in feeling 
bad  for  not  receiving  enough  Likes,  and  a  β  =  0.09  point 
increase in perceived Likes received compared to friends.  
Self-monitoring 
Similar  to  individuals  with  low  self-esteem,  the  more 
someone  monitors  his  or  her  behavior 
for  social 
appropriateness  the  more  sensitive  he  or  she  is  to  Likes. 
The higher the level of self-monitoring, the more they think 
getting enough Likes is important (β = 0.20) and feel bad if 
they  don’t  get  enough  Likes  (β  =  0.28).  However,  self-
monitoring  was  not  associated  with  receiving  a  different 
number of Likes compared to friends. 
Extraversion 
Extraversion was not associated with a sensitivity to Likes, 
individuals  with  high  self-esteem, 
though  similar 

to 

extraverts believe they receive more Likes than their friends 
do (β = 0.16).  

Facebook relationship maintenance behaviors 
People  who  engage 
in  many  relational  maintenance 
behaviors  on  Facebook  place  more  importance  on  getting 
enough Likes (β = 0.09), though the magnitude was smaller 
than the effects of self-esteem and self-monitoring. People 
who  engage  in  more  relational  maintenance  behaviors  on 
Facebook believe they receive more Likes than their friends 
do (β = 0.05, p < .01).  
DISCUSSION 
Likes are one of the most ubiquitous online actions in the 
world.  Relative  to  their  ubiquity,  there  has  been  little 
research into how people think about receiving Likes or the 
importance  of  Likes  in  online  communication.  While 
previous research suggests that Likes may not be uniformly 
meaningful,  this  work  demonstrates  that  they  do  hold 
meaning  on  Facebook,  though  that  meaning  is  largely 
influenced by who the Likes are from (vs. how many Likes 
are  received)  and  who  is  receiving  those  Likes.  We  also 
found that people infer meaning behind their friends’ Likes, 
noting that Likes may represent signals of like-mindedness 
or support. This echoes Burke and Kraut’s suggestion that 
“the mere act of communication independent of its content 
provides a symbolic message about the time and effort one 
person is willing to invest in another” ([3], p. 4188). 
Our research found that people care more about who Likes 
their  Facebook  posts  than  how  many  Likes  their  posts 
receive, and that they desire Likes more from certain types 

 

1507

of  relational  ties  than  others.  This  sheds  new  light  on  the 
value of a Like and has important implications for design. 
First,  it  suggests  that  routing  posts  to  the  “right”  people 
might be better than simply getting as many people to see a 
post  as  possible.  Likes  from  close  friends,  romantic 
partners,  and  family  members  other  than  parents,  which 
were the three most highly desired sources of Likes found 
in  this  study,  seem  to  be  more  important  than  more 
feedback  from  other  audiences.  It  could  also  be  the  case 
that there is a threshold with regard to the number of Likes 
beyond  which  there  is  diminishing  value.  Future  work 
could  more  directly  investigate  the  relative  value  of  who 
Likes a post vs. how many as the number of Likes on a post 
increases. In addition, there may be some cases where Likes 
from close ties may actually be unwanted, such as when a 
person is embarrassed by something that only close friends 
know about (like a lost job), and so interactions with those 
friends may heighten embarrassment [3]. 
That  people  care  more  about  who  Likes  their  Facebook 
posts than how many Likes their posts receive also informs 
what  feedback-related  information  is  most  meaningful  to 
show  people  on  social  media  platforms.  Currently, 
Facebook and Twitter send notifications when someone has 
Liked or Favorited one’s post or Tweet, showing the poster 
the  name  of  the  person  who  gave  the  feedback.  But  in  a 
feed or profile page, who Liked or Favorited a post is more 
obscure. Facebook often only shows a total count of Likes 
and a viewer must click through to see who actually Liked 
the  post.  Similarly,  Twitter  shows  how  many  Favorites  a 
Tweet has but one must drill down to see who has Favorited 
the  Tweet.  Social  media  platforms  that  support  one-click 
communication  from  friends  or  followers  could  consider 
other  more  prominent  ways  of  surfacing  the  “who”  rather 
than the “how many” in more public displays of feedback. 
This might lead some people to care less about the specific 
number of Likes they receive, but might also put pressure 
on  a  smaller  number  of  Facebook  friends  to  actively  Like  
posts. However, it is unclear from the current study whether 
people  want  Likes  from  certain  types  of  friends  for  their 
own knowledge or as more of a public-facing cue to their 
networks. Future research should examine why people want 
Likes from specific types of people. 
Yet about half of participants reported that they did care to 
some extent about getting enough Likes, suggesting that the 
number  of  Likes  may  be  more  important  if  a  certain 
minimum is not met. Of the people who cared about getting 
enough  Likes,  about  half  of  them  received  more  than 
enough,  while  the  other  half  received  too  few  by  their 
standards.  When  asked  how  many  Likes  was  “enough”, 
people  tended  to  have  a  rationale  for  this  number,  which 
was  higher  than  their  typical  number  of  Likes  by  about  9 
Likes.  This  is  possibly  due  to  the  Like  paradox  whereby 
one’s  friends  get  more  Likes  than  one  does,  or  the  feed 
ranking  algorithm  showing  people  content  that  receives  a 
lot of Likes [11]. 

1508

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

The  finding  that  some  people  are  not  getting  what  they 
consider to be enough Likes on their posts has implications 
for  Facebook  in  particular,  and  for  SNSs  more  generally. 
For  instance,  the  pressure  to  get  enough  Likes  that  some 
people feel could be reduced by providing other social cues. 
This could be through development of alternative one-click 
actions  that  aren’t  public-facing,  or  signals  such  as  “read 
receipts” to provide more insight to audience composition. 
The pressure to get enough Likes could be also be reduced 
by  encouraging  people  to  share  with  specific  subsets  of 
friends, like in a closed group or on a specific friend’s wall. 
Alternatively, other SNSs have addressed their versions of 
the Friend paradox and/or Like paradox in other ways. For 
example, Snapchat does not show the amount of feedback 
on others’ content and feedback is provided in other ways 
(namely, content production of one’s own). 
Furthermore, it may be that not getting enough Likes on a 
post  is  a  cue  to  the  poster  that  their  specific  post  was  not 
agreed with or deemed acceptable in some way. While we 
found  evidence  that  Likes  are  social  cues  that  carry 
meaning,  there  are  still  many  more  aspects  of  Likes  to 
understand, such as how people feel when they receive the 
Like that gives them “enough” Likes, or what they think the 
Likes they receive signal to the rest of their network.  
We  also  show 
that  self-esteem,  self-monitoring,  and 
engaging  in  relationship  maintenance  behaviors  were  all 
related  to  perceptions  and  attitudes  about  Likes.  That 
people  lower  in  self-esteem  and  higher  in  self-monitoring 
care  more  about  receiving  Likes  is  in  line  with  their 
orientations  toward  social  cues.  People  with  low  self-
esteem  may  view  Likes  as  validation  of  their  self-worth. 
Similarly, high self-monitors may view Likes as a cue that 
they’ve  behaved  appropriately  in  an  online  social  setting. 
These  findings  suggest 
traits 
influence  one’s  attitudes  about  receiving  feedback  on 
Facebook, and that what might be hollow cues to some are 
actually important social cues to others. 
Limitations and Future Work 
There are several limitations to this work. First, this sample 
is  comprised  of  only  US  English  speakers.  Given  cross-
cultural  differences  in  reciprocity,  self-monitoring,  and 
other related constructs, the results found here may not be 
generalizable to other cultures. In addition, there may be a 
social desirability bias in reports of how much people care 
about getting enough Likes; people may not want to admit 
that Likes are important to them. Third, we note that issues 
of causality may be difficult to untangle. For instance, we 
examine  how  well  stable  traits  like  self-esteem  and  self-
monitoring  predict  attitudes  about  Likes.  However,  it  is 
possible that people’s past experiences with receiving Likes 
could  influence  how  they  feel  about  themselves,  or  how 
closely they try to monitor their behavior online.  
Another limitation is that our sample was likely comprised 
of  “power  users.”  Previous  work  found  that  participants 
Liked friends’ content 14 times per month on average and 

that  one’s  personality 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

received  Likes  20  times  per  month  [16].  The  authors 
attributed this imbalance to Facebook “power users”– those 
who  perform  activities  such  as  Liking  and  commenting 
more  often  than  the  typical  user  –  and  noted  that  most 
Facebook users “get more than they give.” Our participants 
had  much  higher  numbers  than  their  reported  average 
(roughly  313  Likes  given  per  month  (median)  and  269 
Likes  received  (median));  these  participants  are  likely  the 
“power  users”  to  which  Hampton  and  colleagues  refer. 
Compared  to  a  random  sample  of  U.S.,  English-speaking 
users,  our  sample  gave  86.5  more  Likes  per  week  and 
received 76.4 Likes more per week (p < .001).  
Participants  were  only  asked  about  receiving  Likes  in 
general and not about Likes on specific types of posts. For 
instance,  people’s  attitudes  toward  receiving  Likes  on 
articles they share may be different from their attitudes on 
updates  about  major  life  events.  In  addition,  though 
participants  reported  most  wanting  Likes  from  close  ties, 
under  some  life  situations  such  as  a  lost  job,  interactions 
from  close  friends  may  be  unwanted  [3].  Future  research 
should  explore  people’s  attitudes  about  Likes  across 
different  types  of  posts  and  different  emotional  states  in 
order  to  understand  contexts  in  which  people’s  attitudes 
about Like vary. 
A  number  of  additional  studies  could  be  conducted  as 
follow-up  inquiries  to  the  results  presented  in  this  paper. 
For  instance,  researchers  could  explore  the  relationship 
between the number of Likes received and other behaviors 
on  Facebook,  which  was  out  of  the  scope  of  the  current 
work.  Or, 
role  of 
expectations  about  Likes  and  actual  Likes  received  on 
subsequent  Liking  or  posting  behavior.  Researchers  could 
also  examine  whether  people  are  satisfied  when  they 
receive  “enough”  Likes  as  well  as  how  getting  more  or 
fewer than enough affects mood or well-being. Overall, we 
view this work as an initial inquiry into the experience of 
receiving  lightweight  feedback  that  can  inform  future 
research on the role of feedback in social media.  
CONCLUSION 
This  work  demonstrates  that  lightweight  feedback,  despite 
requiring  little  effort  to  produce,  is  important  to  social 
media users. We found that many people care more about 
whom they get feedback from, rather than the exact amount 
of feedback received. In addition, individual traits like self-
esteem  and  self-monitoring  influence  people’s  attitudes 
toward lightweight feedback.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We  thank  the  anonymous  reviewers  for  their  suggestions 
and insights, which greatly improved this work. 
REFERENCES 
1.  Michael S. Bernstein, Eytan Bakshy, Moira Burke, and 
Brian Karrer. 2013. Quantifying the invisible audience 
in social networks. CHI 2013, 1462–1471.  

researchers  could  examine 

the 

2.  Moira Burke. 2011. Reading, writing, relationships: 

The impact of social network sites on relationships and 
well-being (Doctoral dissertation, Carnegie Mellon 
University). http://reports-
archive.adm.cs.cmu.edu/anon/anon/usr/ftp/hcii/CMU-
HCII-11-107.pdf 

3.  Moira Burke and Robert Kraut. 2013. Using Facebook 

after losing a job: Differential benefits of strong and 
weak ties. CSCW 2013, 1419–1430. 

4.  Moira Burke and & Robert Kraut. 2014. Growing 

closer on Facebook: Changes in tie strength through 
social network site use. CHI 2014, 4187–4196.  

5.  Moira Burke, Cameron Marlow, and Thomas Lento. 
2009. Feed me: motivating newcomer contribution in 
social network sites. CHI 2009, 945–954. 

6.  Brent M. Donnellan, Frederick L. Oswald, Brendan M. 

Baird, and Richard E. Lucas. 2006. The mini-IPIP 
scales: Tiny-yet-effective measures of the big five 
factors of personality. Psychological Assessment, 
18(2), 192–293. 

7.  Ellison, N., Steinfield, C., & Lampe, C. (2007). The 

Benefits of Facebook Friends:” Social Capital and 
College Students' Use of Online Social Network Sites. 
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 12(4), 
1143–1168.  

8.  Nicole B. Ellison and Jessica Vitak. 2015. Social 

network site affordances and their relationship to social 
capital processes. In S.S. Sundar (Ed.), The Handbook 
of the Psychology of Communication Technology (pp. 
205–227). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell. 

9.  Nicole B. Ellison, Jessica Vitak, Rebecca Gray, and 
Cliff Lampe. 2014. Cultivating social resources on 
social network sites: Facebook relationship 
maintenance behaviors and their role in social capital 
processes. Journal of Computer-Mediated 
Communication, 19, 855–870. 

10.  Facebook’s growth in the past year. 2013. 

https://www.facebook.com/facebook/photos/a.1015190
8376636729.1073741825.20531316728/101519083768
31729/ 

11.  Facebook Help Center. 2015. “How News Feed 

Works.” 
https://www.facebook.com/help/327131014036297/ 

12.  Scott L. Feld. 1991. Why your friends have more 

friends than you do. American Journal of Sociology, 
96(6), 1464–1477. 

13.  Amanda L. Forest and Joanne V. Wood. 2012. When 

social networking is not working: Individuals with low 
self-esteem recognize but do not reap the benefits of 
self-disclosure on Facebook. Psychological Science, 
23(3), 295–302. 

14.  Paul T. Fuglestad and Mark Snyder. 2009. Self-

monitoring. In M. Snyder, M. R. Leary & R. H. Hoyle 

1509

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

25.  Tamara Peyton. 2014. Emotion to action?: 

Deconstructing the ontological politics of the "Like" 
button. In T. Benski & E Fisher (Eds.), Internet and 
Emotions (pp. 113–129). New York, NY: Routledge. 
26.  Morris Rosenberg. 1965. Society and the adolescent 

self-image. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

27.  Craig Ross, Emily S. Orr, Mia Sisic, Jaime M. 

Arseneault, Mary G. Simmering, and R. Robert Orr. 
2009. Personality and motivations associated with 
Facebook use. Computers in Human Behavior, 25, 
578–586. 

28.  Lauren Scissors, Michael Roloff, and Darren Gergle. 
2014. Room for interpretation: The role of self-esteem 
and CMC in romantic couple conflict. CHI 2014, 
3953–3962.  

29.  Andrew D. Smock, Nicole B. Ellison, Cliff Lampe, and 
Donghee Yvette Wohn. 2011. Facebook as a toolkit: A 
uses and gratification approach to unbundling feature 
use. Computers in Human Behavior, 27, 2322–2329.  
30.  Mark Snyder. (1974). Self-monitoring of expressive 

behavior. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 30(4), 526–537.  

31.  Stephanie J. Tobin, Eric J. Vanman, Marnize 

Verreynne, and Alexander K. Saeri. 2014. Threats to 
belonging on Facebook: lurking and ostracism. Social 
Influence, 10(1), 31–42.  

32.  Catalina L. Toma and Jeffrey T. Hancock. 2013. Self-
affirmation underlies Facebook use. Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 39(3), 321–331. 

33.  Joseph B. Walther and Malcolm R. Parks. 2002. Cues 

filtered out, cues filtered in: Computer-mediated 
communication and relationships. In M. L. Knapp & J. 
A. Daly (Eds.), Handbook of Interpersonal 
Communication, 3rd edition (pp. 529–563). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage. 

34.  Joseph B. Walther, Brandon Van Der Heide, Sang-
Yeon Kim, David Westerman, and Stephanie Tom 
Tong. 2008. The role of friends' appearance and 
behavior on evaluations of individuals' on Facebook: 
Are we known by the company we keep? Human 
Communication Research, 34, 28–49. 

35.  Joseph B. Walther, Brandon Van Der Heide, Lauren 

M. Hamel, and Hillary C. Shulman. 2009. Self-
generated versus other-generated statements and 
impressions in computer-mediated communication: A 
test of warranting theory using Facebook. 
Communication Research, 36(2), 229–253.

(Eds.), Handbook of individual differences in social 
behavior (pp. 574–591). New York, NY: Guilford 
Press.  

15.  Jeffrey A. Hall and Natalie Pennington. 2013. Self-
monitoring, honesty, and cue use on Facebook: The 
relationship with user extraversion and 
conscientiousness. Computers in Human Behavior, 29, 
1556–1564.  

16.  Keith N. Hampton, Lauren Sessions Goulet, Cameron 
Marlow, and Lee Rainie. 2012. Why most Facebook 
users get more than they give: The effect of Facebook 
'power users' on everybody else. Pew Research 
Center’s Internet & American Life Project. 
http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2012/Facebook-
users.aspx  

17.  Joinson, A. N. 2004. Self-esteem, interpersonal risk, 

and preference for e-mail to face-to-face 
communication. CyberPsychology & Behavior, 7(4), 
479–485.  

18.  Mark R. Leary, Ellen S. Tambor, Sonja K. Terdal, 

Deborah L. Downs. 1995. Self-esteem as an 
interpersonal monitor: The sociometer hypothesis. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68(3), 
518–530. 

19.  Richard D. Lenox and Raymond N. Wolfe. 1984. 
Revision of the self-monitoring scale. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 46(6), 1349–1364. 
20.  Eden Litt and Eszter Hargittai. 2014. A bumpy ride on 

the information superhighway: Exploring turbulence 
online. Computers in Human Behavior, 36, 530–529. 
21.  Mary Madden, Amanda Lenhart, Sandra Cortesi, Urs 
Gasser, Maeve Duggan, Aaron Smith, and Meredith 
Beaton. 2013. Teens, social media, and privacy. Pew 
Research Center’s Internet & American Life Project. 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2013/05/21/teens-social-
media-and-privacy/ 

22.  Jennifer N. Morey, Amy L. Gentzler, Brian Creasy, 
Ann M. Oberhauser, and David Westerman. 2013. 
Young adults’ use of communication technology 
within their romantic relationships and associations 
with attachment style. Computers in Human Behavior, 
29, 1771–1778. 

23.  Zizi Papacharissi and Andrew Mendelson. 2011. 

Toward a new(er) sociability: Uses, gratifications and 
social capital on Facebook. In S. Papathanassopoulos 
(Ed.), Media Perspectives for the 21st Century (pp. 
212–231): Routledge. 

24.  Pew Internet Report. (2014) 

http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2014/02/03/6-
new-facts-about-facebook/ 
 

1510

