CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Mom, I Do Have a Family!: Attitudes, Agreements, and 

Expectations on the Interaction with Chilean Older Adults 

Francisco J. Gutierrez and Sergio F. Ochoa 

Department of Computer Science, University of Chile 

Beauchef 851, 3rd floor, Santiago, Chile 

{frgutier, sochoa}@dcc.uchile.cl 

ABSTRACT 
Most  related  research  about  intra-family  communication 
follows  the  reality  of  developed  countries,  where  older 
adults  can  live  independently  from  their  families  and  are 
likely to embrace technology. Contrarily, in Chile and other 
Latin  American  countries,  most  older  adults  live  close  to 
their families, are usually dependent of the latter, and rarely 
use  digital  means 
to  communicate.  Through  cross-
generational interviews, we identified attitudes, agreements, 
and  expectations  that  describe  how  middle  class  Chilean 
families,  living  in  urban  settlements,  interact  with  their 
elders.  The  study  findings  indicate  that  the  approach  used 
by the adult children to take care of their parents produces a 
vicious  circle  that  stresses  out  the  former  and  limits  the 
technology  adoption  of  the  latter.  Therefore,  new  ways  of 
interacting  with  the  elderly  are  required  and  digital 
technology has the potential to produce this change. 
Author Keywords 
Intra-family communication; older adults; Chile; interaction 
agreements; social expectations 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.3.  Group  and  Organization  Interfaces:  Computer-
supported cooperative work 
INTRODUCTION 
A  large  part  of  the  research  on  family  communication 
conducted  within  the  CSCW  community  considers  the 
reality  of  developed  countries.  In  this  scenario,  elderly 
people  can  live  quite  independently  from  the  rest  of  their 
families.  Although  this  independence  (or  self-sufficiency) 
seems to be a cultural aspect [17], it is also due to a reduced 
family  size  and  the  high  mobility  of  its  members.  These 
factors 
the  elderly  assume  an  active  role  when 
communicating with their families, and consequently favor 
the usage of computer-mediated solutions.  

let 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is  granted without fee pro vided  that copies  are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that co pies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for  components of this work 
owned by others than the author(s)  must be honored. Abstracting with credit is 
permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,  to post on servers or to redistribute 
to  lists,  requires  prior  specific  permission  and/or  a  fee.  Request 
permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA. 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820000 

Contrary  to  the  Anglo-American  culture,  which  values 
autonomy  and  independence,  Latin  American  families 
value  closeness,  dependence,  obedience,  and  loyalty  [10]. 
Latino family members appreciate living in a place close to 
other  relatives;  therefore,  they  tend  to  show  low  mobility. 
In addition, the technology appropriation of Latino elders is 
lower  than  what  can  be  observed  in  developed  societies. 
Given  that  the  Latin  American  interaction  context  has  not 
been  deeply  studied  yet  from  a  CSCW  perspective,  this 
paper  aims  to  identify  the  main  attitudes,  agreements,  and 
expectations  around  family  interaction  with  their  older 
adults, in the particular case of Chile.  
Chilean  society is collectivistic. This means that the goals 
and interests of the group are considered to be above those 
of  individual  members.  Family  members  keep  a  tight 
relationship  with  each  other,  where  older  adults  enjoy  a 
respectful position. Such a position is recognized by the rest 
of  the  family,  mainly  by  their  children,  who  usually  take 
care of the seniors as a repayment for the parental care they 
received during childhood [2].  
This  attitude,  known  as  filial  obligation,  is  stronger  in 
Latino families than in Anglo-American ones [22]. Indeed, 
this can be explained as parents in Latino families typically 
follow a “protective” parenting style, which is characterized 
by  warmth  and  demandingness  [9].  In  Chile,  the  filial 
obligation  consists  in  providing  affective  care  to  older 
adults,  offering  them  economic  support  if  needed,  and 
helping  them  address  the  issues  that  represent  a  challenge 
[20]. These issues typically range from simple and domestic 
needs, to medical treatments. 
Given  this  filial  obligation,  Chilean  older  adults  adopt  a 
passive role around social interaction, assuming that the rest 
of the family has the responsibility of helping them address 
their needs [21]. Therefore, the interaction scenario in Chile 
is  different  than  the  one  in  the  Anglo-American  culture. 
Indeed,  while  in  the  former  the  interactions  are  strongly 
oriented toward the elderly and based on duties [21], in the 
latter they are more balanced and based on wills [29].  
Trying to understand the particularities of social interaction 
with older adults in Chilean families, the implication of the 
filial obligation in adult children and grandchildren, and the 
reasons behind the low technology adoption of the elderly, 
we conducted an interview study with twenty middle class 
families living in Santiago. The study considered canonical 
families; i.e., the most common type of family structure in 

1402

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

imposed  by 

Chile.  These  families  are  composed  of  three  generations: 
older  adults,  their  adult  children,  and  their  grandchildren, 
who do not necessarily live in the same household. A total 
of  60  people  were  interviewed  –one  member  of  each 
generation per family–.  
The study results indicate that the interviewed Chilean older 
adults  consider  being  well  cared  for  by  their  family 
members,  but  mainly  by  their  adult  children,  who  assume 
the  responsibilities 
the  filial  obligation. 
However, the approach used to deal with these duties tends 
to evolve in a vicious circle that slows down the technology 
adoption among the elderly and stresses the adult children. 
We also identified that this situation affects the relationship 
within family members, particularly with the elderly. Thus, 
it seems imperative to find alternatives to break this vicious 
circle  and  promote  a  smooth  evolution  toward  sustainable 
interaction  paradigms  for  all  family  members.  Digital 
technology can help reach such a goal, if it is grounded on 
the  particular  attitudes,  agreements,  and  expectations  of 
people within the target socio-cultural context. 
Understanding  family  communication  with  older  adults  in 
Chile  serves  as  an  interesting  case  study,  because  this 
cultural  scenario  shares  several  common  traits  with  most 
Latin American countries. Therefore, the obtained findings 
and  derived  design  implications  have  the  potential  to  also 
be applicable to other Latin American families. 
The  following  sections  discuss  related  work  and  provide 
background information about intra-family communication 
with older adults in Chile. We then introduce the research 
questions  to  answer  in  this  study,  describe  the  followed 
method,  present  the  findings,  and  show  how  the  findings 
can  be  used  to  design  computer-supported  solutions  that 
facilitate  intra-family  communication  in  this  socio-cultural 
context. Finally, we present the conclusion of this work. 
RELATED WORK 
Recently, a broad amount of HCI and CSCW literature has 
been  devoted  to  exploring  how  family  members  interact 
using computer-mediated  mechanisms. Particular topics  of 
interest  are:  understanding  the  attitudes  and  needs  of 
different  generations  around  digital  communication,  and 
how  to  design  ICT-based  technology  to  support  and 
integrate the elderly into the family rituals and routines.  
individualistic 
Most  studies  have  been  conducted 
cultures,  which  do  not  necessarily  explain  what  occurs  in 
collectivistic societies, like Chile. Contrary to collectivistic 
societies, in individualistic ones the filial obligation tends to 
prescribe,  and  the  support  to  the  elderly  is  addressed  as  a 
personal attitude of children, which depends on the quality 
of the parent-child relationship [12, 28].  
Naturally,  cultural  differences  shape  the  way  in  which 
family members perceive their relations within their social 
networks. For instance, Kennedy and Wellman [14] report 
that  in  developed  countries,  such  as  urban  Canada,  family 
members have found different means to live their own lives, 

in 

that  younger  generations  help  address 

while staying connected to each other. Indeed, according to 
the authors, this is partially attributed to the high adoption 
of ICTs and the individualistic approach followed by family 
members.  Moreover,  older  adults  in  the  United  Kingdom 
may “view the exercise of familial obligation as an assault 
on their dignity and moral worth” [16] (p. 77). This reduces 
the  amount  of  work  that  the  adults  have  to  do  in  favor  of 
their parents. Besides, given that many of these older adults 
already use technology [24, 32], the process of taking care 
of them also becomes more affordable.  
This  attitude  for  living  independently  and  embracing 
technology is not present in most Chilean older adults [20]. 
Some sociological and anthropological studies conducted in 
Chile (e.g., [2, 20, 21]) can be used to try understanding this 
lack of interest of the elderly for using digital media; e.g., 
email,  social  networking  services,  and  instant  messaging 
systems. These studies identify the relevance of maintaining 
periodic face-to-face interactions and routines for sustaining 
the affective links with the elderly, and they recognize that 
there is an unsatisfied need for intra-family communication, 
which  is  not  always  perceived  or  agreed  by  other  family 
members [20, 21]. The studies also state that it is socially 
expected 
the 
unsatisfied  needs  of  their  elders  [2,  21].  However,  while 
valuable,  these  results  do  not  identify  the  particular 
unsatisfied  intra-family  communication  needs  of  Chilean 
older  adults,  and  fail  to  explore  the  sustainability  of  the 
approach  currently  used  by  Chilean  adult  children  in 
dealing with their filial duties.  
According  to  these  studies,  phone  calls  and  face-to-face 
interaction are the main mechanisms used by the adults to 
deal with their filial duties, and by the elderly to be in touch 
with  other  family  members  [21].  However,  there  is  no  in-
depth information about how social interaction is managed 
in Chilean families. 
Concerning the motivation to adopt digital technology, the 
literature suggests that in developed Western countries this 
adoption  is  motivated  by  the  interest  of  the  elderly  in 
staying  in  touch  with  other  family  members  [8,  16,  26], 
particularly  with  their  younger  relatives  [24,  32]  and 
grandchildren [7, 11, 16]. Conversely, while Chilean older 
adults  show  the  same  need  [2],  they  do  not  perceive  a 
benefit  in  adopting  digital  technology.  The  reason  behind 
this  attitude  is  that  they  manage  their  communication 
through  mechanisms  that  are  already  assimilated  by  them. 
In fact, very few Chilean older adults describe themselves 
as  active  users  of  social  media  or  demonstrate  comfort  in 
using smartphones [23]. 
Although the findings obtained from studies in the Anglo-
American  culture  help  elucidate 
interaction 
agreements and expectations in a broad sense, they are not 
representative  of  the  Latino  culture,  given  that  the  adult 
children differ in their attitude toward filial obligation, and 
the  elderly  differ  in  their  attitude  regarding  intra-family 
communication  and  the  adoption  of  digital  technology. 

family 

1403

Furthermore,  previous  studies  conducted  in  Chile  do  not 
explore the particularities of the interaction with the elderly. 
Therefore,  this  paper  provides  new  knowledge  that  allows 
designing  supporting  technology  to  address  the  cross-
generational needs of Chilean family members. 
INTRA-FAMILY COMMUNICATION IN CHILE 
Most of the Chilean population (52%) lives in Santiago and 
two other large cities [23], which opens the possibility for 
frequent  face-to-face  interaction.  This  situation  also  holds 
in  the  rest  of  the  country,  given  that  filial  obligations 
impose that at least one adult child has to live close to the 
older  adults  for  taking  care  of  them  when  needed  [20].  In 
addition,  family  members  usually  have  low  geographical 
mobility [23]; therefore, this situation does not represent an 
issue for them. Although many older adults have access to 
computer-supported  technology,  their  adoption  of  it  is 
typically low [20]. 
Interaction Routines 
While  exceptions  occur,  Chilean  families  follow  an 
interaction routine –grounded in tradition– that consists in a 
weekly  family  reunion.  These  meetings  take  place  in  the 
home of a family member (usually the older adult or one of 
his/her  adult  children),  uniting  those  who  are  available 
during  the  weekend.  These  family  meetings,  which  also 
happen  in  other  Latin  American  countries  [30],  last  for  at 
least a couple of hours, and their main goal is to reinforce 
the affective links and agreements of mutual support among 
members that do not share the same household.  
If these family meetings do not occur, or if their frequency 
is  reduced,  people  miss  them,  particularly  the  elderly.  By 
recognizing  that  this  routine  should  be  adjusted  according 
to the intrinsic family evolution, most members value these 
opportunities to conduct face-to-face interactions [20].  
The Role of Older Adults in Chilean Families 
Typically,  older  adults  live  with  their  partner  in  the  same 
household  while  they  are  still  self-sufficient.  During  the 
first  period  after  retirement,  i.e.,  while  they  are  still 
physically active, many of them (particularly women) take 
care  of  their  grandchildren  or  collaborate  in  the  parenting 
activities [20]. This is part of the protective parenting style 
of  Chilean  families,  and  it  allows  older  adults  to  interact 
more frequently with their children and grandchildren.  
The  participation  of  older  adults  on  parenting  activities 
decreases  with  the  advancement  of  their  physical  and 
cognitive 
the 
frequency  of  face-to-face  interactions  with  adult  children 
and grandchildren [20]. When the elderly are no longer self-
sufficient,  their  adult  children  usually  hire  an  external 
caregiver  to  help  them,  or  they  arrange  for  the  elderly  to 
live with them [20]. 
The Role of Adult Children to Care for their Older Adults 
Chilean  adults  typically  have  a  stressful  lifestyle  that 
involves  quite  long  working  shifts  (9–10  hours  a  day, 
regulated  by  law).  In  particular,  Mexico  and  Chile  are 

limitations.  This  progressively  reduces 

1404

SESSION: PARENTS AND CHILDREN

reduces 

toward 

style  considerably 

among the Western countries belonging to the Organization 
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) with 
the highest number of worked hours per year [25]. Adults 
are  also  highly  committed  to  their  parenting  activities, 
which  are  usually  conducted  after  working  hours.  These 
duties are a priority for them, and are performed even after 
their  children  have  formed  their  own  families  [2].  This 
protective  parenting 
the 
available time of the adults for taking care of their parents. 
The low technology adoption of the elderly conditions their 
adult children to use interaction means that are comfortable 
for  the  former  (e.g.,  short  visits,  and  phone  calls),  thus 
restricting  the  available  alternatives  for  the  latter  to  deal 
with their filial obligation. 
The Role of Grandchildren to Care for their Older Adults 
The bond between Chilean grandparents and grandchildren 
is  usually  quite  strong.  The  perception  of  strength  of  this 
relationship naturally varies along their lives [1, 2].  
During  their  early  years,  grandchildren  usually  have  a 
strong  relationship  with  their  grandparents.  When  the 
former  grow  up,  their  available  time  for  socializing  is 
reduced,  and  their  priorities  for  building  and  maintaining 
social relations shift from within their families to their close 
peers, same-aged friends and couples [1, 19]. This is similar 
to what has been described in individualistic societies (e.g., 
[4]),  which  is  not  surprising  given  that  young  people  in 
Chile are highly influenced by the American and European 
cultures.  However,  most  grandchildren  in  Chile  recognize 
having  some  kind  of  filial  obligation 
their 
grandparents, but the literature it is not clear about how this 
feeling of duty is materialized in practice.  
RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
In  order  to  gain  a  deeper  understanding  of  the  attitudes, 
agreements,  and  expectations  of  Chilean  family  members 
around social interaction with the elderly, this study intends 
to answer the following research questions: 
RQ1:  What  are  the  needs  of  older  adults  around  intra-
family communication? 
RQ2:  How  do  Chilean  older  adults  address  their  intra-
family communication needs? 
RQ3:  How  do  adults  deal  with  the  duties  toward  their 
parents? 
RQ4:  How  do  grandchildren  participate  in  the  caring 
process of older adults? 
These research questions still remain open for collectivistic 
societies, particularly for the case of Chile. Answering them 
will  allow  us  understand  how  to  help  the  elderly  address 
their  communication  needs,  as  well  as  how  to  help  adults 
and grandchildren deal with their filial obligation.  
STUDY METHODOLOGY 
Middle  class  families  are  prevalent  in  Chile  [19,  22]. 
Therefore,  this  study  focuses  on  middle  class  canonical 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

families  living  in  urban  settlements.  A  typical  Chilean 
household  is  composed  of  an  adult  child,  his/her  partner, 
and one or more children [23]. Grandparents enjoy a close 
relationship  with 
their  grandchildren,  while  assuming 
caring duties and providing assistance to their own children 
[21].  Adult  children  usually  live  with  their  parents  until 
they reach a certain socioeconomic status that lets them be 
independent –usually in the late twenties, after completing a 
professional  degree  and  getting  married–  [19].  One  of  the 
most  usual  exceptions  occurs  when  young  adults  have  to 
move to a different city for study or work reasons. 
Similar to current trends in developed countries, technology 
adoption  is  high  in  children,  teenagers,  young  adults  and 
professional  adults.  However,  it  is  still  low  among  non-
professional adults, and almost null among older adults.  
Although Chile has the second highest Internet penetration 
in  Latin  America  [13],  only  25.6%  of  the  population  over 
50  years  old  is  able  to  search  information  online,  28.5% 
declares knowing how to send emails, and 70.5% states that 
they are not able to perform either of these tasks [23]. Most 
of the digital illiterate people are older adults (aged over 65 
years old). 
Participants 
We initially interviewed several older adults participating in 
senior community centers and religious groups of Santiago 
to  determine  if  their  families  qualify  as  canonical.  After 
selecting  the  candidates,  we  contacted  their  children  and 
grandchildren,  belonging  to  the  same  family  branch,  in 
order  to  request  their  participation  in  the  study.  While  we 
did not explicitly consider gender in this selection process, 
we  tried  to  balance  the  participation  of  the  oldest  and 
youngest people in each generation. 
Following  a  snowball  sampling  strategy,  we  reached  20 
canonical  families.  While  we  focused  mainly  on  the 
metropolitan area of Santiago for convenience reasons (at 7 
million inhabitants), due to the used sampling strategy we 
reached  participants  from  La  Serena  (400  km  north  of 
Santiago)  and  Concepción  (450  km  south  of  Santiago). 
These cities have around 250,000 inhabitants each. At least 
one older adult, one adult, and one young person belonging 
to the same family branch were interviewed. 
Out  of  the  60  participants,  25  were  men  (42%)  while  35 
were  women  (58%).  Young  people  (N=20;  M=21.5; 
S.D.=4.2;  range=15–29)  ranged  between  high  school  and 
undergraduate  students.  Adults  (N=20;  M=45.1;  S.D.=7.5; 
range=30–60)  were  dependent  workers, 
independent 
workers,  and  homemakers.  Regarding  the  older  adults 
(N=20;  M=70.6;  S.D.=7.4;  range=65–91),  three  of  them 
were  part-time  workers,  two  ran  their  own  business  as 
small-scale shop owners, and the others were retired. 
Interview Method 
We conducted individual semi-structured interviews during 
February 2014, coinciding with summer holidays in Chile. 
The interviews lasted between  46 to 72 minutes (M=61.2; 

S.D.=5.8),  and  they  were  held  at  the  participants’  home. 
Each interview was structured as follows: 
1. Introduction:  We  explained  the  objectives  of  the  study 
and  what  kind  of  data  we  were  going  to  collect.  We 
followed  ethical  considerations  regarding  personal  data 
processing,  and  asked  each  participant  for  his/her  free 
and informed consent to participate in the study. 

2. Family  Network:  We  asked  the  participants  to  draw  a 
visual map of their family structure, the kinship among its 
members, and how strong they perceive the affective link 
is  between  them.  We  also  asked  the  participants  to 
indicate how close they lived from other family members. 
3. Communication  Media:  We  asked  the  participants  to 
inform  us  about  what  communication  media  they  are 
capable of using, how often, and which ones they prefer 
to  use  with  the  other  family  members  depicted  in  the 
visual  map.  We  chose  this  approach,  as  according  to 
Smith et al. [27], it “allows people to remember who is in 
their network and to readily see the various relationships 
they have with the members of their social network” (p. 
553). 

4. Interaction  Practices:  We  asked  the  participants  to 
describe  their  interaction  practices  with  other  family 
members  in  several  scenarios.  For  instance,  how  they 
would prefer to be contacted if they are at work and how 
they would react in case of interruption. In particular, we 
wanted  to  explore  if  the  participants  were  aware  of  the 
different  communication  practices  and  media  preference 
of  their  family  members,  and  if  they  were  aware  of 
possible communication asymmetries with their relatives. 
5. Affective  Care  and  Interaction  Needs:  We  finally  asked 
the  participants  to  describe  how  close  they  felt  with  the 
other members of their family network. In particular, we 
were interested in the affective perception of both parties 
in the case of informal communication, and if this social 
interaction is frequent enough. Using this information we 
identified  the  specific  interaction  needs  among  them,  in 
particular, of elderly people. 
Data Collection and Analysis 
A 
journalists 
conducted  the  interviews.  Each  interviewer  followed  a 
script  with  the  topics  to  be  discussed.  This  script  was 
validated  in  a  pilot  study  with  three  families,  where 
wording  problems  and  ambiguous 
statements  were 
resolved. Before initiating the interviews, the authors held a 
meeting with the interviewing team to present the script and 
clarify doubts. This was to limit bias and avoid ambiguity. 
Each interview was tape-recorded with the explicit consent 
of  the  participant,  and  they  were  later  transcribed  and 
analyzed by the authors. To analyze the data, we performed 
open, axial and selective coding. 
STUDY RESULTS 
Next,  we  present  the  study  results  considering  the  stated 
research  questions.  In  order  to  comply  with  the  privacy 

team  of  six  psychology  students  and 

1405

they  were 
if  necessary, 

consent signed by the participants, quotes are anonymized. 
In  addition, 
translated  from  Spanish  and 
corrected, 
into  Standard  English 
to  fit 
grammar rules. We use the following codes for referring to 
participants: Y for young person, A for adult, and OA for 
older adult. The number identifies each family. 
RQ1: What are the Needs of Older Adults Around Intra-
Family Communication? 
The study results indicate that most of the interviewed older 
adults  need  to  interact  with  other  family  members  to 
communicate their feelings, to assess if family links are still 
alive, and to receive affective care and support in activities 
that are challenging for them.  
The interviewed elderly also seem to be well cared for by 
their adult children and do not suffer from social isolation. 
This situation is backed by the findings of a recent survey 
conducted  by  the  Chilean  government  [20].  However,  our 
interviews  identify  specific  needs  that  are  unsatisfied  and 
can  be  addressed  using  digital  technology.  Unfortunately, 
the elderly do not see this possibility as evident. 
The Elderly Receive Less Attention Than What They Expect 
Older adults always get support from the family; however, 
many times they have to demand it. This situation is mainly 
caused  by  differences  in  the  caring  priorities  among  adult 
children and the elderly, and also in the available time for 
socializing.  Concerning  the  caring  priorities,  older  adults 
expect that the filial obligation becomes a priority for their 
children, but the latter prioritize their family of procreation.  
“As  you  become  older,  you  hope  that  your  kids  will  take 
care  of  you.  However,  I  know  that  at  times  my  children 
have to take care of their own.” OA9, female, 73 years old. 
The  interviewed  older  adults  also  recognize  the  difference 
of  availability  between  themselves  and  the  rest  of  the 
family.  Therefore,  they  usually  refrain  from  taking  the 
initiative  in  the  interaction,  because  they  feel  they  will  be 
disrupting the routine of their family members.  
“My son is always busy at work and I don’t want to bother 
him. I call them during the afternoon, once I know they are 
all resting at home.” OA16, female, 66 years old. 
Although the elderly expect more affective care than what 
they  actually  receive,  they  recognize  the  effort  of  their 
children to comply with their filial obligation.  
Older Adults Want to Know About Their Family Members 
The interviewed older adults show a strong desire to know 
the  doings  and  whereabouts  of 
their  children  and 
grandchildren. Indeed, when an older adult queries a family 
member for personal information, the former feels that s/he 
is enhancing the link with such a person. The same happens 
when the elderly use an intermediary person to know about 
other  member;  e.g.,  asking  an  adult  child  about  a 
grandchild.  Knowing  about  others  make  them  feel  part  of 
the  family,  and  give  them  background  topics  to  interact 
with other members and participate in family conversations. 

1406

SESSION: PARENTS AND CHILDREN

“I love to know how my daughter and my grandchildren are 
doing  at  all  times.  I  love  giving  them  advice  on  their 
problems, or just chat with them […] It gives me the chance 
to get closer to them when they come visit me on Sundays.” 
OA1, female, 74 years old. 
Grandparents Expect to Interact More Frequently with their 
Grandchildren 
The  interviewed  older  adults  also  expect  more  frequent 
interaction  with  their  grandchildren.  These  interactions 
usually  go  well  when  the  latter  are  kids,  become  less 
frequent when they are teenagers, and get reinforced when 
they  become  young  adults.  Although  there  are  several 
reasons  for  such  a  reduction  in  the  intra-family  social 
interaction  during  the  adolescence,  the  interviews  reveal  a 
cultural  aspect  of  the  Chilean  society:  older  adults,  given 
their position in the family, feel that they have the right to 
ask  personal  questions  to  grandchildren,  which  turns 
somewhat natural conversations into questionings.  
“When  I  talk  to  grandma,  she  is  constantly  asking  me 
annoying  questions.  [...]  I  sometimes  don’t  want  to  keep 
talking to her.” Y14, male, 17 years old. 
Consequently,  teenagers  do  not  feel  at  ease  with  this 
situation  and  prefer  to  interact  using  asynchronous  digital 
media,  or  simply  opt  to  avoid  communicating  with  their 
elders.  This  raises  tensions  in  the  relationship  among 
grandparents  and  teenagers,  as  a  result  of  unbalanced 
expectations in the social interaction process. 
“It’s  difficult  to  socialize  with  young  people  because  they 
use  their  mobile  phones  all  day.  You  need  to  constantly 
remind them that you exist; otherwise, you become someone 
that they are forced to invite to birthdays or other important 
family celebrations.” OA15, male, 65 years old. 
This attitude allows teenagers to socialize with their parents 
and  grandparents  whenever  they  are  willing  to,  and  they 
also  tend  to  regulate  the  length  of  each  interaction.  This 
source  of  control  protects 
the 
interrogative attitude of other family members, particularly 
the older adults.  
Therefore, even if the interviewed teenagers show traits of 
the  Latino  culture,  they  also  feel  they  have  a  right  to 
privacy. This particular trait is recognized in the literature 
as a distinctive feature of individualistic cultures [15].  
Once the grandchildren become young adults, they tend to 
become less vulnerable to the questioning sessions and turn 
to be more conscious of the needs of their elders. Therefore, 
they are willing to be active in the caring process of their 
grandparents and other family members. 
RQ2: How do Chilean Older Adults Address their Intra-
Family Communication Needs? 
The  interviewed  elderly  stated  they  prefer to  address  their 
interaction needs using mechanisms that they have already 
assimilated;  particularly, 
face-to-face  encounters  and 
telephone calls. 

teenagers 

the 

from 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Family  Meetings  Help  the  Elderly  Address  Most  of  Their 
Communication Needs 
Most family members, but mainly the elderly, consider that 
family  reunions  help  them  reinforce  their  affective  links, 
reduce  tensions,  and  redefine  agreements  among  one 
another. These meetings also allow family members to get 
updates  about  the  family  as  a  whole  group.  However,  the 
existence of these reunions hides the potential benefits that 
the  adoption  of  digital  technology  has  for  the  elderly. 
Indeed,  if  this  benefit  is  not  evident,  then  technology 
adoption is not interesting for older adults. Therefore, using 
digital means to communicate does not become part of the 
filial  duties,  and  consequently,  the  elderly  do  not  receive 
this  kind  of  support.  This  finding  complements  recent 
Chilean studies [20, 23] by identifying a cultural cause for 
the low technology adoption in the Chilean elderly. 
The interviews also reveal that the quality of the affective 
link  diminishes  with  those  family  members  that  cannot 
regularly attend these meetings. Usually, this turns into both 
parties  reformulating  their  social  interaction  agreements. 
However, the benefits of using digital media for supporting 
these  interactions  remains  to  be  not  clear  for  the  elderly, 
who in turn expect to interact with these people by phone. 
“I  haven’t  seen  my  grandmother  for  a  while.  I  haven’t 
made the time for travelling and visiting her. We therefore 
don’t communicate as much as I’d like. I think I might have 
lost all the bonds I had with her, so I doubt that she would 
even call me back.” Y19, female, 19 years old. 
The grandmother of Y19 also considers that the relationship 
between them has been deteriorated. Although she still has 
affection for her granddaughter, the lack of initiative of the 
latter hurdles their relationship. 
“Of course I miss my little girl! I always ask her father how 
she’s  doing  to  get  some  news  about  her.  I  know  she’s 
studying in Santiago, but she could pick up the phone once 
in a while, don’t you think?” OA19, female, 73 years old. 
This situation highlights the value of the affective links for 
the elderly, particularly in the case where it is not possible 
to  reunite  with  certain  family  members.  However,  this 
perception is also asymmetrical across generations. Indeed, 
the  kinship  maps  depicted  by  the  study  participants  show 
that  most  of  the  elderly  perceive  that  their  affective  links 
with other family members are quite strong, whereas adult 
children  and  young  people  consider 
their  mutual 
relationships to be stronger than those with their elders. 
Regular  Phone  Calls  are  Used  to  Keep  the  Bonds  Among 
Older Adults and Family Members who Live Away 
Although  distance  is  a  hurdle  for  family  communication, 
particularly  with  older  adults,  this  study  found  that  many 
adult  children  (and  some  grandchildren)  overcame  this 
situation  using  synchronous  communication 
routines, 
typically  based  on  phone  calls.  In  this  case,  calls  are  not 
only for monitoring the elderly, but also for socializing and 
keeping the affective links alive. 

link  with 

their 

family  members 

When these interactions are not frequent, some older adults 
tend to be more active by taking the initiative. One reason 
that  explains  this  behavior  is  that  the  elderly  feel  that  the 
affective 
risks  of 
deteriorating. This is aligned with the findings of Forghani 
and Neustaedter in Canadian families [11]. 
RQ3:  How  do  Adults  Deal  with  the  Duties  toward  their 
Parents?  
In 18 out of the 20 interviewed families, adults stated that 
they are expected to take care of the elderly, not only as an 
integral part of their upbringing, but also as a contribution 
to the rest of the family. Therefore, even adults that do not 
have a good relationship with their parents find the way to 
contribute, reciprocating the affective links of belonging to 
the  family.  Adults  indicate  that  they  feel  good  when  they 
manage to accomplish with their filial duties, and they feel 
guilty when they are not able to do so. 
Family Members Assume Roles to Care For the Elderly 
Family members also implicitly assume roles when caring 
for  their  elders,  according to  the  perceived strength of the 
affective  link  between  each  other  and  the  feasibility  of 
assuming  particular  commitments.  This  helps  balance  the 
caring efforts generated by the filial obligation. 
We identified five roles that are implicitly and voluntarily 
assumed  by  Chilean  family  members.  These  assumptions 
are quite stable, but they consider the temporal needs of the 
elderly  and  the  willingness  of  people  for  contributing.  In 
addition, a family member can assume simultaneously more 
than  one  role,  although  they  can  be  expressed  in  different 
ways throughout families. 
• Caregiver:  An  external  caregiver  or  family  member 
the  older  adult,  who  continuously 

cohabiting  with 
monitors the latter and reacts promptly when needed.  

• Monitor: A family member who does not share the same 
household with the older adult, but monitors him/her, and 
is  usually  available  for  assistance.  Typically,  daughters 
play this role, and are willing to assume several others. 

• Helper:  A  family  member  who  is  willing  to  assist  the 
elderly  when  required.  Helpers  assume  a  particular 
responsibility in specific situations; e.g., buying medicine 
for  the  older  adults.  This  role  is  usually  assumed  on-
demand; i.e., somebody asks the helper to do something. 
Adult  children  living  away  usually  act  as  helpers  by 
providing economic support to the elderly when required. 
• Broker: A family member who gives information from the 
family network to the older adults, as a way to help them 
address  their  need  for  knowing  the  whereabouts  and 
doings  of  their  adult  children  and  grandchildren.  People 
living away also can act as brokers and monitors when it 
is required. 

• Meeting organizer: A family member who organizes face-
to-face reunions (typically, family meetings) to reinforce 
the family cohesion and the links with the elderly. 

1407

the  current 

Family meetings serve as instances to play these roles and 
to coordinate the caring efforts for the elderly in a distended 
environment. Typically, a few family members are willing 
to  assume  the  role  of  coordinating  the  caring  activities, 
because such a process is time-consuming and exposes that 
person to conflicts with other family members. 
“With my sister we decided to split the time that we host our 
father at our place […]. We understand that he (our father) 
would like to spend time with all my children and nephews 
at  the  same  time,  but  it’s  difficult  to  arrange  a  big  lunch 
together every week.” A14, male, 46 years old. 
Even  though  the  literature  reports  the  existence  of  a  filial 
obligation  across  cultures  (e.g.,  [2,  9,  22,  28,  29]),  the 
assumption  of  roles  within  the  family  to  address  with  this 
concern has not been properly studied in depth, at least in 
the  Chilean  scenario.  Given 
technology 
appropriation  and  habituation  among  adult  children  and 
younger  generations,  there  is  an  open  opportunity  for 
designing  alternative  computer-supported  mechanisms  to 
ease  the  assumption  of  such  filial  duties,  considering  the 
constraints and expectations of the involved stakeholders.  
Media Preferences of the Elderly Constrain the Interaction  
Similar  to  current  trends  in  Western  countries,  Chilean 
young people largely prefer communicating through social 
media, adults tend to prefer email, and older adults lean to 
face-to-face  and  phone  communication  [7,  31].  The  older 
adults do not perceive this asymmetry of media preference, 
as their position in the family imposes that their preferred 
media will be used instead of those selected by the others. 
Although almost all the interviewed family members accept 
interacting  with  their  older  adults  using  these  media,  the 
interactions  turn  to  be  time-consuming;  therefore,  some 
family members try to identify alternatives. 
“I  barely  talk  to  my  father  through  the  mobile  phone.  We 
bought him one, but he doesn’t even know how to turn it on! 
I prefer to go and visit him, or to call mom and then talk to 
dad.” A3, female, 51 years old. 
While  the  asymmetry  of  media  preference  also  exists  in 
other  cultures  (e.g.,  [7,  8,  16]),  the  approach  followed  to 
reduce  it  in  collectivistic  cultures  is  different.  Therefore, 
family  members  see  themselves  forced  to  use  time-
demanding mechanisms for interacting with their elders.  
The Filial Obligation Burdens Adult Children 
Most  adult  children  recognize  and  assume  the  filial 
obligation  as  part  of  their  family  duties.  However,  their 
main concern is focused on maintaining and caring for their 
own families of procreation, which reduces the amount of 
time available for taking care of their elders. 
“Sometimes I have to tell her: Mom, I know that you need 
my help, but I do have a family now! It’s my obligation to 
take care of them.” A9, male, 46 years old. 
When  the  elderly  demand  a  lot  of  attention  and  the  adult 
children have little to no help from external means or other 

1408

SESSION: PARENTS AND CHILDREN

family members, achieving the filial obligation is likely to 
become  an  impossible  mission.  In  these  cases,  adults  tend 
to rely on their partner and own children to get assistance 
for dealing with their filial duties.  
“I’m  lucky  that  my  mom  and  my  wife  like  hanging  out 
together.  It’s  good  to  rely  on  someone  when  you  feel  that 
you’re overloaded with work!” A11, male, 48 years old. 
The perception of filial obligation is not the same among all 
adults in the family. Therefore, some of them will tend to 
assume  more  responsibilities  than  others.  In  particular, 
women tend to be more engaged in this process than men, a 
trend also identified in other cultures (e.g., [22]). 
RQ4:  How  do  Grandchildren  Participate  in  the  Caring 
Process of Older Adults? 
Many older adults think that their grandchildren should also 
assume  part  of  the  filial  obligation  in  favor  of  them. 
However,  this  situation  is  not  necessarily  clear  to  the 
grandchildren, who typically only assume roles if there is a 
strong affective relation with the older adult. 
Grandchildren  Do  Not  Perceive  a  Filial  Obligation  Toward 
their Grandparents as Mandatory During Adolescence 
The study results show that older adults, and in some cases 
adult  children,  usually  remind  young  grandchildren  their 
family  duties,  particularly  during  adolescence.  However, 
grandchildren  feel  they  are  committed  to  reciprocate  only 
the affective link they have built with their grandparents. 
“Don’t get me wrong. I love grandma […] but I don’t think 
I  have  to  talk  to  her  everyday.  My  mom  already  does  so, 
and  she  tells  me  how  granny  is  doing  and  gives  her  my 
regards.” Y8, male, 16 years old. 
Most  grandchildren  seem  to  be  ready  to  act  as  helpers,  if 
somebody  asks  them.  Apparently,  they  are  not  proactive 
because the needs of the elderly are not evident for them. In 
this sense, young adults are more conscious of the elderly 
limitations and needs, and therefore they are more prone to 
collaborate in this process than teenagers. 
The  Grandchildren  Can  Facilitate  the  Adoption  of  Digital 
Technology of their Grandparents 
Some  of  the  interviewed  younger  family  members  stated 
that 
their 
grandparents  how  to  adopt  digital  media  tools.  However, 
this process requires the commitment of both parties. 
“Adults  and  older  adults  need  to  be  more  updated  with 
current  technology  trends.  And  we  can  teach  them  what’s 
required.” Y15, male, 17 years old. 
Consequently, all of those older adults who have succeeded 
in this process appear to have received significant support 
from family members, mainly their grandchildren. 
“I’m lucky that my family taught me how to use my mobile 
phone.  Now  I  can  chat  with  my  grandchildren,  and  I  can 
use WhatsApp with my daughter. I’m quite happy that I’m 
part of my family!” OA7, female, 68 years old. 

they  could  assume 

the  role  of 

teaching 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

This  situation  shows  a  possible  way  to  facilitate  the 
technology  adoption  by  the  elderly.  Therefore,  one  of  the 
challenges  is  identifying  how  to  engage  grandchildren  to 
actively take part in this process. 
DISCUSSION 
The study results show that Chilean older adults do not see 
a need to adopt digital technology for interacting with their 
families,  because  they  use  means  already  assimilated  by 
them.  This  interaction  approach  is  time-consuming,  and 
stresses out adult children, who are usually busy with their 
own duties toward their families of procreation. However, 
these people accept and do their best to address their filial 
obligation,  and  usually  succeed,  even  maintaining  regular 
interaction  mechanisms.  Therefore,  most  of  the  elderly 
continue without seeing a need to adopt digital technology 
to  interact  with  other  family  members.  Given  the  natural 
aging  process  of  older  adults,  this  approach  tends  to 
generate a vicious circle (Figure 1). 
2. Older adults do not 
1. The ﬁlial obligation 
see the need to learn 
imposes duties to adult 
children, which are 
addressed using 
technology to interact 
phone calls and face-
to-face interactions

becomes time-
consuming  and 
stressful, but adult 
children accept it and 
usually succeed

how to use digital 
with other family 

3. The caring process 

members

Figure 1. Vicious circle in the interaction with the elderly 

 

Adults  assume  that  their  own  children  will  take  care  of 
them  in  the  future;  therefore,  we  can  expect  that  the  filial 
obligation will continue to be present in Chilean families, at 
least  for  the  next  few  years  (situation  1  in  Figure  1). 
However, it is possible to introduce changes in the way in 
which it is addressed.  
It is quite evident that several collaborative solutions can be 
designed  to  help  adults  deal  with  their  filial  obligation 
(situation 3). They would help reduce the stress on the adult 
children,  but  keep  the  current  status  quo  of  the  caring 
process.  However,  by  facilitating  the  technology  adoption 
by  the  elderly  (situation  2),  we  can  produce  changes  that 
shift  the  caring  approach  toward  a  sustainable  scenario, 
which respects the cultural aspects of Chilean families.  
Helping Adult Children Deal with their Filial Obligation 
Designing  technology  with  this  purpose  can  contribute  to 
reducing  stress  on  the  adult  children  and  tensions  among 
family  members,  as  well  as  create  space  that  allows  adult 
children to support the technology adoption of their parents.  
Given that family members already assume roles to care for 
their elders, follow interaction routines, and coordinate their 
activities,  the  design  of  mobile  technology  with  these 
purposes  can  help  address  their  duties  in  a  less  stressful 
way.  For  instance,  persuasive  systems  can  utilize  positive 
computing strategies [6] (e.g., by promoting empathy, well-
being,  memories,  and  reinforcing  affective 
to 
motivate  people  to  do  things  in  favor  of  older  adults, 
according to the roles they have assumed. Similarly, design 
approaches based on positive principles effectively have the 
potential to promote well-being within the elderly [3]. 

links) 

1409

formulate 

Computer-supported  cooperative  systems  aiming  to  help 
address filial obligation need to ensure some balance in the 
workload  assumed  by  family  members,  as  well  as  keep 
them  engaged  in  this  process.  For  instance,  gamification 
can help reach these goals [18]. This design paradigm can 
particularly  encourage  the  participation  of  younger  family 
members, thus improving family cohesion.  
Several solutions proposed by the CSCW community could 
also be used to address particular activities derived from the 
filial  obligation.  In  this  sense,  the  findings  of  this  study 
contribute  to  determining:  what  kind  of  technology,  with 
what  purpose,  when,  and  who  should  use  it  in  order  to 
address specific needs by respecting the local culture. 
Helping Older Adults Embrace Digital Technology 
According to the study results, Chilean older adults do not 
intend to adopt digital technology because they do not see 
the  need  to  do  it.  However,  in  several  situations  we  can 
motivate the adoption of particular technology. 
In  all  of  the  successful  cases  observed  in  this  study,  we 
identify that technology adoption is motivated by the need 
to address an unsatisfied and important issue for the elderly. 
Furthermore,  some  family  members  are  willing  to  support 
their older adults in the technology adoption process.  
These  observations  allow  us 
two  design 
requirements  that  domestic  technologies  trying  to  connect 
family  members  need  to  accomplish:  (1)  it  should  be 
evident for older adults that the technological solution to be 
adopted will help them address an unsatisfied and important 
need; and (2) these solutions must also be embraced by the 
other  family  members  surrounding  the  elderly,  who  must 
facilitate  the  technology  adoption.  Considering  the  current 
literature,  a  third  requirement  emerges:  (3)  the  technology 
to be adopted should be understandable and usable for the 
elderly. These three requirements seem to be mandatory to 
facilitate the technology appropriation of the Chilean older 
adults.  Therefore,  they  should  be  considered  in  the  design 
of the product and in its adoption process.  
Regarding the first requirement, the study identifies various 
unsatisfied  needs  that  are  important  for  Chilean  older 
adults;  e.g.,  to  increase  the  interaction  frequency  with  the 
grandchildren. Considering this need we can conceive, for 
instance, computer-supported collaborative games for kids, 
which  require 
the  participation  of  grandparents  for 
achieving 
recognizing 
differences  among  the  participants,  the  gameplay  could 
promote the interaction among them and provide awareness 
about the activities of the elderly. This will allow the kids 
identify situations where the elderly actually need external 
support (requirement 2). Thus, the supporting process to the 
elderly  is  embedded  in  the  gameplay,  and  the  kids  are  in 
charge  of  providing  it.  Moreover,  the  mechanics  of  these 
games are usually not complex and are based in simple user 
interfaces,  which  fit  well  for  the  elderly  that  are  learning 
how to use technology (requirement 3).  

the  goal  of  such  game.  By 

The  study  also  shows  various  other  unsatisfied  needs  that 
open  interesting  opportunities  to  motivate  this  technology 
adoption, and current literature reports novel approaches to 
design these solutions. For instance, augmenting habituated 
objects, as suggested by Brereton et al. [5], could be useful 
to increase the interactions around common routines among 
the elderly and the rest of the family. However, considering 
the participation of family members during product design 
(as  facilitators  of  technology  adoption)  represents  a  major 
concern for designers. The willingness of the grandchildren 
to support this adoption process eases the accomplishment 
of the requirement 2.   
Although  the  stated  requirements  for  adopting  technology 
could also be present in individualistic cultures, older adults 
in  such  societies  can  probably  adopt  technology  only  if 
requirements 1 and 3 are satisfied, due to the prevalence of 
autonomy  and  individual  initiative  [15].  However,  in  the 
case  of  Chilean  older  adults,  all  of  them  seem  to  be 
mandatory.  Therefore,  technology  designed  for  Anglo-
American  older  adults  could  be  extended  to  accomplish 
with requirement 2, and thus fit with the needs of Chilean 
older  adults.  Moreover,  it  is  not  clear  that  the  unsatisfied 
needs considered as important in individualistic cultures are 
the  same  than  those  in  collectivistic  societies.  Therefore, 
design approaches need to comply with the cultural nuances 
in  the  way  they  intend  to  accomplish  with  the  stated 
requirements.  
Study Limitations 
This  study  is  particularly  bound  to  a  specific  geographic 
and  socio-cultural  environment.  Therefore,  we  cannot 
ensure  that  the  obtained  results  can  be  largely  generalized 
to other populations or groups. However, we still consider 
our results to be useful when they are applied to designing 
cross-cultural  mechanisms  for  family  communication,  by 
highlighting 
the  media  preferences,  social  practices, 
attitudes, agreements, and expectations of family members. 
CONCLUSION 
This  paper  presents  a  cross-generational  interview  study 
that  highlights  the  attitudes,  agreements,  and  expectations 
around  social  interaction  of  Chilean  family  members, 
particularly when interacting with the elderly. The approach 
used  by  adult  children  for  taking  care  of  their  parents 
generates  a  vicious  circle  that  stresses  out  the  former  and 
limits  the  technology  adoption  of  the  latter.  Therefore,  a 
change  in  the  interaction  paradigm  with  the  elderly  seems 
to  be  required,  and  promoting  the  technology  adoption  by 
the elderly can contribute to such a change.  
Although  the  article  identifies  opportunities  to  adopt 
technology  that  helps  adult  children  address  the  caring 
process  in  a  more  comfortable  and  sustainable  way, 
changing the interaction paradigm requires that the Chilean 
elderly embrace digital technology. In this sense, the article 
proposes three requirements that any technological solution 
should consider, in order to have a chance of being adopted 
by  the  Chilean  elderly.  This  illustrates  that  technology 

1410

SESSION: PARENTS AND CHILDREN

to 

like 

adoption for intra-family communication in a collectivistic 
culture seems to be different than in an individualistic one. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We  would 
thank  Jonathan  Grudin  for  his 
encouragement and valuable feedback on earlier versions of 
this  paper.  This  work  has  been  partially  supported  by  the 
Fondecyt  Project  (Chile),  grant:  1150252.  The  work  of 
Francisco  J.  Gutierrez  has  been  supported  by  the  Ph.D. 
Scholarship  Program  of  Conicyt  Chile 
(CONICYT-
PCHA/Doctorado Nacional/2013-21130075). 
REFERENCES 
1.  Regina Akel. 2004. Chile. In Teen Life in Latin 

America and the Caribbean (Teen Life Around the 
World), Cynthia Tompkins and Kristen Sternberg 
(eds.). Greenwood Press, Westport, CT, USA, 57-76. 

2.  Carmen Barros, M. Beatriz Fernández, and María 

Soledad Herrera. 2014. Notions that people over 45 
years old have about family and the internal 
interactions between family members [in Spanish]. 
Psicoperspectivas, 13, 1, 121-130. 

3.  Mark Blythe, Jamie Steane, Jenny Roe, and Caroline 
Oliver. 2015. Solutionism, the game: design fictions 
for positive aging. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI’15), 3849-3858. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702491 

4.  danah boyd. 2014. It’s complicated: the social lives of 
networked teens. Yale University Press, New Haven, 
USA. 

5.  Margot Brereton, Alessandro Soro, Kate Vaisutis, and 

Paul Roe. 2015. The messaging kettle: prototyping 
connection over a distance between adult children and 
older parents. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI’15), 713-716. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702462 

6.  Rafael A. Calvo and Dorian Peters. 2014. Positive 
Computing: Technology for Wellbeing and Human 
Potential. MIT Press, Cambridge, USA. 

7.  Raymundo Cornejo, Mónica Tentori, and Jesús Favela. 

2013. Ambient awareness to strengthen the family 
social network of older adults. Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work 22, 2-3 (April 2013), 309-344. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10606-012-9166-2 

8.  Anna Dickinson and Robin L. Hill. 2007. Keeping in 

touch: talking to older people about computers and 
communication. Educational Gerontology 33, 8, 613-
630. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/03601270701363877 

9.  Melanie M. Domenech Rodríguez, Melissa R. 

Donovic, and Susan L. Crowley. 2009. Parenting styles 
in a cultural context: observations of “protective 
parenting” in first-generation Latinos. Family Process 
48, 2, 195-210. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

10.  Celia Jaes Falicov. 2013. Latino Families in Therapy 

(2nd. ed.). Guilford Press, New York, USA. 

11.  Azadeh Forghani and Carman Neustaedter. The 

routines and needs of grandparents and parents for 
grandparent-grandchild conversations over distance. In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’14), 4177-4186. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557255 

12.  María Soledad Herrera. 2007. Social Individualization 

and Demographic Changes: Toward a Second 
Demographic Transition? [Individualización Social y 
Cambios Demográficos: ¿Hacia Una Segunda 
Transición Demográfica?, in Spanish]. CIS, Madrid, 
Spain.  

13.  Internet World Stats. 2014. Latin American Internet 

and Population Statistics. Retrieved May 1, 2015 from 
http://internetworldstats.com/stats10.htm 

14.  Tracy L. M. Kennedy and Barry Wellman. 2007. The 
networked household. Information, Communication & 
Society 10, 5, 645-670. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13691180701658012 

15.  Uichol Kim. 1994. Individualism and collectivism: 

conceptual clarification and elaboration. In 
Individualism and Collectivism: Theory, Method, and 
Applications, Uichol Kim, Harry C. Triandis, Cigdem 
Kagitcibasi, Sang-Chin Choi, and Gene Yoon (eds.). 
Sage Publications, Thousands Oaks, CA, USA, 1-18. 
16.  Siân E. Lindley, Richard Harper, and Abigail Sellen. 
2008. Designing for elders: exploring the complexity 
of relationships in later life. In Proceedings of the BCS 
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction (HCI'08), 
77-86. 

17.  Hazel Rose Markus and Shinobu Kitayama. 1991. 

Culture and the self: implications for cognition, 
emotion, and motivation. Psychological Review. 98, 2, 
224-253. 

18.  Jane McGonigal. 2011. Reality is Broken: Why Games 
Make Us Better and How They Can Change the World. 
The Penguin Press, New York, USA. 

19.  Ministry of Social Development, Chile. 2012. Seventh 
National Study on Youth [Séptima Encuesta Nacional 
de Juventud, in Spanish]. 

20.  Ministry of Social Development, Chile. 2013. Chile 
and its Older Adults: Third National Study on Life of 
Quality in the Old Age [Chile y sus Mayores: 
Resultados de la Tercera Encuesta Nacional de 
Calidad de Vida en la Vejez, in Spanish]. 

21.  Ministry of Social Development, Chile. 2013. Social 

Inclusion and Exclusion of the Elderly in Chile 
[Inclusión y Exclusión de las Personas Mayores en 
Chile, in Spanish]. 

 

22.  National Alliance for Caregiving and AARP. 2015. 

Caregiving in the U.S. – 2015 Report. Retrieved July 
19, 2015 from http://www.aarp.org/ppi/info-
2015/caregiving-in-the-united-states-2015.html 

23.  National Statistics Institute, Chile. 2012. Preliminary 
Results of the 2012 Census of Population and Housing 
[in Spanish]. 

24.  Tobias Nef, Raluca L. Ganea, René M. Müri, and Urs 
P. Mosimann. 2013. Social networking sites and older 
users - a systematic review. International 
Psychogeriatrics. 25, 7, 1041-1053. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S1041610213000355 

25.  OECD. 2015. Average annual hours actually worked 

per worker. Retrieved May 5, 2015 from 
http://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=ANHRS 

26.  Andra Siibak and Virge Tamme. 2013. 'Who 

introduced Granny to Facebook?': an exploration of 
everyday family interactions in web-based 
communication environments. Northern Lights: Film 
& Media Studies Yearbook 11, 1 (June 2013), 71-89. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1386/nl.11.1.71_1 

27.  Hilary Smith, Yvonne Rogers, and Mark Brady. 2003. 

Managing one’s social network: does age make a 
difference? In Proceedings of the IFIP TC13 
International Conference on Human-Computer 
Interaction (INTERACT’03), 551-558. 

28.  Maria C. Stuifbergen, Johannes J. M. Van Delden, and 

Pearl A. Dykstra. 2008. The implications of today's 
family structures for support giving to older parents. 
Ageing & Society 28, 3 (April 2008), 413-434. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0144686X07006666 
29.  Maria C. Stuifbergen, Pearl A. Dykstra, Katja N. 
Lanting, and Johannes J. M. Van Delden. 2010. 
Autonomy in an ascribed relationship: the case of adult 
children and elderly parents. Journal of Aging Studies, 
24, 4 (December 2010), 257-265. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jaging.2010.05.006 

30.  Juana Suárez. 2004. Colombia. In Teen Life in Latin 

America and the Caribbean (Teen Life Around the 
World), Cynthia Tompkins and Kristen Sternberg 
(eds.). Greenwood Press, Westport, CT, USA, 77-98. 

31.  Kimberly Tee, A. J. Bernheim Brush, and Kori M. 

Inkpen. 2009. Exploring communication and sharing 
between extended families. International Journal of 
Human-Computer Studies 67, 128-138. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2008.09.007 

32.  Jenny Waycott, Frank Vetere, Sonja Pedell, Lars Kulik, 

Elizabeth Ozanne, Alan Gruner, and John Downs. 
2013. Older adults as digital content producers. In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI'13), 39-48. 
http://dx/doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2470662 

1411

