CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

First-Generation Students and College: The Role of 

Facebook Networks as Information Sources 

Grace YoungJoo Jeon, Nicole B. Ellison 

University of Michigan 
School of Information  

105 S. State St  

Ann Arbor, MI 48109  

[yjeon, enicole]@umich.edu 

to 

that 

reveals 

information-seeking  channels  due 

ABSTRACT 
Social network site (SNS) platforms have the potential to be 
effective 
their 
technical  and  social  affordances,  such  as  the  ability  to 
broadcast  content  to  a  large  group  and  to  aggregate  one’s 
contacts. This study tests the impact of a Facebook app that 
allows users to visualize their network of Facebook Friends 
to  see  how  it  influences  who  adolescents  identify  as  good 
sources  of  information  about  college.  Comparing  Friends 
selected by 24 high school seniors before and after viewing 
Facebook  network  visualizations 
first-
generation  students  were  more  likely  to  select  higher 
quality information sources among their Facebook Friends 
after exposure to the visualization. Our results suggest that 
social  media  can  help  users 
identify  good  human 
information  sources  by  making  hidden  resources  in  one’s 
network more visible.  
Author Keywords 
Social  media;  Facebook;  social  network  sites;  college 
access;  first-generation; 
information  seeking;  network 
visualization.  
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous. 
INTRODUCTION 
The  rapid  growth  of  social  media  tools  has  shaped 
communication patterns, including information-sharing and 
information-seeking  practices.  In  recent  years,  there  has 
been  an  increasing  number  of  studies  on  social  media 
question  asking,  investigating  how  and  why  people  use 
various  social  media  platforms  such  as  Facebook  and 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  the  author(s)  must  be 
honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or 
republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific  permission 
from 
Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
Copyright  is  held  by  the  owner/author(s).  Publication  rights  licensed  to 
ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820074. 

fee.  Request  permissions 

and/or 

a 

887

Bernie Hogan  

University of Oxford 

Oxford Internet Institute 

1 St Giles'  

Oxford OX1 3JS 

Christine Greenhow 

Michigan State University 

College of Education 

620 Farm Lane 

East Lansing, MI 48824 

greenhow@msu.edu 

bernie.hogan@oii.ox.ac.uk 

 

in  young  people’s 

Twitter to access information [1, 23, 28, 38, 42].   
Much of the research on question asking in social media has 
dealt with adult populations [e.g., 28, 38, 42]. By contrast, 
very few studies have focused explicitly on question asking 
among  adolescents,  despite  their  typically  heavy  use  of 
social  media.  Although  some  studies  have  looked  at  how 
youth  use  social  media  in  their  everyday  information 
seeking  [20],  relatively  little  is  known  about  the  role  of 
social  media 
information-seeking 
processes. In particular, given that youth have a tendency to 
turn  to  others  to  address  their  information  needs  [36], 
investigating  how  they  use  social  media  to  reach  out  to 
other  people  in  the  process  of  information  seeking  is  an 
important extension of this literature.  
Research has consistently identified needs related to future 
plans (including education or careers) as some of the most 
important 
information  needs  of  adolescents  [3,  31]. 
Looking  for  information  about  college  is  a  particularly 
important  example  of  these  future-related  information 
needs,  because  whether  one  pursues  post-secondary 
education  or  not  has  a  large  impact  on  one’s  future 
economic well-being [44]. Moreover, finding and assessing 
college  information  is  a  challenging  information  task, 
because  students  must  consider  a  wide  range  of  complex 
factors, ranging from college majors to specific courses to 
financial aid [26].  
Those  who are likely to have  fewer resources  within  their 
immediate  network  tend  to  be  at  a  disadvantage  in  the 
college application and selection process [17]. For instance, 
first-generation  students  (those  without  a  parent  who  has 
graduated  college)  are  less  likely  to  be  able  to  access 
college-related information from their parents. Recent work 
suggests that social media can serve as a useful tool that can 
help people more easily access resources buried within their 
social networks, especially in the context of college access 
[10,  24,  46].  Given  the  importance  of  accessing  post-
secondary  education  in  today’s  economic  climate  and  the 
difficulties  associated  with  college-related 
information 
seeking, especially in the case of first-generation students, it 
is  important  to  understand  how  social  media  interaction 
opportunities  influence  adolescents’  strategies  for  locating 
and  accessing  social  ties  that  might  serve  as  sources  of 
college information.   

“College Connect” is a Facebook application created by the 
authors  which  provides  users  with  a  visualization  of  their 
Facebook  network.  The  app  highlights  friendship  clusters 
(which are color-coded) and whether or not each Facebook 
Friend has college or university  information listed in their 
Facebook profile (in the “college” field). (Following Ellison 
and boyd [12], we capitalize Friends when we are referring 
to the connections on Facebook in order to distinguish them 
from the colloquial reference to friendship.) It also provides 
a  pre-populated  set  of  commonly  asked  and  important 
questions  about  college  and  enables  users  to  easily  send 
these questions to selected ties using Facebook’s Messenger 
feature.  Previous  research  suggests  that  the  affordances  of 
Facebook, such as the ability to broadcast updates and the 
visibility  of  one’s  contacts,  enable  people  to  use  this 
platform for information needs as well as social interaction 
[13]. The guiding motivation for this study was to examine 
how  the  visualization  affordances  offered  by  College 
Connect  might  shift  adolescents’  college  information-
seeking practices by  highlighting the availability of  useful 
sources  of  college  information  –  some  of  whom  may  be 
weak  ties  hidden  by  the  News  Feed  algorithm.  The 
literature  suggests  that  social  network  sites  (SNSs)  like 
Facebook  might  enable  users  to  access  resources  held  by 
their weak ties, but we also know that contents from one’s 
weakest  ties  are  often  hidden  by  display  algorithms  or 
overlooked  by  users.  In  fact,  there  may  be  more  value  in 
social  media  networks 
is  currently  offered  by 
customized  and  personalized  interfaces  which  seek  to 
minimize  distracting  content  and  target  attention  to  close 
ties. When only 16% of Friends see a new post, on average, 
it  is  clear  that  information  exchanges  on  social  media  are 
also  being  shaped  by  filtering  processes  at  the  platform 
level [4]. Does having a comprehensive overview of one’s 
network change this?  
In the following section, we situate our study in the related 
work  on  question  asking  in  SNSs,  selection  of  human 
information 
college 
information seeking before turning to methods and findings. 
Discussion and conclusions follow. 
RELATED WORK 
SNSs as a Venue for Information Seeking  
A number of factors appear to facilitate the use of SNSs for 
information  seeking.  The  first  is  their  widespread  use, 
which means the largest sites like Facebook can be used to 
connect  to  ties  from  different  contexts  (such  as  school, 
hobbies,  family,  and  work  or  profession-related  contexts). 
Individuals have large social networks that appear to still be 
increasing  in  size  as  more  people  join  SNSs  [11].  The 
second  is  the  capacity  of  SNSs  to  be  repurposed  by  third 
parties  through  application  programming  interface  (APIs). 
For  example,  the  site  Quora  uses  Facebook  Connect  for 
user  logins,  explicitly  linking  itself  to  Facebook  as  an 
information  resource.  Consequently,  an  increasing  number 
of studies have examined how people use various SNSs to 

and  young  people’s 

sources, 

than 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

to 

to  find  answers 

list.  Typically  SNSs  allow  users 

ask  questions  of  their  friends  in  the  process  of  seeking 
information in various contexts [7, 23, 28, 37, 38, 42]. 
Research on question asking in SNSs has identified a wide 
range  of  benefits  including  high-quality  answers  [38,  39], 
social awareness and fun [38], and cognitive benefits  with 
regard  to  processing  and  managing  information  [18,  38]; 
these  are  all  factors  that  motivate  people  to  turn  to  their 
social  networks 
their  questions. 
Moreover, researchers  examining question asking in SNSs 
within  the  framework  of  social  capital  have  found  other 
relational  benefits  to  answering  questions  from  friends, 
including  signaling  attention  to  specific  ties  and  social 
grooming [14, 16].   
Prior work has shown that one’s motivation to use SNSs to 
seek  help  appears  to  be  influenced  by  individual  factors 
such as one’s activities on the site and perceptions of SNS 
norms. For instance, Lampe et al. [29] identified factors that 
contribute  to  a  propensity  for  information  seeking  on 
Facebook,  including  perceiving  the  site  as  appropriate  for 
non-social purposes, greater time spent on site, and a higher 
number of Friends.  
The use of SNSs for information seeking  is not surprising 
considering  the  affordances  these  sites  offer.  One  key 
affordance of most SNSs is the ability to see a contacts or 
friends 
to  post  a 
broadcasted message that is distributed to these contacts via 
a  “social  awareness  stream”  [40;  see  also  12,  15].  On 
Twitter,  this  would  be  through  tweeting,  on  LinkedIn,  by 
posting to one’s feed, and on Facebook, via a status update. 
However, not all contacts attend to this content equally. On 
Facebook,  for  instance,  an  information  request  might  be 
viewed by a few close contacts but missed  by weaker ties 
due to Facebook’s EdgeRank-based News Feed. Those who 
happen to be reading only at the right time of the day would 
see the request on Twitter.  
SNSs are also  used as a collection of contacts that can be 
messaged  directly.  Affordances,  such  as  the  News  Feed, 
remind  people  who  is  active  on  the  site  but  do  not 
necessarily signal to users which contacts are most relevant 
for  a  direct  query  about  a  specific  topic  (e.g.,  college 
applications).  Other  affordances  for  viewing  friends  may 
include  an  address  book,  useful  for  contacting  a  specific 
person,  or  a  list  of  most  recently  contacted  friends,  useful 
for reaching regularly-messaged ties. However, in the case 
of  specific  information-seeking  requests,  the  person  with 
the best information (i.e., which university is the best fit for 
one’s intended course of study) might not be easily recalled 
by  the  user,  via  either  name  or  recent  interaction.  In  this 
case, it is worth considering the value of other affordances 
for viewing contacts. Creating other pathways for accessing 
these data are often possible through the use of APIs, which 
is  what  College  Connect  seeks  to  do:  with  programmatic 
access to Facebook data, it is possible to create applications 
or ‘social media apps,’ such as the one used in this study, to 

888

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

represent these data in different (and perhaps more useful) 
ways.  
In this study, we seek to explore the use of a sociogram for 
information-seeking  practices.  An  interactive  sociogram 
affords a number of novel views, such as seeing friends-of-
friends  in  context,  highlighting  which  friends  might  have 
relevant  knowledge,  clustering  friendships  in  meaningful 
groupings  spatially,  and  denoting  quasi-social  groups 
through automatic “community detection” methods.  
Selection of People as an Information Source  
Researchers  in  the  field  of  information  science  and 
organizational  science  have  investigated  how  individuals 
select  specific  people  to  serve  as  a  source  of  information. 
Most  of  these  papers  have  considered  organizational 
contexts,  examining 
information-seeking  practices  of 
knowledge  workers  from  either  the  “expert-finding”  or 
“knowledge-sharing” perspective. This line of research has 
consistently shown that two main characteristics of sources 
– accessibility and quality – affect people’s decision about 
source selection [25, 47].  
Accessibility  refers  to  the  cost  in  terms  of  time  and  effort 
associated  with  gaining  access  to  the  physical  carrier  of 
information and the information in it [35], while quality is 
commonly  described  as  the  value  or  benefits  of  the 
information in a particular source [19]. With regard to the 
relative  importance  between  accessibility  and  quality, 
historically  researchers  have  found  either  accessibility  or 
quality  is  dominant,  depending  on  contextual  factors  such 
as information need and task importance [2, 33].  
Although most work on source selection  has been done in 
organizational settings, given that adolescents tend to prefer 
other people as their information source over other sources 
like  media  [30,  31,  36],  researchers  have  examined  the 
factors  that  influence  teens’  decisions  regarding  who  they 
turn  to  for  information.  Findings  from  these  studies  on 
youths’  human  source  selection  processes  are  in  line  with 
findings from work done in organizational settings, in that 
adolescents  also  consider  accessibility  and  quality  as 
important  when  selecting  human  information  sources.  For 
example,  Shenton  and  Dixon  [43]  found  that  youngsters 
consulted  people  who  are  readily  accessible,  who  share 
similar needs, and who possess knowledge in relation to the 
subject of the need. Similarly, Julien [27] found that when 
adolescents look for information to make career decisions, 
they rely  heavily on the people  whom they trust to advise 
and 
their  families, 
guidance counselors, and people perceived to have pertinent 
personal experience and expertise. 
College Information Seeking by Young People  
College  access  is  an  important  public  concern  today 
because  it  has  significant  ramifications  for  the  economic 
and  general  well-being  of  thousands  of  young  people. 

their  decisions, 

including 

inform 

889

According  to  the  U.S.  Department  of  Education  [45],  the 
more  educated  you  are,  the  less  likely  it  is  that  you  are 
unemployed and the higher your weekly salary is likely to 
be.  People  who  have  a  post-secondary  education  also  are 
more  civically  engaged  and  have  better  health  than  those 
who do not. Similarly, a recent Pew Research Center report 
on  higher  education  [44]  has  shown  that  Millennials  ages 
25  to  32  without  a  college  degree  are  more  likely  to  earn 
less,  to  be  in  poverty,  and  to  be  unemployed  than  their 
college-educated peers.  
Much of the  work on college-focused information seeking 
has  been  conducted  in  the  field  of  education  where  this 
issue has been explored through the lens of college access 
issues. Research has found that students tend to use families 
and  school  counselors  as  the  main  sources  of  college 
information  during  the  process  of  college  information 
search  [8,  34].  In  addition  to  human  information  sources, 
according to the National Research Center for College and 
University  Admissions,  82%  of 
students  obtained 
information about college from institutional websites [41].   
Gathering  college  information  in  the  process  of  college-
going is a particularly challenging information task because 
students need to consider a wide range of factors including 
the  major of study, courses,  career opportunities,  financial 
aid, 
location,  and  safety  [26].  In  particular,  many 
researchers have found that first-generation students tend to 
be at a disadvantage in the process of college  information 
seeking because their parents are unlikely to provide them 
with  relevant  information  [e.g.,  17]  and  schools  they  are 
attending  often  lack  quality  counseling  programs  [e.g.,  9]. 
This lack of access to resources ultimately results in lower 
rates  of  getting  accepted  to  college  and  low  college 
enrollment  among  first-generation  students  compared  to 
those who are not first-generation students, exacerbating the 
college access gap.   
With  regard  to  young  people’s  information  seeking,  many 
researchers  have  also  investigated  how  adolescents  select 
information  sources  to  satisfy  their  information  needs. 
Common  themes  found  across  these  studies  were  that 
adolescents tend to use multiple sources to find information 
they need and often show a preference for turning to other 
people,  including  peers,  teachers,  and  parents  to  seek 
information  [30,  36].  When  selecting  sources  relevant  to 
their 
to  have 
preference towards strong ties such as friends and family.  
With regard to the relationship between information quality 
and tie strength, the literature suggests that weak ties tend 
to be better sources of novel information [e.g., 22, 23]. This 
is  due 
that 
individuals typically have more weak than strong ties (even 
if  most  time is spent  with  strong ties), tendencies towards 
homophily, and fewer shared experiences and social ties.  

information  needs,  adolescents  appear 

to  multiple  reasons, 

including 

the  fact 

social  media 

A  few  studies have looked at how  youth use  social  media 
platforms  to  seek  information  in  general  [20]  and  to  seek 
health-related information in particular [6]. However, as far 
as  we  know,  no  studies  specifically  examine  the  role  of 
social  media  in  relation  to  college  information  seeking 
among adolescents, despite this population’s active usage of 
social media [32]. 
This work extends prior work on question asking in social 
media  by  exploring  how 
influence 
adolescents’ information practices with respect to selection 
of people as an information source. Specifically, we seek to 
understand  how  additional  (primarily  visual)  affordances, 
offered by a Facebook app, influence adolescents’ selection 
of their Facebook Friends as a source of information about 
college. In doing so, we specifically focus on the context of 
college information seeking where people such as families 
and  school  counselors  have  been  found  to  serve  as  main 
sources of information. 
The research questions addressed by this study are:  
RQ1:  How  do  adolescents  use  social  media  to  seek 
information about college? 
RQ2:  How  do  adolescents  decide  whom  to  approach  for 
college information among their Facebook Friends? 
RQ3:  How  does  seeing  network  members  as  a  network 
influence  adolescents’  selection  of  college  information 
sources among their Facebook Friends? 
METHODS 
Description of College Connect 
College  Connect  is  a  web-based  Facebook  application 
designed to help students identify useful resources in their 
Facebook  network  and  ask  them  questions  about  college. 
The  app  visualizes  a  user’s  Facebook  personal  network, 
meaning  the  set  of  a  user’s  Friends  as  well  as  the 
friendships between these Friends (See Figure 1). We draw 
upon  conventions  in  social  network  analysis  to  represent 
this network. A user is a ‘node’ represented by a circle. A 
Friend is an ‘edge’ represented as a line between two nodes. 
The placement of the nodes is automatically determined by 
a network layout algorithm [21]. The coloring of the nodes 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Figure 2. Example of a highlighted friendship network. 

is  automatically  determined  by  a  community  detection 
algorithm, such that likely  members of a particular cluster 
have the same-colored nodes [5]. 
The friendships between network members are highlighted 
or greyed out when the user is interacting with the network 
by hovering a mouse or clicking on a node (See Figure 2). 
If the Friend has a college or university listed in his or her 
profile, the dot is solid-colored; Friends  who don’t  have a 
college or university listed in their profiles are represented 
as  an  empty  dot.  Users  can  interact  with  their  network 
visualization  (e.g.,  by  zooming  in  or  clicking  on  specific 
nodes  to  see  Friends  in  common)  and  search  for  specific 
Friends or colleges/universities. Moreover, the app includes 
a  list  of  suggested  questions  (See  Figure  3)  and  enables 
users  to  send  questions  to  people  in  their  network  via 
Facebook private messaging (See Figure 4). The suggested 
questions  address  common  college-related  information 
needs. 
The app connects to the Facebook Graph API (version 1.0) 
in  order  to  access  a  list  of  a  user’s  Friends  and  the 
connections between these Friends. In order to use the API, 
the application  must be granted explicit permission by the 
user to view Friends and Friend data. The ability for third 
parties to access this data is no longer available as of Graph 
2.0. Nevertheless, this work demonstrates what can be done 
with  social  network  data,  not  exclusively  with  Facebook 
data in their current state.   
Participants 
We  recruited  12th  grade  students  from  two  high  schools, 
one in Minnesota and one in Michigan. We chose these two 

Figure 1. Example of the College Connect network 

visualization. 

Figure 3. Example of a list of suggested questions. 

 

890

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

about  participants’  Facebook  use  and  their  assessment  of 
Facebook as an information source.  
During  the  face-to-face  interview,  participants  were  first 
asked  questions  about  college  information  seeking  in 
general  and  question  asking  within  the  Facebook  setting. 
After  the  brief  walk-through  of  the  College  Connect 
application, participants were given time to engage with the 
app, exploring the visualization of their Facebook network 
on  their  own.  They  were  asked  to  narrate  their  thoughts 
aloud  as  they  did  so.  After  spending  some  time  with  the 
app, we asked them again to nominate up to six Facebook 
Friends they would approach with questions about college. 
Ratings  on  the  six  dimensions  were  collected  for  any 
newly-named Friends not rated on the initial online survey. 
Finally,  participants  were  asked  about  their  perceptions  of 
their Facebook Friends as a source of college information. 
The interview concluded with questions about participants’ 
reactions  to  College  Connect’s  features  and  functionality. 
Participants’  on-screen  activities  during  the  interview 
session were recorded using a screen capture software and 
interviews  were  recorded,  transcribed,  and  imported  into 
NVivo for analysis. Two interviews were not recorded due 
to  technical  problems;  our  qualitative  analysis  is  based  on 
the responses of 22 participants. Interviews lasted between 
44 and 74 minutes, averaging 57 minutes.  
Sample Demographics 
Twenty-four 12th grade students, 12 from a high school in 
Minnesota  and  12  from  a  high  school  in  Michigan, 
participated.  Out  of  24  study  participants,  14  (58%)  were 
males  and  10  (42%)  were  females.  Participants  from 
Minnesota and Michigan differed slightly:  the majority of 
the sample from Minnesota was Asian (83%), while Whites 
accounted  for  58%  of  the  sample  from  Michigan.  83%  of 
the  sample  from  Minnesota  identified  themselves  as  first-
generation,  while  25%  of  the  sample  from  Michigan  self-
reported  as  first-generation  (defined  as  neither  parent 
graduated  from  college).  In  addition,  all  participants  from 
the school in Minnesota qualified for free or reduced lunch 
at school, whereas 17% of the sample from Michigan did. 
All participants from both research sites reported that they 
planned to attend college after high school. However, there 
were differences in terms of type of school they planned to 
attend. The majority of participants from Minnesota (83%) 
reported  that  they  planned  to  attend  four-year  college  or 
university  full  time,  while  58%  of  participants  from 
Michigan reported that they planned to do so; 34% reported 
they planned to attend a two-year community college. 
In  terms  of  frequency  of  Facebook  use,  33%  of  all 
participants reported that they visited the site once or twice 
a day, 25% of participants reported that they visited the site 
1-6  times  a  week,  and  38%  of  participants  reported  that 
they  visit  the  site  1-3  times  a  month.  One  participant 
reported  visiting  the  site  less  than  once  a  month;  this 
participant’s  data  were  not  included  in  our  quantitative 
analyses.  On  average,  participants  reported  473  Facebook 

 

Figure 4. Example of sending a question.  

schools  because  they  both  showed  high  interest  in  college 
access  issues  and  indicated  their  support  for  our  data 
collection  effort,  while  differing  on  important  student 
population  characteristics  (namely,  ethnic  diversity  and 
proportion  of  first-generation  students).  Students  in  the 
Minnesota  high  school  were  participating  in  the  College 
Possible program, an afterschool program designed to help 
promising  low-income  students  become  college  graduates. 
Students  in  Michigan  were  from  a  public  magnet  school 
which prides itself on its academic college preparation. To 
participate, students needed to meet three criteria: (1) be a 
high school senior, (2) have had a Facebook account for at 
least  one  year,  and  (3)  log  into  Facebook  at  least  twice  a 
week.  Information  forms  were  distributed  to  parents  of 
potential  participants  by  a  contact  person  at  each  school. 
Only students who had their parents’ consent were allowed 
to participate.  
Participants  were  given  a  link  to  an  online  survey,  to  be 
completed  before  their  interview,  by  their  contact  at  the 
school  and  were  contacted  by  a  researcher  to  schedule  an 
interview. After completing the survey, they were directed 
to the College Connect app, which downloaded data about 
their  Facebook  Friends  network.  After  they  completed  the 
online  survey  and  network  download,  a  face-to-face 
interview  took  place  during  school  hours  on  the  school 
campus. All interviews took place within seven days of the 
network  download,  but  were  typically  conducted  the  next 
day. All participants received a $30 Amazon.com gift card 
for their participation. 
Procedure 
The online survey asked participants to nominate up to six 
people they would turn to for college information (“Imagine 
you  have  a  question  about  what  colleges  to  apply  to.  Of 
your  Facebook  Friends,  who  would  you  ask 
this 
question?”).  For  each  person  they  nominated,  participants 
were asked to report how many years they knew the person 
and  to  rate  the  person  on  six  dimensions:  availability, 
comfort,  closeness,  understandability,  expertise,  and 
reliability  on  a  scale  of  1-5  (1  =  strongly  disagree,  5  = 
strongly  agree).  The  online  survey  also  included  items 
about  participants’  demographic 
information  such  as 
gender, race, parents’ education level, and their plans after 
high  school.  Finally,  the  instrument  included  questions 

891

Friends with a median of 454, while data we obtained from 
their network download showed participants had an average 
of  597  Friends  with  a  median  of  456.  When  asked  how 
often  they  asked  a  question  using  status  updates  on 
Facebook, 61% of participants reported that they never used 
status updates to ask a question on Facebook, although 52% 
of  participants  reported  that  they  asked  questions  using 
private messages 1-2 times a week. 
Measures 
The online survey included the following measures: 
Facebook as an information source 
Social Media Information Mobilization (α = 0.78, M = 3.36, 
SD = 0.78), a 3-item scale introduced in Wohn et al. [46], 
captures  the  perceptions  of  participants  regarding  the 
usefulness  of  social  media  in  getting  college  information. 
Sample  items  include:  “I  learn  about  college  from  my 
friends on Facebook and/or other social media sites” and “I 
get  information  about  college  on  Facebook  and/or  other 
social media sites.” 
Facebook Friend College Resource (α = 0.82, M = 4.17, SD 
=  0.78),  a  4-item  scale  used  in  Wohn  et  al.  [46],  gauges 
participants’  beliefs  about  whether  they  could  obtain 
information  or  advice  about  college  from  their  Facebook 
Friends,  specifically  Friends  who  have  attended  or  are 
attending  college.  Sample  items  include:  “I  am  “Friends” 
with  someone  on  Facebook  who  graduated  college  and 
faced  the  same  kind  of  challenges  I  face”  and  “I  am 
“Friends”  with  someone  on  Facebook  that  could  answer 
questions about college.”  
See Table 1 for summary statistics for the scales. 
Characteristics of human information sources 
Six  dimensions  of  source  characteristics  of  each  Friend 
nominated by a participant were measured using one Likert-
scale item for each dimension, rated on a scale of 1-5 (1 = 
strongly  disagree,  5  =  strongly  agree).  These  dimensions, 
derived from previous literature, include aspects related to 
source  accessibility  (availability,  comfort,  and  closeness) 
and  source  quality  (understandability,  expertise,  and 
reliability).  The  items  were  worded  as  follows:  “This 
person  is  always  available  to  me”  (availability),  “I  feel 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

comfortable  asking  this  person  a  question”  (comfort),  “I 
think this person and I are close” (closeness), “I think this 
person  will  provide  an  answer  that  is  easy  to  understand” 
(understandability),  “I think this person knows a  lot about 
college”  (expertise),  and  “I  think  I  will  be  able  to  get  a 
reliable answer from this person” (reliability).      
The ratings data collected in the interview were entered into 
an Excel spreadsheet, merged with the downloaded survey 
data, and then imported into Stata for quantitative analysis.  
FINDINGS 
Looking for College Information Using Social Media  
Our  first  research  question  asked  about  students’  college 
information  seeking  practices  using  social  media.  In  the 
survey,  two  measures  (i.e.,  Social  Media  Information 
Mobilization  and  Facebook  Friend  College  Resource) 
captured  participants’  perceptions  of  Facebook  as  an 
information  source.  In  general,  participants  moderately 
agreed  that  social  media  were  useful  in  getting  college 
information  (M=3.36,  SD=0.78)  and  reported  greater 
perceived  utility  of  Facebook  Friends  as  resources  for 
information or advice about college (M=4.17, SD=0.78). 
While  most  participants  responded  that  they  obtained 
college  information  through  word  of  mouth  when  asked 
where  they  obtained  information  about  college,  most  had 
never  used  Facebook  as  a  means  to  reach  out  to  other 
people  to  seek  information  about  college.  When  asked  if 
they  had  ever  asked  a  question  about  college  using  either 
the  status  update  feature  or  private  message  feature  on 
Facebook,  most  participants  said  they  had  never  done  so. 
When asked why, some participants voiced concerns about 
visibility,  saying  that  college-related  questions  were  too 
“personal” to post on Facebook. For instance, S19 said:  
I guess [college-related questions are] more personal 
than  just  writing  it  [on  Facebook]  for  everybody  to 
see.  I  mean,  not  all  these  kids  …  that  I  say  are  my 
friends on Facebook are really my friends, like really 
close  to  me.  I  guess  I  don’t  really  like  to  express 
those types of things online [Male, Non First Gen].  

Some participants responded that they would ask questions 
about  college  directly  to  a  few  people  using  private 

Measures 
Social Media Information Mobilization (Cronbach’s α = .78) 
I learn about college from my friends online. 
I learn about college from my friends on Facebook and/or other social media sites. 
I get information about college on Facebook and/or other social media sites. 
 
Facebook Friend College Resource (Cronbach’s α = .82) 
I am “Friends” with someone on Facebook who graduated college and faced the same kind of challenges I face. 
I am “Friends” with someone on Facebook that could answer questions about college. 
I am “Friends” on Facebook with an older relative who graduated college. 
I am “Friends” with someone who is currently in college on Facebook. 

Note: Scale ranges from 1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree. 

Table 1. Summary statistics for scales in the online survey 

Mean 
3.36 
3.35 
3.43 
3.30 
 
4.17 
4.48 
 
4.35 
3.74 
4.13 

SD 
0.78 
1.03 
0.84 
0.93 
 
0.78 
0.95 
 
0.57 
1.18 
1.06 

892

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

 
Availability 
Comfort 
Closeness 
Understandability 
Expertise 
Reliability 
Note: Significance reported based on the adjusted p-value after correction for multiple comparisons. 

After 
3.87 (0.89) 
4.43 (0.67) 
3.90 (0.95) 
4.45 (0.64) 
4.26 (0.77) 
4.40 (0.58) 

Before 
3.97 (0.98) 
4.34 (0.66) 
4.15 (0.83) 
4.22 (0.71) 
3.97 (0.90) 
4.24 (0.67) 

Table 2. Ratings between pre- and post-visualization 

p-value (adjusted p-value) 
0.358 (1.000) 
0.223 (1.000) 
0.025 (0.150) 
0.001 (0.006)** 
0.001 (0.006)** 
0.005 (0.030)** 

messages  instead  of  broadcasting  their  questions  because 
they  believed  that  they  were  more  likely  to  get  relevant 
answers  to  their  questions  when  using  private  messages. 
S16 stated: 

I  feel  like  it  [my  question]  doesn’t  apply  to 
everybody. Whatever I’m trying to post, I don’t need 
to  show  to  everybody,  so  I  basically  will  message 
one,  two,  maybe  three  different  people,  max,  about 
whatever I need [Male, First Gen].  

A  small  number  of  participants  expressed  doubt  about  the 
usefulness  of  Facebook  as  an  information  source,  stating 
that  Facebook  was  mainly  a  place  for  connecting  and 
keeping  in  touch  with  their  friends  rather  than  for  getting 
information.  A  few  pointed  to  the  composition  of  their 
Facebook  Friends,  who  were  not  serious  about  college  or 
were still in high school, as a reason why Facebook was not 
a place for getting information about college. 
Selection of Facebook Friends for College Information 
Our  second  research  question  asked  how  students  decide 
whom  to  approach  for  college  information  among  their 
Facebook  Friends.  When  comparing  participants’  survey 
responses  (from  before  they  interacted  with  the  app)  and 
their  responses  after  seeing  the  visualization,  we  found 
participants  named  more  people  on  average  after  seeing 
their  Facebook  network  visualization  (pre-visualization: 
5.04  and  post-visualization:  5.70).  The  difference  was  not 
significant although the p-value approached significance (p-
value=0.057).  In  addition,  on  average,  4.22  new  people 
were named after participants saw their Facebook network 
visualization, replacing other people nominated in the initial 
round.  
With regard to  ratings of the nominated informants, linear 
mixed  models  (LMMs)  were  utilized  with  participant  as  a 
random  effect  and  time  (i.e.,  before/after  exposure)  and 
first-generation  status  (i.e.,  whether  a  participant  is  first-
generation  or  not)  as  fixed  effects  to  compare  ratings  of 
friends  nominated  before  seeing  the  network  visualization 
and those nominated after. We chose to use LMMs because 
they  account  for 
individual 
participant ratings before and after exposure to the app. In 
addition,  a  Bonferroni  correction  was  used  to  account  for 
multiple comparisons.  
The  data  showed  that  there  were  statistically  significant 
differences after the Bonferroni correction between pre- and 

the  correlation  between 

893

post-visualization  in  terms  of  understandability,  expertise, 
and reliability. Specifically, students’ average ratings of the 
understandability,  expertise,  and  reliability  of  people  they 
nominated increased from 4.22 to 4.45 (understandability), 
3.97  to  4.26  (expertise),  and  4.24  to  4.40  (reliability) 
(adjusted  p-value=0.006,  0.006,  and  0.030,  respectively). 
Evidently,  after  engaging  with  the  app,  participants  chose 
Friends who they rated as more likely to provide an “easy 
to understand” answer, more knowledgeable about college, 
and more likely to give a reliable answer. See Table 2 for 
details. 
To  test  whether  students  who  were  likely  to  have  fewer 
resources in their network (namely, first generation students 
and  those  reporting  lower  perceived  value  of  Facebook 
Friends  as  sources  of  college  information)  would  benefit 
more from the visualization affordances, we compared pre- 
and  post-visualization  ratings  between  resourced  and  less 
resourced groups on these two dimensions.  
First,  when  comparing  these  ratings  before  and  after 
exposure  to  the  visualization  by  first-generation  status, 
there were statistically significant differences between pre- 
and post-visualization ratings in terms of reliability for first-
generation students only. The data showed that after seeing 
their  Facebook  network  visualization,  first-generation 
students  selected  Friends  who  they  rated  as  significantly 
more  likely  to  give  a  reliable  answer.  Specifically,  first-
generation  students’  ratings  for  reliability  increased  from 
4.06  to  4.41  (adjusted  p-value=0.000).  With  regard  to 
understandability 
the 
visualization,  first-generation  students’  ratings  of  people 
they 
4.43 
(understandability)  and  3.88  to  4.35  (expertise).  However, 
these  differences  lost  their  statistical  significance  after  the 
Bonferroni  correction.  For  non  first-generation  students, 
there  was  no  statistically  significant  difference  identified 
between pre- and post-visualization. See Table 3 for details. 
Second, we divided participants into two groups according 
to  whether  they  perceived  their  Facebook  Friends  to  be 
valuable resources about college: those who were above the 
median (4.25) and those below. Viewing the social network 
visualization  had  an  impact  only  for  those  who  reported 
lower  scores  on  the  “Facebook  Friend  College  Resource” 
measure.  Students  with  lower  scores  were  significantly 
more likely to nominate Friends with greater expertise and 
reliability  after  viewing 
their  social  network  as  an 

nominated 

expertise, 

increased 

after 

seeing 

and 

from 

4.08 

to 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

 
 
Availability 
Comfort 
Closeness 
Understandability 
Expertise 
Reliability 
Note: Significance reported based on the adjusted p-value after correction for multiple comparisons. 

Non first-generation (n=10) 
Before  
After  
3.85 (0.99) 
4.14 (0.93) 
4.55 (0.63) 
4.50 (0.58) 
3.98 (0.87) 
4.24 (0.94) 
4.47 (0.63) 
4.41 (0.61) 
4.08 (0.85) 
4.15 (0.78) 
4.37 (0.56) 
4.47 (0.54) 

First-generation (n=13) 
Before  
3.85 (1.01) 
4.21 (0.69) 
4.08 (0.73) 
4.08 (0.75) 
3.88 (0.94) 
4.06 (0.70) 

After  
3.88 (0.82) 
4.35 (0.69) 
3.84 (1.00) 
4.43 (0.64) 
4.35 (0.76) 
4.41 (0.59) 

Table 3. First-generation vs. Non first-generation 

p-value 
(adjusted p-value) 
0.135 (0.810) 
0.302 (1.000) 
0.770 (1.000) 
0.043 (0.258) 
0.045 (0.270) 
0.000 (0.000)** 

(p-value=0.005). 

interactive graphic. These students named Friends believed 
to be more likely to provide an “easy to understand” answer 
after exposure to the app, although the difference  was not 
statistically  significance  after  the  correction  for  multiple 
tests.  For  those  who  scored  in  the  higher  half  on  this 
measure, there was no statistically significant difference in 
ratings  between  pre-  and  post-visualization  scores.  See 
Table 4 for details.  
Fisher’s  test  was  used  to  test  for  a  relationship  between 
first-generation  status  and  the  level  of  Facebook  Friend 
College Resource given our small sample size. The results 
indicated  a  statistically  significant  relationship  between 
first-generation  status  and  the  level  of  Facebook  Friend 
College  Resource 
First-generation 
participants were more likely to report lower perceptions of 
Facebook  Friends  as  a  source  of  college  information, 
indicating a perceived lack of resources in their immediate 
Facebook  Friends  network.  (Participants  completed  this 
measure  before  viewing  the  application  and  we  did  not 
assess this during the interview.)  
Effect  of  Visualization  Affordances  on  Selection  of 
Facebook Friends for College Information  
Our  last  research  question  asked  about  how  the  ability  to 
see the network visualization in College Connect influenced 
students’  decisions  regarding  their  selection  of  good 
sources  of  college  information  among  their  Facebook 
Friends. During the interview, participants were asked what 
new  information,  if  any,  they  obtained  from  the  network 
visualization  that  might  have  affected  which  Facebook 
Friends 
they  nominated  as  good  sources  of  college 
information.  In  response,  some  participants  mentioned  the 
fact  that  the  app  surfaced  information  about  whether  a 
specific  person  had  listed  a  college  or  university  in  their 
profile. Most participants assumed that the content entered 

their  Facebook  Friends  after  viewing 

in this field was an indication of what schools their Friends 
went to or were attending, although they acknowledged that 
in  some  cases  these  fields  might  represent  aspirations  or 
serve  as  signals  of  interest,  as  opposed  to  colleges  they 
were actually attending at that moment.  
When asked about new information they obtained from the 
visualization,  S06,  for  example,  said  “‘oh,  I  didn’t  know 
you  went  to  college,’  or  ‘I  didn’t  know  you  had  some 
college  information.’”  This  is  consistent  with  participants’ 
responses  when  asked  why  they  picked  certain  people 
among 
the 
visualization:  they  picked  individuals  who  were  currently 
attending  college  and  thus  had  relevant  experience.  While 
some  participants  specified  that  the  Friend  was  attending 
the  specific  college  that  he  or  she  was  interested  in,  most 
simply mentioned the fact that the Friend was in college as 
the reason for choosing that person. In a similar vein, when 
asked  about  helpful  features  of  the  app,  participants 
reported  on  one  affordance  in  particular:  people  that  had 
college information were solid dots, whereas those who had 
no  information  were  empty  dots.  As  S13  explained,  “You 
can have a very specified [sic] way of seeing who goes to 
what  college.”  Similarly,  S19  stated  that  solid  dots  served 
as confirmation of his knowledge about specific schools his 
Friends went to.  
One participant (S16) stated that seeing many solid dots in 
his  network  was  “a  little  push”  for  him,  explaining, 
“There’s a lot more people in my friend group on Facebook 
that  are  associated  with  different  colleges  than  I  had 
anticipated.” He further stated: 

I was definitely not debating whether I was going or 
not. That’s definitely a future plan in motion. It was 
interesting to see that there are so many people that I 

 

High level of FB Friend college resource 
(n=13) 
Before  
4.19 (0.84) 
4.41 (0.63) 
4.24 (0.86) 
4.39 (0.62) 
4.17 (0.82) 
4.46 (0.58) 

 
Availability 
Comfort 
Closeness 
Understandability 
Expertise 
Reliability 
Note: Significance reported based on the adjusted p-value after correction for multiple comparisons. 

Low level of FB Friend college resource 
(n=10) 
Before  
3.65 (1.10) 
4.22 (0.70) 
4.00 (0.76) 
3.96 (0.76) 
3.65 (0.95) 
3.89 (0.65) 

After  
3.75 (0.84) 
4.27 (0.68) 
3.58 (0.96) 
4.38 (0.59) 
4.33 (0.67) 
4.33 (0.51) 

Table 4. Low Facebook Friend College Resource vs. High Facebook Friend College Resource 

p-value 
(adjusted p-value) 
 
0.113 (0.678) 
0.833 (1.000) 
0.181 (1.000) 
0.016 (0.096) 
0.001 (0.006)** 
0.000 (0.000)** 

After  
3.96 (0.92) 
4.55 (0.64) 
4.13 (0.88) 
4.49 (0.67) 
4.21 (0.84) 
4.45 (0.62) 

894

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

know of that are in college, going to college [Male, 
First Gen].  

question  about  college 
visualization, S24 explained: 

after 

seeing 

the  network 

In  relation  to  this,  S10  found  it  surprising  to  see  Friends 
who  she  did  not  know  had  an  interest  in  college  include 
college information on their Facebook profile.  Participants 
viewed  having  information  in  this  field  as  a  sign  of  these 
Friends’ level of seriousness about college and often chose 
these “solid dot” Friends as someone they would turn to for 
college information. She expressed surprise, saying “Some 
people that do have colored-in dots, I’m just like, “Oh, so 
you  were  serious  about  college?”  ‘Cause  some  of  them,  I 
didn’t expect them to be.”  
On average, 42 percent (SD=0.05) of nodes in the Facebook 
networks had some college information. The percent ranged 
from a minimum of 30 percent to a maximum of 52 percent 
with  college  information.  This  suggests  that  highlighting 
these  people  could  show  substantially  more  possible 
information sources than the respondent expected. 
Similarly, when asked why they found the app helpful  for 
obtaining  college  information,  participants  reported  that  it 
helped them locate people who could answer their questions 
about college. For instance, S17 stated: 

I believe it could help me find who to ask to make it 
easier  so  you  wouldn’t  have  to  either  embarrass 
others  on  them  not  knowing,  or  make  yourself  feel 
awkward in the situation of going out asking all these 
different people and everything [Male, First Gen].  

S10  stated  that  “since  I  know  people  that  actually  will  be 
interested in there [the college I am interested in], I can ask 
them for questions like that, other than asking someone that 
doesn’t really know, or just heard about it [the college I am 
interested in].”  
In  some  cases,  the  network  visualization,  which  allowed 
participants  to  see  the  entire  web  of  their  Facebook 
connections,  appeared  to  remind  participants  of  close 
friends  whom they were not cognizant of or had forgotten 
about. When asked why they selected different people after 
seeing the visualization compared to the names they listed 
in the survey, many participants stated that College Connect 
acted  as  a  reminder.  For  instance,  S11  indicated  that  he 
named one of his closest friends as one of his new people 
post-visualization because “we haven’t seen each other for 
like  five  months,  I  think,  so  I  kind  of  forgot  about  her  a 
little bit.”  
Participants  reported  that  the  visualization  also  reminded 
them of their weak ties, allowing them to recognize people 
they did not know well or they did not realize were in their 
Facebook  network,  perhaps  because  these  weak  ties  were 
hidden  by 
that 
participants’  average  ratings  for  closeness  decreased  from 
4.15 to 3.90 when comparing pre- and post-visualization in 
Table 2.) When asked why he selected new people for the 

the  News  Feed  algorithm. 

(Recall 

I did [nominated] these two because I just know them 
very well. Those are the people that just, off the top 
of  my  head,  I  could  just  immediately  count  on.  I 
added  the  other  four  because  this  gave  me  a  really 
good visual aspect of … It really, I guess, opened up 
the  options  that  were  available  that  previously  I 
didn’t know about [Male, Non First Gen].  

Similarly, S20 said that “I think, without a visual, I was just 
referring to people in my mind that I know pretty well.” 
Although our interview questions were designed to capture 
how the visualization affected participants’ choices, if at all, 
participants’ responses to a question about  the  helpfulness 
of College Connect compared to Facebook more generally 
revealed  the  additional  potential  of  the  application  for 
increasing the utility of Facebook. When asked how helpful 
they  found  College  Connect  compared  to  Facebook,  some 
participants mentioned the fact that the application provided 
focused and specific information to users. For instance, S05 
found  College  Connect  more  helpful 
than  Facebook 
because  “when  you’re  on  Facebook  …  you  don’t  think 
about  college.  This  is  a  certain  app  for  college  and  it’s 
connected  to  your  Facebook  friends.”  S18  also  indicated 
that  “Facebook  is  really  broad. This  kind  of  like  makes  it 
more  specific  and  just  gives  you  a  lot  more  information 
than  just  going  on  the  Facebook  bar  and  looking  up  a 
certain  thing.”  Similarly,  S24  described  that  “it’s  sort  of 
display  information  [sic]  that  I  really  care  about,  whereas 
normally, for the  most part, Facebook has  stuff  where it’s 
more just like everyday bantering.”  
One  participant  (S19)  suggested  College  Connect  might 
help people get more value from Facebook. He felt a shift 
in norms around appropriate activities on the site could add 
value  by  increasing  Facebook’s  utility  for  information 
seeking. He told us: 

I see some kids here that have silly things. Like … on 
my Facebook wall, [I put] I’m the manager at Stride 
gum,  which  makes absolutely no sense. I feel like I 
would want to be able to explain myself a little better 
and put real schools and things. Because the kids I’m 
friends  with,  we  kind  of  see  Facebook  as  this  time-
consuming area on the web that really, it’s kind of a 
silly type of thing. This [College  Connect]  makes it 
really useful. I feel like if people actually took it this 
seriously,  then  it  would  actually  be  a  really  great 
source  of  information  and  just  of  anything.  Which 
would  be  really  cool  and  really  good  [Male,  Non 
First Gen].  
DISCUSSION 
Our findings show that the visualization affordances offered 
by  College  Connect  have 
to  support 
information  seeking  around  college  questions,  especially 
for  those  participants  with  fewer  likely  resources  among 

the  potential 

895

after  viewing 

their  Friends  on  Facebook.  Students  selected  Friends  who 
were  more  likely  to  provide  easy-to-understand  answers, 
more  knowledgeable,  and  more  likely  to  give  reliable 
answers 
the  network  visualization. 
Importantly,  this  difference  was  significant  only  for  those 
who  lacked  access  to  college  information  resources  (i.e., 
first-generation students and those who reported they were 
less able to obtain college information from their Facebook 
Friends).  Indeed,  the  visualization  helped  participants  list 
Friends who were more appropriate for answering college-
related questions.  
Surfacing Important Information 
One  of  the  important  affordances  offered  by  College 
Connect  was 
the  visibility  of  relevant 
information  by  displaying  Friends  who  listed  a  college  or 
university in their profiles as a solid dot. By surfacing this 
information and presenting it in aggregate, the app seemed 
to help participants scan and direct attention to information 
in the network that was relevant to their needs.  After seeing 
the network visualization, participants picked  Friends they 
rated higher in terms of understandability and reliability. Of 
course, the app only presented information that was already 
available through the general Facebook platform, although 
it  would  require  clicking  on  individual  profiles  to  view 
college information and examining  lists of  mutual  Friends 
to determine clusters. In short, without the app, we believe 
relevant  information  is  likely  to  be  buried  in  the  network 
and not recognized by participants, given the typically large 
number  of  Facebook  Friends  people  have  on  average. 
According to a Pew Research report, the median number of 
Facebook  Friends  among  its  users  was  150  [11].  In  this 
study, the median number of Facebook Friends reported by 
participants was 454, and the median number of Facebook 
Friends obtained from their downloaded network data was 
456.  Future  research  could  consider  other  ways  in  which 
salient  information  contained  within  Facebook  might  be 
surfaced  for 
information 
challenges.  
Serving as a Reminder  
The network visualization also appears to  play a reminder 
role  by  aggregating  all  of  our  participants’  Facebook 
Friends  in  a  playful  and  engaging  visual  format,  thus 
surfacing  information  sources  that  they  otherwise  might 
have  overlooked.  Our  finding 
the  visualization 
reminded  participants  of  their  weak  ties  suggests  that 
making weak ties more accessible could be one way to help 
people  take  better  advantage  of  the  weak  ties  in  their 
network. Participants reported that the visualization helped 
them  recognize  people  they  did  not  know  well  or  had 
forgotten  about.  As  one  participant  (S20)  explained,  “I 
think, without a visual, I was just referring to people in my 
mind  that  I  know  pretty  well,”  attesting  to  this  surfacing 
dynamic.  
The  visualization  reminded  participants  of  not  only  weak 
ties but also strong ties they forgot. Accordingly, we found 

individuals  facing 

to  highlight 

important 

that 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

that  participants  nominated  a  greater  number  of  people  in 
the  post  condition  compared  to  before  they  saw  the 
visualization, suggesting that the app surfaced the existence 
of some Friends who might otherwise be “out of sight, out 
of  mind.”  The  difference  in  the  number  of  nominated 
Friends was not significant at the .05 level (p-value=0.057), 
but  given  our  small  sample  size  (23  participants  in  the 
quantitative  analysis),  we  expect  this  difference  would  be 
significant with a larger sample.  
Potential of Social Media Interventions  
Perhaps our most promising finding involves those who are 
more  likely  to  lack  college  knowledge  resources  in  their 
immediate networks and the fact that these individuals were 
more likely to benefit from use of the app. We found that 
only  first-generation  students  were  influenced  by  the 
visualization  when  selecting  people  to  turn  to  for  college 
information,  while  non  first-generation  students  were  not. 
First-generation students tend to be at a disadvantage when 
it  comes  to  college  information  seeking  because  they  are 
less  likely  to  get  information  about  college  from  parents, 
who,  for  non  first-generation  students,  may  be  one  of  the 
main  sources  of  college 
information  [17].  Similarly, 
looking  at  pre-  and  post-visualization  scores,  only 
participants  who  reported  lower  perceptions  of  having 
Facebook  Friends  as  a  source  of  college  information 
demonstrated significant differences in ratings of expertise 
and reliability.  
Researchers  have  found  that  whether  people  use  social 
media to seek information or not is influenced by individual 
characteristics  [e.g.,  29].  For instance,  those  who  perceive 
that it is appropriate to ask questions on Facebook are more 
likely  to  seek  information  using  Facebook  [29].  Three 
participants  indicated  that  seeing  college  information  in 
their  Friends’  profiles  may  have  changed  their  perception 
that Facebook is a  frivolous  place  where people put “silly 
things.” While seeing college information on their Friends’ 
profiles came as a surprise to them, in particular, the change 
in perception appeared to be more likely to happen because 
participants  recognized  peers’  interests  or  aspirations  they 
had not been aware of. Our findings suggest that designers 
may try emphasizing certain profile fields in order to shift 
norms around information seeking on the site. For example, 
seeing  Friends’  college  profile  data  might  serve  to  signal 
that  these  Friends  are  serious  about  their  educational 
pursuits, thus encouraging them to take advantage of social 
media as one means to access human information sources in 
their  network  when  seeking  information  they  need.  Job-
seeking is another example of  a complex information  task 
that  requires  a  lot  of  resources  and  support.  For  instance, 
highlighting previous work experience among adults might 
help  the  unemployed  feel  more  comfortable  reaching  out 
for networking or with job-related questions.   
Our  findings  are  positive  regarding  the  potential  of  social 
media interventions for remediating unequal access to post-
secondary  education.  Social  media  apps  that  can  provide 

896

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

list  with 

in 

to  one’s  Friend 

these  differences  may  have 

similar  affordances  may  serve  as  a  useful  tool  for  less 
resourced  individuals  such  as  first-generation  students  by 
allowing them to access resources hidden in their network. 
In  addition,  these  interventions  may  also  shift  norms  –  in 
this  case  around  perceptions  of  social  media  as 
inappropriate for getting information – thus, promoting the 
use  of  social  media  for  college  information  seeking.  This 
ultimately may lead to more access to resources embedded 
in people’s network, but otherwise not visible.   
College Connect has been discontinued due to new changes 
in the Facebook platform. As of April 30, 2015, Facebook 
has  restricted  access 
the 
introduction  of  Graph  2.0,  which  means  the  app  can  no 
longer  access  the  Friend  data  needed  to  create  network 
visualizations. Designers will have to be creative in finding 
other ways to uncover and highlight weak ties. We believe 
that  more  work  is  needed  to  further  explore  the  role  of 
social  media  in  helping  people  access  hidden  resources  in 
their  network 
the  process  of  seeking  help  and 
information.  
Limitations 
Our  sample  was  small  –  only  24  participants.  Given  that 
some  p-values  approached  significance  (e.g.,  difference  in 
the  number  of  people  nominated  between  pre-  and  post-
visualization), 
reached 
significance  with  a  larger  sample  size.    When  collecting 
data, artificiality was introduced by having participants use 
the  app  during  a  face-to-face  interview.  As  participants 
were given a limited amount of time and had to use a laptop 
instead  of  a  larger  monitor,  their  experience  with  the  app 
could have been affected by these constraints. The timing of 
data  collection  also  could  have  influenced  responses  we 
obtained.  Both  the  survey  and  interview  were  conducted 
during the period in which students were sending out their 
applications 
(i.e.,  November  and  December,  2014). 
Considering  the  college  application  timeline,  this  means 
that  most  participants  had  already  made  decisions  about 
where  to  apply  and  were  mostly  likely  interested  in 
information about a specific college rather than conducing 
broader searches. If data collection took place earlier in the 
process, the college information seeking practices reported 
by our participants might have been different.  Finally, due 
to time constraints, we used one-item measures to assess the 
characteristics  of  human  information  sources;  future  work 
should use multi-item scales.  
CONCLUSION 
The  search  and  broadcasting  affordances  offered  by  SNSs 
mean  that  these  platforms  may  serve  as  useful  venues  for 
information seeking. One of the benefits of using SNSs for 
information seeking is that weak ties that would otherwise 
have degraded may be more accessible. Although research 
on youth’s social media use has been increasing, still little 
is  known  about  the  role  of  social  media  in  adolescents’ 
information seeking practices. 

in 

This  study  examined  how  social  media 
influence 
adolescents’  information  practices  with  respect  to  the 
selection  of  human  information  sources  in  the  context  of 
college  information  seeking.  This  form  of  information 
seeking  is  a  complex  task,  requiring  help  from  families, 
peers,  and  institutional  resources.  Considering  that  first-
generation students tend to lack informational resources in 
their family, they may most benefit from social media when 
looking  for  college  information.  Our  findings  show  that 
first-generation students indeed were more likely to benefit 
from  social  media  compared 
to  non  first-generation 
students 
the  visualization,  first-
that  after  seeing 
generation  students  selected  Friends  who  were  more 
appropriate for providing information about college.  
This  work  contributes  to  our  knowledge  about  the  role  of 
social  media  in  the  process  of  information  seeking,  and 
provides  some  insights  into  the  relationship  between 
affordances  of  social  media  and  people’s  information 
practices in relation to topic-specific informational tasks.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We would like to thank the school administrators, teachers, 
and  students  as  well  as  the  College  Possible  program  for 
their help with data collection. We also would like to thank 
Steve  McKellar  and  Josh  Melville  for  their  programming 
work  on  College  Connect.  This  research  was  conducted 
with support from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and 
the King Center Charter School.  
REFERENCES 
1.  Mark Ackerman, Lada Adamic, Nicole Ellison, Darren 

Gergle, Brent Hecht, Cliff Lampe, Meredith Ringel 
Morris, and Jaime Teevan. 2013. Social media question 
asking workshop. In Proceedings of the 2013 
Conference on Computer supported cooperative work 
companion (CSCW '13), 297-298. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2441955.2442027  

2.  Naresh Kumar Agarwal, Yunjie (Calvin) Xu, and 

Danny C.C. Poo. 2011. A context-based investigation 
into source use by information seekers. Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science and 
Technology 62, 6: 1087-1104. 

3.  Denise E. Agosto and Sandra Hughes-Hassell. 2006. 

Toward a model of the everyday life information needs 
of urban teenagers, Part 2: Empirical model. Journal of 
the American Society for Information Science and 
Technology 57, 11: 1418-1426. 

4.  Heidi G. Allen, Tasha R. Stanton, Flavia Di Pietro, and 

G. Lorimer Moseley. 2013. Social media release 
increases dissemination of original articles in the 
clinical pain sciences. PLoS ONE 8, 7. 

5.  Vincent D Blondel, Jean-Loup Guillaume, Renaud 

Lambiotte, and Etienne Lefebvre. 2008. Fast unfolding 
of communities in large networks. Journal of 
Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 10: 
P10008. 

897

6.  Leanne Bowler, Jung Sun Oh, Daqing He, Eleanor 

Mattern, and Wei Jeng. 2012. Eating disorder questions 
in Yahoo! Answers: Information, conversation, or 
reflection? In Proceedings of the American Society for 
Information Science and Technology, 1-11. 

7.  Erin L. Brady, Yu Zhong, Meredith Ringel Morris, and 

Jeffrey P. Bigham. 2013. Investigating the 
appropriateness of social network question asking as a 
resource for blind users. In Proceedings of the 2013 
Conference on Computer supported cooperative 
work (CSCW '13), 1225-1236. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2441776.2441915  

8.  Julia Bryan, Cheryl Holcomb-McCoy, Cheryl Moore-
Thomas, and Norma L Day-Vines. 2009. Who sees the 
school counselor for college information? A national 
study. Professional School Counseling 12, 4: 280-291. 
9.  Alberto F. Cabrera and Steven M. La Nasa. 2001. On 

the path to college: Three critical tasks facing 
America’s disadvantaged. Research in Higher 
Education 42, 2: 119-149. 

10.  David C. DeAndrea, Nicole B. Ellison, Robert LaRose, 

Charles Steinfield, and Andrew Fiore. 2012. Serious 
social media: On the use of social media for improving 
students’ adjustment to college. The Internet and 
Higher Education 15, 1: 15-23. 

11.  Maeve Duggan, Nicole B. Ellison, Cliff Lampe, 

Amanda Lenhart, and Mary Madden. 2015. Social 
Media Update 2014. Pew Research Center. 

12.  Nicole Ellison and danah boyd. 2013. Sociality through 

social network sites. In The Oxford Handbook of 
Internet Studies, William H. Dutton (eds.). Oxford 
University Press, Oxford, 151-172.  

13.  Nicole B. Ellison, Rebecca Gray, Cliff Lampe, and 
Andrew T. Fiore. 2014. Social capital and resource 
requests on Facebook. New Media & Society 16, 7: 
1104-1121. 

14.  Nicole B. Ellison, Charles Steinfield, and Cliff Lampe. 
2011. Connection strategies: Social capital implications 
of Facebook-enabled communication practices. New 
Media & Society 13: 873-892. 

15.  Nicole B. Ellison and Jessica Vitak. 2015. Social 

network site affordances and their relationship to social 
capital processes. In The Handbook of the Psychology 
of Communication Technology, S. Shyam Sundar 
(eds.). Wiley-Blackwell, Hoboken, NJ, 205-227.  

16.  Nicole B. Ellison, Jessica Vitak, Rebecca Gray, and 
Cliff Lampe. 2014. Cultivating social resources on 
social network sites: Facebook relationship 
maintenance behaviors and their role in social capital 
processes. Journal of Computer-Mediated 
Communication 19, 4: 855-870. 

17.  Nicole B. Ellison, D. Yvette Wohn, and Michael G. 

Brown. 2014. Social media and college access. 

898

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

interactions 21, 4: 62-65. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2630008 

18.  Brynn M. Evans and Ed H. Chi. 2010. An elaborated 

model of social search. Information Processing & 
Management 46, 6: 656-678. 

19.  Raya Fidel and Maurice Green. 2004. The many faces 
of accessibility: Engineers’ perception of information 
sources. Information Processing & Management 40, 3: 
563-581. 

20.  Andrea Forte, Michael Dickard, Rachel Magee, and 

Denise E. Agosto. 2014. What do teens ask their online 
social networks?: social search practices among high 
school students. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM 
conference on Computer supported cooperative work 
& social computing (CSCW '14), 28-37. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2531602.2531723 

21.  Thomas M. Fruchterman and Edward M. Reingold. 
1991. Graph drawing by force-directed placement. 
Software-Practice and Experience 21, 11: 1129-1164.  
22.  Mark S. Granovetter. 1973. The strength of weak ties. 

American journal of sociology, 1360-1380. 

23.  Rebecca Gray, Nicole B. Ellison, Jessica Vitak, and 
Cliff Lampe. 2013. Who wants to know?: question-
asking and answering practices among Facebook users. 
In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Computer 
supported cooperative work (CSCW '13), 1213-1224. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2441776.2441913 

24.  Rebecca Gray, Jessica Vitak, Emily W. Easton, and 

Nicole B. Ellison. 2013. Examining social adjustment 
to college in the age of social media: Factors 
influencing successful transitions and persistence. 
Computers & Education 67: 193-207. 

25.  Morten Hertzum. 2014. Expertise seeking: A review. 

Information Processing & Management 50, 5: 775-
795. 

26.  Steven J. Ingels, Michael Planty, Robert Bozick, and 
Jeffrey A. Owings. 2005. A profile of the American 
high school senior in 2004: A first look. Initial results 
from the first follow-up of the Education Longitudinal 
Study of 2002 (ELS: 2002). NCES 2006-348. National 
Center for Education Statistics. 

27.  Heidi Julien. 2004. Adolescent decision-making for 
careers: An exploration of information behavior. In 
Youth Information Seeking Behavior: Theories, 
Models, and Issues, Mary K. Chelton and Colleen Cool 
(eds.). Scarecrow Press, 321-352. 

28.  Cliff Lampe, Rebecca Gray, Andrew T. Fiore, and 

Nicole Ellison. 2014. Help is on the way: patterns of 
responses to resource requests on Facebook. 
In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on 
Computer supported cooperative work & social 
computing (CSCW '14), 3-15. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2531602.2531720  

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

39.  Meredith Ringel Morris, Jaime Teevan, and Katrina 

Panovich. 2010. A comparison of information seeking 
using search engines and social networks. In Fourth 
International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social 
Media.  

40.  Mor Naaman, Jeffrey Boase, and Chih-Hui Lai. 2010. 

Is it really about me?: message content in social 
awareness streams. In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM 
conference on Computer supported cooperative 
work (CSCW '10), 189-192. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1718918.1718953 

41.  Noel-Levitz, OmniUpdate, CollegeWeekLive, and 
NRCCUA. 2014. 2014 E-Expectations Report: The 
Online Preferences of College-Bound High School 
Seniors and Their Parents. 
https://www.noellevitz.com/papers-research-higher-
education/2014/2014-e-expectations-report 

42.  Katrina Panovich, Rob Miller, and David Karger. 2012. 

Tie strength in question & answer on social network 
sites. In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW '12), 
1057-1066. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2145204.2145361. 

43.  Andrew K. Shenton and Pat Dixon. 2003. Youngsters’ 
use of other people as an information-seeking method. 
Journal of Librarianship and Information Science 35, 
4: 219-233. 

44.  Paul Taylor, Rick Fry, and Russ Oates. 2014. The 
rising cost of not going to college. Pew Research 
Center. 

45.  U.S. Department of Treasury, and U.S. Department of 
Education. 2012. The economics of higher education. 
http://www.treasury.gov/connect/blog/Pages/economic
s-of-higher-education.aspx 

46.  Donghee Yvette Wohn, Nicole B. Ellison, M. Laeeq 
Khan, Ryan Fewins-Bliss, and Rebecca Gray. 2013. 
The role of social media in shaping first-generation 
high school students’ college aspirations: A social 
capital lens. Computers & Education 63: 424-436. 

47.  Lilian Woudstra, Bart van den Hooff, and Alexander P. 

Schouten. 2012. Dimensions of quality and 
accessibility: Selection of human information sources 
from a social capital perspective. Information 
Processing & Management 48, 4: 618-630. 

29.  Cliff Lampe, Jessica Vitak, Rebecca Gray, and Nicole 
Ellison. 2012. Perceptions of Facebook’s value as an 
information source. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI '12), 3195-3204. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2207676.2208739.  

30.  Audrey Laplante. 2014. Social capital and academic 

help seeking: Late adolescents’ use of people as 
information sources. In New Directions in Children’s 
and Adolescents’ Information Behavior Research 
(Library and Information Science), Dania Bilal and 
Jamshid Beheshti (eds.). Emerald Group Publishing 
Limited, 67-103. 

31.  Kathy Latrobe and W. Michael Havener. 1997. The 
information-seeking behavior of high school honors 
students: An exploratory study. Journal of Youth 
Services in Libraries 10, 2: 188-200. 

32.  Amanda Lenhart. 2015. Teens, Social Media and 

Technology Overview 2015. Pew Research Center.  

33.  Li Lu and Y. Connie Yuan. 2011. Shall I Google it or 

ask the competent villain down the hall? The 
moderating role of information need in information 
source selection. Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science and Technology 62, 1: 133-145. 
34.  Helen Janc Malone. 2013. The search stage: When, 
where, and what information do urban public high 
school students gather about college. Journal of School 
Counseling 11, 13. 

35.  Christine Marton and Chun Wei Choo. 2002. A 

question of quality: The effect of source quality on 
information seeking by women in IT professions. In 
Proceedings of the American Society for Information 
Science and Technology 39, 1: 140-151. 

information world: The everyday(cid:486)life information 

behavior of preteens. The Library Quarterly 79, 3: 301-
341. 

36.  Eric M. Meyers, Karen E. Fisher, and 

Elizabeth Marcoux. 2009. Making sense of an 

37.  Meredith Ringel Morris, Kori Inkpen, and Gina 

Venolia. 2014. Remote shopping advice: Enhancing in-
store shopping with social technologies. 
In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on 
Computer supported cooperative work & social 
computing (CSCW '14), 662-673. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2531602.2531707 

38.  Meredith Ringel Morris, Jaime Teevan, and Katrina 

Panovich. 2010. What do people ask their social 
networks, and why?: a survey study of status message 
q&a behavior. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI '10), 1739-1748. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1753326.1753587. 

899

