CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Encouraging  “Outside-­the-­box”  Thinking  in  Crowd  
Innovation  Through  Identifying  Domains  of  Expertise  

Lixiu Yu, Aniket Kittur, Robert E. Kraut 

Carnegie Mellon University 

5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
{lixiuyu, nkittur, robert.kraut }@cs.cmu.edu 

ABSTRACT  
People  are  more  creative  at  solving  difficult  design 
problems when they use relevant examples from outside of 
the  problem’s  domain  as  inspirations.  However,  finding 
such “outside-the-box” inspirations is difficult, particularly 
in large idea repositories such as the web, because without 
guidance people select domains to search based on surface 
similarity  to  the  problem’s  domain.  In  this  paper,  we 
demonstrate  an  approach  in  which  non-experts  identify 
domains  that  have  the  potential  to  yield  useful  and  non-
obvious  inspirations  for  solutions.  We  report  an  empirical 
study demonstrating how crowds can generate domains of 
expertise and that showing people an abstract representation 
rather  than  the  original  problem  helps  them  identify  more 
distant domains. Crowd workers drawing inspirations from 
the distant domains produced more creative solutions to the 
original problem than did those who sought inspiration on 
their own, or drew inspiration from domains closer to or not 
sharing  structural  correspondence  with 
the  original 
problem.  

Author  Keywords  
Crowdsourcing; problem solving; design; idea generation 
ACM  Classification  Keywords  
H.5.3 Group and Organization Interfaces 

INTRODUCTION  
Important  innovations  and  discoveries  often  come  from 
drawing upon knowledge from domains outside of a target 
problem as an inspiration to solve the problem [8, 10]. For 
example,  using  origami-folding  techniques,  NASA's  space 
engineers  designed  a  space  array,  which  can  be  folded 
compactly and then deployed while in outer space. The new 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page. Copyrights for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be  honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or 
from Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW  '16, February  27-March  02,  2016,  San  Francisco,  CA,  USA  
©  2016  ACM.  ISBN  978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820025 

fee.  Request  permissions 

a 

1214

analogy. 

For 

example, 

design solved the 50-year-old space problem of transporting 
large objects in narrow rockets [2].  
The  emergence  of  large  online  idea  repositories  has  the 
potential  to  radically  accelerate  innovation  by  increasing 
designers’ access to  analogical ideas. There now exists an 
enormous selection of ideas that could spark creative ideas 
through 
InnoCentive 
(innocentive.com)  contains  more  than  40,000  business, 
social,  policy,  scientific,  and  technical  problems  and 
solutions  in  various  domains,  hundreds  of  new  product 
ideas are submitted to Quirky (quirky.com) every day by a 
pool  of  over  a  million  inventors,  and  OpenIDEO  has 
collected  hundreds  of  solutions  for  a  variety  of  social 
problems  since  2010  (openideo.com).  More  generally, 
information  available  online  including  scientific  literature, 
patents,  webpages,  and  images  and  videos  represent  a 
treasure  trove  of  potential  analogies  in  different  domains. 
For  example,  a  car  mechanic  adapted  a  method  for 
extracting a lost cork from a wine bottle seen in a YouTube 
video to save a baby stuck in the birth canal, described as 
the most important innovation in birthing since forceps [17, 
22]. 
However, our ability to process this deluge of information 
to  find  and  use  analogies  is  severely  bottlenecked  by 
individual cognitive limits, as the speed and capacity with 
which individuals can learn and explore new domains have 
not  kept  up  with  the  rapid  growth  in  online  information 
from  which  analogies  can  be  discovered.  Even  when  they 
have  the  appropriate  knowledge,  people  often  become 
fixated  on  surface-level  details  that  prevent  them  from 
retrieving  useful  analogs  from  memory  or  external 
repositories or applying them for problem solving [9]. 
Previous work has shown that using crowds to mine online 
idea repositories for such analogous inspirations can enable 
search  at  a  scale  beyond  the  individual  and  has  identified 
ways of reducing fixation by having different workers see 
different representations of the problem [24, 25]. However, 
this work has looked at relatively small repositories of ideas, 
such  as  Quirky’s,  where  searchers  were  only  looking 
through hundreds of ideas. In contrast, the web holds orders 
of  magnitude  more  potentially  useful  analogous  ideas,  not 
only  in  explicit  idea  repositories,  such  as  the  US  patent 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

database, but also in expert-generated content in nearly any 
domain.  
In this paper, we describe and evaluate a two-stage process 
that enables crowds to search the web for useful and novel 
do  design  ideas  than  alternative  approaches.  In  the  first 
stage, crowds identify domains of expertise remote from the 
initial  problem  but  relevant  enough  to  provide  ideas  to 
inspire useful and non-obvious solutions. They are best able 
to  identify  relevant  but  remote  domains  when  the  original 
concrete  problem  is  represented  as  an  abstract  problem 
schema.  In  the  second  stage,  crowds  search  in  these 
domains  to  find  inspirational  examples  they  can  adapt  to 
solve  the  original  problem.  The  key  insight  here  is  that  a 
rich set of expert-generated ideas, solutions, and skills have 
already been documented on the web, and non-experts can 
find  and  appropriate  these  resources  in  the  design  process 
even  if  they  did  not  possess  the  expertise  to  generate  this 
knowledge in the first place.  

inspire 

leading 

Identifying  “Outside-­the-­box”  Domains  
Although  distant  analogies  can 
innovation, 
systematically  identifying  them  in  distant  domains  is 
challenging. First, people must identify the domains where 
relevant  inspirational  sources  might  be  found.  The  most 
useful  inspirations  often  come  from  distant  domains  that 
have  little  surface  similarity  with  the  target  problem  [11, 
18,  21];  for  example,  in  the  NASA  example,  the  problem 
comes from the aerospace field while paper folding is from 
origami  art.  Identifying  such  domains  can  be  challenging 
for  human,  because  they  often  become  fixated  on  the 
surface  details  of  the  problem  domain.  Outside-the-box 
domains  are  also  challenging  for  automated  search 
algorithms  to  identify,  since  the  algorithms  also  generally 
search  on  surface  features, 
to  same-domain 
recommendations [3, 16, 20, 26].  
Yu et al. [24] demonstrated a way for crowds to find distant 
domains more effectively by re-representing the problem. A 
critical  step  was  abstracting  surface  details  of  the  original 
problem  to  reduce  people’s  fixation  on  surface  features, 
such as domain-specific vocabulary and objects [7, 15]. For 
example, in the previous NASA story, space and rockets are 
surface  features  while  the  abstract  representation  of  the 
problem  can  be  “how  to  contain  more  content  within  a 
limited  space”.  Using  this  abstract  representation  rather 
than  the  literal  description  of  the  problem  frees  people  to 
identify  remote  areas  of  knowledge  containing  useful 
inspirations  for  the  problem.  Yu  et  al.  then  showed  that 
crowd  workers  given  the  abstract  representation  of  a 
problem  (i.e., 
the  concrete 
representation  were  able  to  find  analogies  in  more  distant 
domains  that  were  more  useful  for  solving  the  problem 
creatively. 
However,  Yu  et  al.  treated  the  search  process  as  a  black 
box,  with  no  instructions  on  how  to  identify  potentially 
fruitful domains to search within. This approach may have 

the  schema)  rather 

than 

been  successful  on  the  tens  to  hundreds  of  ideas  easily 
available  on  Quirky.com,  but  may  not  scale  well  to  the 
billions of web pages available on the Internet, a subset of 
which  could  have  a  potentially  relevant  solution  to  the 
target  problem.  The  difficulty  of  winnowing  distant 
domains for useful analogs has posed a crucial challenge to 
many  design-by-analogy 
“this 
influential  technique  to  be  limited  to  little  more  than 
interesting  examples  with  accompanying  direction 
to 
simply ‘try to find analogies.’” [14]. 

approaches, 

causing 

Exploring  “Outside-­the-­box”  Domains  
A  second  problem  is  finding  useful  ideas  within  the 
identified domain. An expensive but powerful way to do so 
would be to have a panel of relevant experts on call from 
that  domain.  Indeed  major  design  firms  like  IDEO  are 
successful  in  part  because  they  hire  employees  who  are 
diverse  in  demographics,  education  and  personal  interests 
and  can  apply  ideas  from  their  areas  of  expertise  to  the 
problems  clients  bring  them  [10].  Although  retaining 
experts may be necessary in research-investment intensive 
industries,  like  pharmaceuticals,  for  many  more  routine 
problem challenges in engineering and design, experts may 
have  already  documents  relevant  solutions  in  language 
accessible to laymen. 
Crowdsourcing approaches have been increasingly used to 
expand the pool that innovation companies can draw upon 
to  solve  problems,  ranging  from  product  ideation  (e.g., 
Quirky.com) 
(e.g., 
Innocentive.com)  to  societal  challenges  (OpenIDEO.com) 
Companies  describe  their  problems  and  then  use  what  is 
called “broadcast search” to invite anyone with a good idea 
to contribute solutions [6, 13]. Here instead of contributing 
original ideas, we aim to use non-expert crowd workers to 
mine the web for ideas in various domains that might help 
solve the target problem. Knowledge, methods, principles, 
skills and tools that experts use in their domains have often 
been  amply  documented  on  the  Internet.  For  example,  the 
origami 
the  previously 
mentioned  NASA  example  can  be  found  through  a  search 
for  “origami  patterns”.  Thus,  problem  solvers  who  might 
not  possess 
themselves  might 
profitably search for outside-the-box knowledge online.  

the  desired  expertise 

techniques  used 

development 

research 

folding 

in 

to 

and 

IDENTIFYING   OUTSIDE-­THE-­BOX  

EXPERIMENT   1:  
DOMAINS    
Our overall goal in this research is to elicit distant domains 
and  useful  inspirations  from  a  large,  open-ended  idea 
repository  such  as  the  web.  In  particular,  we  aim  to  go 
beyond  previous  design-by-analogy  work  in  providing  a 
structured  process  for  identifying  fruitful  domains  for 
exploration,  rather  than  simply  asking  individuals  to  find 
useful  examples  directly.  We  hypothesize  that  doing  so 
requires  generating  and  exploring  domains  that  are  distant 
from the original problem domain, yet contain structurally 
similar  and  relevant  inspirations.  In  Experiment  1  we 

1215

explore a process for generating distant structurally similar 
domains,  and  in  Experiment  2  we  test  whether  the  found 
domains yield relevant and useful inspirations. 
In  a  pilot  study  we  asked  workers  directly  to  identify 
domains  that  might  be  useful  for  solving  the  schematic 
representation  of  the  problem.  However,  the  resulting 
domains  were  generally  too  vague  to  be  useful  (e.g., 
“engineering”).  To  address  this  problem  we  turned  to  a 
mechanism  that  people  use  in  real  life  when  they  are 
looking for knowledge in a different domain: they look for 
referrals. The intuition is that even if people might not have 
the  desired  knowledge  a  problem  needs  and  are  not 
accustomed  to  thinking  about  “domains”  of  knowledge, 
they may be able to identify a type of expert in a different 
domain  who  might  deal  with  relevant  problems.  We  thus 
reframed  our  elicitation  from  crowd  workers,  asking  them 
to identify professions that could have useful perspectives. 
For example, if the goal were to design a new power strip, 
one might ask about professions that deal with problems of 
packing things into a limited space. Such professions could 
be  as  diverse  as  landscapers  packing  plants  into  a  small 
yard; warehouse loaders packing products into crates; user 
interface  designers  packing  information  into  interfaces;  or 
even  contortionists  packing 
into  small 
containers.  Some  of  these  domains  might  yield  interesting 
solutions, such as a terraced landscaping solution inspiring 
the  design  of  a  power  strip  with  different  height  levels  to 
avoid plugs obstructing each other. 
The  above  example  also  highlights  the  importance  of 
abstraction in the domain elicitation process. Providing an 
abstract  representation  of  a  problem  can  increase  the 
diversity of the resulting domains found [25]. For example, 
the abstract representation of the power strip’s problem for 
“packing  things  into  a  limited  space”  might  elicit  more 
diverse  professions  than  a  concrete  representation  such  as 
“fitting different sized plugs into a power strip”. 
In Experiment 1 we manipulated the level of abstraction of 
the problem representation (i.e., original, concrete problem 
or  abstracted  problem)  and  asked  people  to  identify 
professions that might have interesting perspectives on the 
problem.  Our  goal  was  to  find  distant  yet  structurally 
relevant domains that might yield useful inspirations. 

their  bodies 

Participants  
One  hundred  and  twenty-two  Amazon  Mechanical  Turk 
workers [12] participated in this experiment. Forty percent 
were women, and 93% were native English speakers. Their 
average age was 33 and ranged from 19 to 68. 
Design  and  Procedure  
We selected two design challenges from a crowd innovation 
website (Quirky.com) to use in the experiment (see Table 1). 
For  each  challenge  we  generated  an  abstract  schematic 
representation by first abstracting the goal and the sub-goals, 
and replacing concrete objects with generic objects sharing 
essential  attributes.  For  example,  the  original  power  strip 

 

1216

SESSION: CROWD INNOVATION AND CROWDFUNDING

Original description 
(Power strip problem) Have a 
look at the power strip under 
your desk. How many of its 
outlets are being used? How 
many of them would you like to 
use, but you can't, because a 
giant power brick (transformer) 
in the adjacent outlet is blocking 
it? How could you fit all the 
different plugs in all the outlets? 
(Cup problem) When we finish 
washing  cups  and  glasses,  we 
have  to  either  spread  them  out 
individually,  but  then  they  take 
up 
space. 
counter 
Alternatively,  we  can 
stack 
them,  but  then  the  cups  never 
dry  completely  and  it  is  hard  to 
separate  them  from  each  other 
later.  How  can  you  dry  many 
cups  quickly  so  that  they  don’t 
take  up  too  much  space  and 
moisture  doesn’t  get 
trapped 
between them? 

the 

all 

Schematic representation 
1. How can you fit objects 
of different sizes into a 
container? (goal) 
 
2. Prevent objects blocking 
each other (sub-goal) 
 
3. Fully make use of a 
container’s capacity (sub-
goal) 
1. How can you dry 
multiple stackable objects? 
(goal) 
2. Prevent multiple similar 
objects from taking up 
much space (sub-goal)  
3. Separate multiple 
stackable objects easily 
(sub-goal) 

Table 1. Original and schematic representations for the two 
design problems (power strip, cup) used in the experiments. 
problem listed on the website talks about plugs and outlets, 
while the schematic version talks about objects fitting into a 
container or blocking each other. While in this research the 
experimenters created the schematic problem representation 
for  convenience  and  standardizing 
the 
experiment,  previous  research  shows  schematization  of  a 
concrete  problem  can  be  done  by  lay  crowd  workers 
following instructions [25].  
After  accepting  the  task,  participants  were  randomly 
assigned  to  either  the  original  or  schematic  representation 
of the power strip or cup problem and asked to recommend 
types  of  experts  for  a  design  problem.  Specifically,  they 
were  asked,  “Please  read  the  design  problem  below  and 
suggest three types of experts who might provide useful or 
interesting perspectives in solving it and explain why”.  

input 

the 

to 

Rating  the  Recommended  Experts  
We  hypothesized  that  the  schematic  representation  would 
return  a  more  diverse  set  of  experts.  Table  2  shows 
examples of the recommended experts for the two problems 
in  the  two  conditions.  Some  professions  appeared  in  both 
problems  (e.g.,  carpenter,  construction  worker)  but  for 
different reasons. For example, a rationale for a carpenter in 
the  cup  problem  was  that  they  could  “design  a  rack  that 
separates the cups just enough so they can dry properly, but 
not  take  up  too  much  space”  while  for  the  power  strip 
problem  they  “Could  design  hidden  compartments  to  run 
cords  to  other  outlets  that  would  also  keep  the  cords 
hidden.” 

forklift  operators,  and 

In  the  original  concrete  formulation  of  the  cup  problem, 
most  recommendations  appeared  to  invoke  people  who 
would  have  direct  knowledge  about  kitchens  and  cups  – 
e.g.,  housewives,  chefs,  bartenders,  cup  designers,  and 
interior designers. Similarly, many participants who saw the 
original  description  of 
strip  problem 
recommended electricians and electronic engineers. 
In  contrast,  the  schematic  representations  of  the  cup 
problem  appeared  to  return  a  wider  variety  of  experts, 
including  bakers, 
sculptors. 
Participants who saw the power strip problem’s schematic 
representation recommended a variety of experts who work 
with  problems  related  to  sizes,  shapes,  and  blocking.  For 
example, in the schematic representation of the power strip 
problem, a participant recommended a topology expert and 
the 
explained, 
mathematical  study  of  shapes  and  shapes  in  space  which 
would help with deciding about objects of different sizes.”  
To  analyze  whether  the  conditions  differed  in  generating 
domains  two  judges  rated  each  recommendation  on  two 
dimensions:  whether  the  expert  was  unique  among  all 
recommendations for the same problem and how distant the 
expert’s domain was from the original problem domain. To 
count 
similar 
recommendations  into  single  one.  For  example,  “mover” 
and  “a  moving  expert-moving  peoples’  possessions  from 
one home to another” were both classified as “mover”. To 
judge distance, two judges blind to experimental condition 
rated  each  recommended  expert  on  a  7-point  Likert  scale: 
“How different is the above power strip problem from the 
problems that the recommended expert works with in his or 

“This  person  would 

experts,  we 

know  about 

unique 

combined 

Condition 
Original 
Schematic 

Freq. 
204 
162 

Percent of unique 
experts 
Mean 
0.41 
0.60 

S.E. 
0.03 
0.04 

Distance 
Mean 
3.87 
5.74 

S.E 
0.23 
0.16 

Note on frequency: There were 68 participants in Original 
representation and 54 participants in Schematic representation. 
Each participant provided three recommendations. 

Table 3. Experiment 1: Means and standard errors.  
 
her domain?” By this metric, for example, a “mail sorter” 
was  considered  further  from  the  cup  problem  than  was  a 
inter-rater 
dishwasher.  The 
reliability  of  0.78,  calculated  using 
Intraclass 
Correlation Coefficient (ICC) [5]. The final distance score 
was calculated by averaging the scores of the two judges. 

judges  achieved  a  good 
the 

Analysis  and  Results  
Table  3  shows  the  means  and  standard  errors  of  the 
percentages  of  unique  experts  and  the  distance  scores.  A 
proportion  test  showed  participants  identified  a  larger 
proportion  of  unique  experts  when  shown  schematic 
descriptions  of  the  problem  than  when  shown  the  more 
concrete,  original  problem  descriptions (z  =  3.21, p < 
0.001).  Participants 
schematic  problem 
descriptions also recommended domains more distant from 
problem domain than did those shown the original problem 
description (z = -5.89, p < 0.001, by a Mann-Whitney U test 
used because of the skewed distribution).  

shown 

the 

EXPERIMENT  2:  GENERATING  IDEAS    
Although  Experiment  1  suggests  that  that  converting  the 
original problem description into a schematic representation 
and eliciting domains in the form of professions led people 
to  identify  more  distant  structurally  related  domains. 
However,  it  fails  to  answer  the  key  question  of  whether 
these  distant  domains  yield  more  useful  inspirations  that 
lead  to  more  creative  solutions  that  the  ones  found  in 
domains closer to the original problem domain. While more 
distant domains have the potential to yield inspirations that 
break  fixation  with  the  original  problem  and  suggest 
interesting  approaches  from  other  domains,  it  is  also 
possible  that  these  domains  might  not  be  sufficiently 
relevant  to  the  target  problem  to  yield  useful  inspirations. 
For  example,  in  Table  2  the  schematic  representation 
resulted  in  professions  that  at  first  glance  might  not  seem 
relevant, such as “magician” for the power strip problem or 
“parking lot attendant” for the cups problem. However, on 
closer  inspection  workers  provided  rationales  that  make 
these  potentially  plausible  sources,  such  as  “Can  make 
objects appear to do many things you might think illogical” 
for magician, perhaps suggesting that some trick mechanics 
might  help  fit  things  in  places  you  wouldn’t  expect;  or 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

the  power 

Cup problem 

Original 
Chef, 
Housewife, 
Bartender,  
Carpenter, 
Counter-
designer, 
Cup designer, 
Dishwasher,  
Gardener, 
Glass expert, 
Home-builder, 
Maid, 
HVAC-
technician, 
Interior-
designer, 
Professional-
organizer, 
Rack-
specialist, 
Waiter 

Schematic 
Baker, 
Bodybuilder, 
Carpenter, 
Cashier, 
Construction  –
worker, 
Designer, 
Fireman, 
Forklift- 
operator, 
Landscaper, 
Mail sorter, 
Mathematician 
specializing  in 
geometry, 
Meteorologist, 
Parking-lot-
attendant, 
Pianist, 
Potter,  
Sculptor 
 

Power strip problem 
Schematic 
Contortionist, 
Geometry-
expert, 
Graphic-
designer, 
Landscaper, 
Magician,  
Physicist, 
Sculptor, 
User-interface-
designer, 
Architect, 
Warehouse-
dock-loader,  
Artist, 
Expert-of- 
arithmetic, 
Expert-on-
Japanese-
aesthetics,  
Expert-on-
topology 

Original 
Electrician, 
Building- 
contractor, 
Computer-
technician, 
Housewife, 
Network-
engineer, 
Interior-
designer, 
Artificial-
intelligence-
scientist, 
Building- 
maintainer, 
Cable installer, 
Carpenter, 
Construction- 
worker, 
Electrical-
engineer 
 

Table 2. Examples of the recommended expert domains 

from Experiment 1 in the Original and Schematic problem 

representation conditions. 

 

1217

interested 
find  more  useful  and 

“…needs  to  be  wise  about  how  they  position  cars  so  that 
they can get in and out whenever needed…would know the 
best way to position objects” for the parking lot attendant. 
In  this  experiment  we  explore  whether  distant  domains 
would  yield  useful  inspirations  by  having  participants 
generate  new  ideas  using  the  inspirations  found  in  the 
in  whether 
previous  experiment.  We  are 
participants  can 
interesting 
inspirational  sources  from  an  outside-the-box  domain  and 
solve the problem better than when searching on their own 
or  when  searching  in  a  domain  that  shared  surface 
similarities  to  the  problem  domain.  Our  hypothesis  is  that 
the benefits of far domains occur only when they are likely 
to contain ideas that  have deep structural correspondences 
to  the  original  problem.  Thus,  one  purpose  of  this 
experiment is to insure that distance from the target domain 
by itself is not what leads to better problem solutions.  
The  experiment  involved  four  conditions.  In  the  Problem-
driven  condition,  participants  searched  for  inspiration  in  a 
domain 
the  original  problem 
description. In the Schema-driven condition, they searched 
for 
the 
schematic  problem  representation.  The  Irrelevant  schema-
driven control condition tested whether far domains that are 
not  structurally  similar  to  the  original  problem  have  the 
same benefits as far domains that were structurally similar. 
Specifically,  participants  searched  for  inspirations  for  the 
cup problem in a domain recommended from the schematic 
problem representation of the power strip problem and vice 
versa. Finally, we also included a control condition where 
participants  were  asked  to  search  for  inspiration  on  their 
own,  called  the  Self-selected  condition.    In  all  these 
conditions,  participants  first  searched  for  inspirations  and 
then 
to  solve 
the 
inspirations they found. 

the  original  problem  using 

inspiration 

in  a  domain  recommended  from 

recommended 

from 

tried 

Participants  
Overall 130 Amazon Mechanical Turk workers participated 
in Experiment 2. Forty-six percent were women, and 96% 
were native English speakers. Their average age was 34 and 
ranged from 18 to 66. Participants from Experiment 1 were 
excluded from participating in Experiment 2. 
Design  and  Procedure  
After  participants  accepted  the  task,  they  were  randomly 

 

Independent variable 

% 

creative 
0.26 
Self-selected 
0.12 
Problem-driven 
0.65 
Schema-driven 
Irrelevant schema 
0.25 
p < .01 = ** p < .001 = *** 

Odds 
Ratio 
5.44** 
13.53*** 
NA 
5.45** 

se 

Z 

3.10 
2.98 
8.91   3.95 
NA 
NA 
3.08 
3.01 

Table 4. The effects of inspiration condition on design 

quality. 

 

SESSION: CROWD INNOVATION AND CROWDFUNDING

assigned  to  one  of  the  four  experimental  conditions.  They 
were  asked  to  search  for  two  inspirational  examples  for 
either the Cup or Power Strip problem and then generate a 
new product idea that solved the problem. They were either 
given  no  hint  about  where  to  search  for  inspiration  (Self-
selected)  or  were  told  to  look  for  their  inspirations  from 
domains  recommended  in  Experiment  1  from  participants 
who  saw  the  concrete  version  of  an  original  problem 
(Problem-driven),  the  schematized  version  of  the  original 
problem  (Schema-driven)  or  a  schematized  version  of  an 
irrelevant problem (Irrelevant schema-driven). Instructions 
for the conditions are described in more detail below: 
1.  Self-selected.  Participants  saw  either  the  Cup  or  Power 
strip problem as described on the left column in Table 1 and 
then asked to search for useful ideas on the web that would 
help  them  design  a  solution  to  the  problem.  Specifically, 
they  were  told,  “Please  go  to  the  Internet  and  find  two 
useful ideas that could inspire good solutions for the above 
problem. These ideas could be knowledge, skills or methods 
other  people  use  to  solve  a  similar  problem  in  their  own 
domain. Please  don't  search  for  ideas  related  to  this  cup 
[power  strip]  problem.  The  useful  ideas  have  to  be  about 
similar problems in a non-cup related domain.” After they 
found  two  useful  ideas,  they  were  asked  to  solve  the 
problem.  Specifically  they  were  told,  “Please  generate  a 
new  product  idea  that  solves  the  above  design  problem 
using the ideas you found.” 
2.  Problem-driven.  After  seeing  one  of  the  two  design 
problems, participants were asked to search for useful ideas 
that  an  expert  in  the  problem  domain  might  have.  For 
example, if they were assigned the housewife domain, their 
prompt  would  be,  “Please go to the  Internet and  find  two 
useful ideas a housewife might have that could inspire good 

Inspiration 

Expert domains and solutions 
An architect: 
Cup with studs on sides, so that they can 
be stacked while allowing airflow to dry 
easily. 

A carpenter: 
Maybe instead of a linear power strip it 
could be built as an arc or circle that 
allows more plugs to fit in basically the 
same amount of space.  By turning a line 
into a circle it opens up more room 
around each plug or AC adaptor.  
An expert on Japanese aesthetics:  
If you made an outlet that looks like a 
Miyabi style building. You could go up 
levels and it would leave more room for 
the plugs to go around the outlet.  

 

 

 

Table 5. Examples of inspirations and resulting solutions 

from participants. 

 

1218

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

from 

the 

replacement 

solutions  for  the  above  problem.  These  ideas  could  be 
knowledge,  skills,  or  methods a  housewife  uses  to  solve  a 
similar  problem  in  his  or  her  own  domain. Please  don't 
search  for  ideas  related  to  this  cup  problem.  The  useful 
ideas  have  to  be  about  problems  in  the  domain  that a 
housewife deals with.” An expert was randomly selected an 
expert  without 
domains 
recommended  in  the  Original  representation  condition  in 
Experiment 1, with a probability proportional to the number 
of  times  the  expert  was  recommended  in  Experiment  1. 
After  finding  two  useful  ideas,  participants  were  asked  to 
solve the problem using those ideas as inspiration. 
3.  Schema-driven.  This  condition  is  identical  to  the 
Problem-driven  condition  except  that  participants  were 
asked  to  find  inspirations  from  domains  identified  in  the 
Schematic representation condition in Experiment 1. After 
finding two inspirations, they then solved the problem.  
4. Irrelevant schema-driven. This condition was identical to 
the  Schema-driven  condition  except  that  participants  were 
asked to find inspirations from the domains identified in the 
Schematic representation condition in Experiment 1 for an 
irrelevant problem.  That is, if participants were to solve the 
cups problem, they were shown domains recommended for 
the power strip problem and vice versa.  After finding two 
inspirations, they then solved the problem.  
There were roughly 90 recommendations identified in each 
condition in Experiment 1. When selecting domains to give 
to participants, we coalesced domains to give related ones a 
common name and excluded generic recommendations such 
as “scientist” and “engineer”.  

Quality  of  the  Design  Solutions  
Judging  the  creative  quality  of  an  idea  can  be  difficult 
problem  involving  significant  subjectivity.  To  judge  the 
ideas  we  draw  on  previous  research  establishing  methods 
for robustly rating creative idea quality, which considers an 
idea  as  being  creative  if  it  is  both  novel  and  practical [4]. 
Novelty  was  defined  as  an  idea  that  was  not  obvious  and 
differed from existing products  on the market. Practicality 
was  defined  as  how  realistically  an  idea  achieved  its  goal 
and could be designed and manufactured.  
 
Two  judges  blind  to  experimental  condition  iterated  on  a 
rubric  for  rating  product  ideas,  then  used  this  rubric  to 
independently  rate  each  idea  on  two  7-point  Likert  scales 
measuring  novelty  and  practicality.  The  judges  achieved 
good  ICC  inter-rater  reliabilities  of  0.79  and  0.61  for 
novelty  and  practicality  respectively.  The  final  creativity 
score of each idea was computed as the mean of its novelty 
and  practicality  scores.  Some  limitations  of  this  approach 
are discussed in the discussion section. 
 
Below  is  an  example  of  a  solution  to  the  power  strip 
problem  rated  highly  in  terms  of  both  novelty  (6.0)  and 
practicality (6.0). 

1219

the  source  of 

Make a power strip that has some outlets raised about the 
others. That way a large plug can fit into the raised outlet 
and still leave room for another plug in the outlet that isn't 
raised. 
 
In contrast, the design idea below was rated poorly on both 
dimensions of novelty (1.0) and practicality (2.5). 
 
I  would  propose  a  specially  made  power  strip  that  is 
longer,  and  wider  than  any  power  strip  on  the  market. 
Would that has enough space between each socket to fit any 
plug,  or  power  brick  comfortably.  Of  course  it  would  be 
bigger, but that is a fair trade off. 
  
Following  recommendations  from  [4],  we  then  classified 
each  design  as  creative  if  it  was  above  a  media-split 
threshold  of  3.0  for  both  novelty  and  practicality  or  non-
creative otherwise.  
Analysis  and  Results  
To  determine  whether 
the  domains 
participants  used  as  inspiration  influenced  the  quality  of 
their  designs,  we  conducted  a  logistic  regression  model 
predicting with whether an idea was creative (1) or not (0) 
from  the  experimental  conditions,  along  with  level  of 
education  and  whether  the  participants’  language  was 
English  as  controls.  Table  4  summarizes  the  results,  with 
Schema-driven  domain  as  the  reference  group.  Results 
indicate that searching for inspiration in domains far from 
the original problem significantly increased the probability 
of generating a creative solution compared to searching in 
Problem-driven  domains, 
in  Irrelevant  schema-driven 
domains or when given no direction about which domains 
to search. The odds of producing a creative idea when given 
recommendations  to  search  in  a  Schema-driven  domain 
were  13.53  times  the  odds  when  given  a  Problem-driven 
domain,  5.45  times  the  odds  when  given  an  Irrelevant 
schema-driven  domain  and  5.44  times  of  the  odds  when 
participants  searched  for  inspiration  with  guidance  about 
domain (Self-selected). 
To  further  examine  whether  the  domain  of  search  is 
responsible  for  the  difference  in  the  quality  of  ideas,  we 
added the domain distance score (judged in Experiment 1) 
as  a  mediator  and  re-run  the  logistic  regression  analysis. 
The  results  show  that  domain  distance  is  significantly 
correlated  with  the  odds  of  producing  a  creative  idea:  for 
every  one-unit  increase  in  the  distance  score,  the  odds  of 
producing  a  creative  idea  increases  by  2.07  times  (p  < 
0.01).  After  adding  domain  distance  as  a  mediator,  the 
quality  difference  between  the  problem-driven  condition 
and the schema-driven condition became non-signiﬁcant (b 
=  -0.96,  p  =  .23).  However,  the  difference  of  idea  quality 
still  exists  between  the  schema-driven  condition  and  the 
irrelevant  schema-driven  condition:  even  holding  domain 
distance  constant,  the  odds  of  producing  a  creative  idea 
when given recommendations to search in a schema-driven 

to 

in 

the 

idea  quality 

target  domain  created  by 

the  problem-driven  condition.  That 

domain  were  3.22  times  of  the  odds  when  given  an 
irrelevant schema-driven domain (p<0.05).  
The  mediation  analysis  suggests  that  the  distance  of 
inspiration  from 
the 
abstraction of the problem schemas completely explains the 
the  schema-driven  condition 
higher 
compared 
is, 
compared  to  the  problem-driven  condition,  people  in  the 
scheme-driven  condition  used  examples  from  distant 
domains as inspiration, which in terms led them to generate 
creative  ideas.  However,  the  distance  of  inspiration  from 
the  target  domain  only  partially  explains  why  solutions 
inspired  by  schema-driven  examples  were  more  creative 
than  ones  inspired  by irrelevant  schema-driven  ones.  This 
failure of mediation shows that the benefits of far domains 
occur only when they are likely to contain ideas that have 
deep structural similarities to the original problem. 
Search  Mechanisms  
In  Experiment  2,  we  found  that  people  were  able  to  find 
relevant  inspirational  examples  for  a  problem  in  remote 
domains and were more likely to generate creative ideas by 
using the inspirations that was found from remote domains.  
These results, however, beg the question of how non-expert 
crowd workers were able to find useful ideas in unfamiliar 
domains. People found and used inspiration in the schema-
driven  domains  using  a  variety  of  mechanisms.  To 
illustrate,  Table  5  shows  the  inspirations  people  found  by 
searching in the domain of an architect, a carpenter, and an 
expert  on  Japanese  aesthetics.  Searching  in  an  architect’s 
domain, a participant found and adopted the energy-saving 
ventilation  design  of  a  building  for  the  cup  problem; 
searching  in  a  carpenter’s  domain,  a  participant  was 
inspired  by  the  circle-shape  of  a  drawer;  and  searching in 
the domain of Japanese aesthetics, a participant borrowed a 
design  of  the  Japanese  Miyabi.  Other  participants  also 
utilized  the  mechanisms  and  principles  of  other  domains. 
For example, a participant designed a power strip that has 
some  outlets  raised  about  the  others  by  utilizing  how 
warehouse dock loading systems work. Another participant 
designed  a  bendable  power  strip  by  searching  in  a 
contortionist’s domain.  
These  forms  of  inspiration  are  much  different  from  those 
found through domains recommended based on the original 
problem  description  or  when  participants  searched  for 
inspirations on their own. In these conditions, people found 
ideas related to organizing clutter, drying dishware, or rack 
design.  When  searching  based  on  irrelevant  domains, 
people  often  found  information  that  appeared  random  and 
their  solutions  were  not  well  connected  to  the  inspirations 
they found.   
The  findings  support  the  assumption  that  knowledge 
encoded on the web in various expert domains is useful in 
sparking  creative  solutions  for  a  related  problem  in  a 
different domain. However, the outside-the-box knowledge 

1220

SESSION: CROWD INNOVATION AND CROWDFUNDING

representation 

in  Experiment  1: 

had to be structurally alignable and relevant to the problem 
as  well.  The  distance  and  relevance  were  created  through 
the  schematic 
the 
abstraction  reduces  the  domain  fixation  leading  to  a 
distance  between 
the 
recommended domains, while goals and sub-goals keep the 
connection  between 
in 
Experiment  2  work  as  a  mediation  step  to  bridge  the 
schematic  representation  and  the  useful  ideas  in  the 
domains. 

them.  The  expert  domains 

the  original  problem 

and 

to 

a  more 

statement 

DISCUSSION  
Previous  research  has  shown  that  creative  solutions  to 
problems  often  emerge  when  experts  from  outside  a 
problem domain apply their “foreign” skills, techniques and 
tools to the problem.  This insight inspired our research in 
developing a systematic process to leverage crowd workers 
to harvest potentially applicable ideas from fields outside of 
a problem’s domain. To do so, we had to get the workers to 
“think  outside  of  the  box”  and  overcome  the  challenge  of 
functional  fixedness  [1],  the  cognitive  bias  that  limits 
people to using objects only for their traditional purposes. 
We  addressed  this  challenge  by  transforming  the  original, 
concrete  problem 
abstract 
representation.  When  combined  with  an  instruction  set 
framed in terms of “referrals”, this schematic representation 
of the problem allowed people to identify a more diverse set 
of  domains  to  explore  for  potential  solutions  than  did  the 
original, concrete problem description.  
Moreover,  when  non-expert  crowd  workers  searched  for 
inspirations for solutions in domains primed by the abstract 
representations, 
they  returned  a  rich  set  of  relevant 
examples.  Their  examples  were  often  very  different  from 
the original problem in terms of surface features, but shared 
structural  features.    For  example,  at  the  surface  level  a 
Miyabi  style  building  has  little  in  common  with  an 
electrical  power  strip,  but  its  three  dimensional  structure 
and  arrangement  of  rooms  might  suggest  ways  to  fit 
different  plugs  in  a  power  strip.  Crowd  workers  who 
collected inspirations from these remote domains produced 
more  creative  problem  solutions  than  did  those  who 
searched  for  inspiration  without  guidance  about  where  to 
look  or  who  looked  for  inspiration  in  domains  primed  by 
the  original  concrete  problem  statement  or  by  an  abstract 
representation  of  a  problem  that  did  not  share  structural 
correspondence with the target problem.  
We asked Amazon Mechanical Turk workers, who were not 
selected  for  engineering  or  design  expertise,  to  solve 
relatively 
real  design  challenges.  The 
participants provided brief text descriptions of the approach 
they  would  take  to  a  problem,  such  as  building  a  power 
strip  in  two  dimension  (a  curve)  or  three  dimension  (a 
tower);  they  were  not  required  to  provide  details  about 
implementation.  Despite  these  limitations,  the  Cup  and 
Power  Strip  problems  were  authentic  design  challenges 
taken  from  Quirky.com,  the  crowd  innovation  company 

simple  but 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

specializing in consumer products. In the past, members of 
the Quirky community designed detailed solutions for these 
challenges,  and  Quirky 
itself  manufactured  and  sold 
consumer  products  to  solve  these  problems.  Interestingly, 
some of the solutions provided by crowd workers, such as a 
bendable power strip inspired by the contortionist domain, 
paralleled those from the Quirky community itself, such as 
the  bendable  PivotPower  (one  of  Quirky’s  most  popular 
products).  Similarity,  the  architecture-inspired  method  for 
attaching studs to cups so that air  could circulate between 
stacked cups to dry them is highly reminiscent of Totem Air 
Dry  (another  Quirky  product).  Workers  did  not  indicate 
being  influenced  by  Quirky  products  and  none  returned  a 
Quirky  product  as  an  inspiration.  When  they  submitted 
design  ideas  that  paralleled  Quirky  products,  their  designs 
had  clear  links  to  examples  retrieved  from  their  assigned 
source  domains,  although  we  cannot  guarantee 
that 
participants  had  never  seen  the  relevant  Quirky  products. 
However,  assuming  no  direct  influence,  parallels  between 
crowd  workers’  solutions  and  those  manufactured  by 
Quirky  suggest  that  the  design  ideas  participants  came  up 
with  in  this  controlled  experiment  could  be  commercially 
valuable in the world. 
We  consider  our  research,  which  challenged  relatively 
unsophisticated  workers  to  solve  relatively  simple  design 
problems, only a first step.  One area for profitable future 
research  is  investigating  whether  this  process  will  be 
effective  in  crowd  innovation  sites  like  InnoCentive, 
TopCoder,  or  MathOverflow,  which  typically  challenge 
sophisticated experts to solve complicated R&D problems. 
We believe the process of searching for inspirations outside 
of  a  problem’s  domain  should  be  useful  to  overcome 
functional  fixedness  for  sophisticated  problems  as  well  as 
simple ones and may actually be more useful for problems 
that  require  deep  expertise.  Abstracting  away  some  of  the 
non-essential  features  of  the  problem  should  help  in 
identifying  new  domains  in  which  to  search  for  solutions. 
However,  when  the  problem  is  complex  or  when  the 
solution must be fully elaborated or reduced to practice, one 
may need to recruit true experts from the distant knowledge 
domains  and  not  just  novices  reading  what  experts  had 
previously written.  
Another limitation in the current research is that one of the 
two judges in Experiment 2 was the first author. While both 
were  blind  to  experimental  condition  and  used  rubrics  to 
reduce  bias  and 
their  ratings,  future 
experiments  could  benefit  from  separate  judges  to  reduce 
any biases resulting from trying to infer which experimental 
condition  each  idea  came.  Future  research  could  also 
examine the robustness of using non-designers as judges in 
this  context,  though  prior  work  shows  high  agreement 
between designers and non-designers in judging consumer 
products [e.g., 23]. 
The approach of using schemas as described here could also 
benefit  from  further  research  into  the  boundary  conditions 

to  standardize 

1221

for  where  schemas  are  useful.  For  example,  it  is  not  yet 
clear  whether  schemas  would  be  as  useful  if  the  design 
process continued past  ideation into the prototyping stage. 
Prototyping  may  force  people  to  think  more  deeply  about 
how to adapt specific mechanisms of inspirational examples 
to  a  solution,  which  may  result  in  poor  fits.  For  example, 
people  may  run  into  configurational  or  material  use 
problem  with  designing  a  Japanese  Miyabi-style  power 
strip, which could limit the practicality of manufacturing it.  

the 

Representing  Problems  in  Crowd  Innovation  
A core contribution of this work is that we use a problem’s 
abstract representation as a cue to identify domains where a 
solution  might  be  found,  instead  of  directly  searching  for 
analogical ideas [25]. This opens up the search space from 
well-defined idea repositories (as in [25]) to the entire web. 
Starting  a  search  for  solutions  in  experts’  domains  can 
provide  more  concrete  guidance  about 
type  of 
knowledge  needed  to  solve  a  problem  than  more  abstract 
schematic  representations  of  the  problem,  which  can  be 
ambiguous  and  difficult  to  interpret.  Presenting  different 
domains  to  different  problem  solvers  opens  up  the  search 
space  and  helps  solves  find  more  varied  inspirations  even 
from the same schematic representation.  
We  argue  that  problem  representation  is  an  important 
research topic with the rise of crowd innovation. This new 
problem-solving model opens a rich research area on how 
to formulate problems so that a distributed group of people 
can  solve  them  creatively.  The  schematic  representation 
proposed  in  this  paper  is  one  approach  constructing  an 
alternative  representation  for  a  problem 
to 
encourage  outside-the-box  search  for  solutions.  However, 
how to identify the most productive level of abstraction for 
a  particular  design  challenge  is  still  an  open  question.  An 
interesting  area  for  future  study  is  whether  more  complex 
problems  on  sites  such  as  InnoCentive  could  be  re-
represented and classified based on abstract goals and sub-
problems,  and  thereby  attract  more  actual  outside-the-box 
experts to solve them.  

in  order 

ACKOWLEDGEMENTS  
This work was supported by NSF grants IIS-1526665, IIS-
1149797,  IIS-1217559,  OCI-0943148,  IIS-0968484,  IIS-
1111124,  Bosch,  Google,  and  Microsoft,  Heinz  College 
Center  for  the  Future  of  Work,  and  Carnegie  Mellon’s 
Center  for  the  Future  of  Work.  We  thank  reviewers  for 
useful feedback. 

REFERENCES  
1.   Robert E. Adamson. 1952. Functional fixedness as 

related to problem solving: A repetition of three 
experiments. Journal of experimental psychology 44, 4: 
288. 

2.   Meg Monk. 2013. The Digital Universe.  

http://universe.byu.edu/2013/12/12/byu-engineers-use-
origami-to-make-more-space-in-space/ 

SESSION: CROWD INNOVATION AND CROWDFUNDING

16.  David W. McDonald and Mark S. Ackerman. 2000. 
Expertise recommender: a flexible recommendation 
system and architecture. In Proceedings of the 2000 
ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative 
work (CSCW ‘00), 231–240. 

17.  The New York Times. Car Mechanic Dreams Up a Tool 

to Ease Births. 
www.nytimes.com/2013/11/14/health/new-tool-to-ease-
difficult-births-a-plastic-bag.html 

18.  Tony Poze. 1983. Analogical connections—The essence 

of creativity. The Journal of creative behavior 17, 4: 
240–258. 

19.  Robert J. Sternberg. 1998. Handbook of creativity. 

Cambridge University Press. 

20.  Lynn Streeter and Karen E. Lochbaum. 1988. An 
expert/expert-locating system based on automatic 
representation of semantic structure. In Proceedings of 
the Fourth Conference on Artificial Intelligence 
Applications (IEEE ‘88), 345–350. 

21.  Thomas B. Ward. 1998. Analogical distance and 

purpose in creative thought: Mental leaps versus mental 
hops. Advances in analogy research: Integration of 
theory and data from the cognitive, computational, and 
neural sciences, 221–230. 

22.  Youtube, 

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uL1ovAYtKuQ 
23.   Lixiu Yu and Jeffrey V. Nickerson. 2011. Cooks or 
cobblers?: crowd creativity through combination. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’11), 1393–1402. 
24.  Lixiu Yu, Aniket Kittur, and Robert E. Kraut. 2014. 
Distributed analogical idea generation: inventing with 
crowds. Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’14), 1245–
1254. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556288.25573781 
25.   Lixiu Yu, Aniket Kittur, and Robert E. Kraut. 2014. 

Searching for analogical ideas with crowds. Proceedings 
of the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors 
in computing systems, (CHI ‘14), 1225–1234. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557378 

26.   Jun Zhang and Mark S. Ackerman. 2005. Searching for 

expertise in social networks: a simulation of potential 
strategies. Proceedings of the 2005 international ACM 
SIGGROUP conference on supporting group work, 71-
80

3.   Maryam Fazel-Zarandi and Eric Yu. 2008. Ontology-

based expertise finding. In Practical Aspects of 
Knowledge Management. Springer, 232–243. 

4.   Ronald A. Finke, Thomas B. Ward, and Steven M. 

Smith. 1992. Creative cognition: Theory, research, and 
applications. Bradford Book. 

5.   Ronald Aylmer Fisher. 1954. Statistical methods for 

research workers. Oliver and Boyd. 

6.   Karsten Frey, Christian Luthje, and Simon Haag. 2011. 

Whom Should Firms Attract to Open Innovation 
Platforms? The Role of Knowledge Diversity and 
Motivation. Long Range Planning 44, 5–6: 397–420. 

7.   Morten Friis-Olivarius. 2013. Overcoming design 

fixation through education and creativity methods. The 
19th International Conference on Engineering Design. 
(ICED’13), 139–148. 

8.   Dedre Gentner, Sarah Brem, Ron Ferguson, Philip 

Wolff, Arthur B. Markaman, and Ken Forbus. 1997. 
Analogy and creativity in the works of Johannes Kepler.  
T. N. Ward, S. M. Smith, J. Vaid, eds. Creative 
Thought. Amer. Psych. Association, Washington, DC, 
403–460. 

9.   Dedre Gentner, Russell Landers, and others. 1985. 

Analogical reminding: A good match is hard to find. In 
Proceedings of the international conference on systems, 
man and cybernetics, 607–613. 

10.  Andrew Hargadon and Robert I. Sutton. 1997. 

Technology brokering and innovation in a product 
development firm. Administrative science quarterly, 
716–749. 

11.  Keith James Holyoak. 1996. Mental leaps: Analogy in 

creative thought. MIT press. 

12.  Aniket Kittur, Ed H. Chi, and Bongwon Suh. 

Crowdsourcing user studies with Mechanical Turk. In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’08), 453–456. 
13.  Karim R. Lakhani, Lars Bo Jeppesen, Peter Andreas 

Lohse, and Jill A. Panetta. 2007. The value of openess in 
scientific problem solving. Division of Research, 
Harvard Business School. 

14.  J.S. Linsey, A.B. Markman, and K.L. Wood. 2012. 
Design by analogy: A study of the WordTree method for 
problem re-representation. Journal of Mechanical 
Design 134, 4, 041009. 

15.  Tony McCaffrey. 2012. Innovation relies on the obscure 
a key to overcoming the classic problem of functional 
fixedness. Psychological science, 0956797611429580. 

 
 
 

1222

