CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

On the Bias: Self-esteem Biases Across Communication 

Channels during Romantic Couple Conflict 

Lauren Scissors, Darren Gergle  

Northwestern University 

2240 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL 60208 USA 

{l-scissors, dgergle}@northwestern.edu 

ABSTRACT 
Are  one’s 
individual  biases  stronger  when  mediated 
communication  is  used?  This  paper  examines  the  role  of 
self-esteem-related  biases  and  communication  channel 
during 
romantic  couple  conflict.  Romantic  couples 
communicated about a conflict either face-to-face (FtF) or 
via instant messenger (IM). Results revealed that for people 
with lower levels of self-esteem, their negative biases were 
triggered  when  they  communicated  with  their  partners  via 
IM;  people  with  lower  levels  of  self-esteem  had  more 
negative  assessments  of  the  conflict  discussion  and  of  the 
impact  of 
the  relationship  when 
communicating via IM than when communicating FtF. At a 
theoretical  level,  this  work  deepens  our  understanding  of 
how individual difference variables like self-esteem impact 
how individuals process information and communicate via 
technology.  At  a  practical  level,  findings  suggest  that  the 
use  of  mediated  communication  during  conflict  is  more 
harmful to certain individuals than to others. 

the  discussion  on 

Author Keywords 
Conflict; romantic relationships; computer-mediated 
communication; self-esteem  
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous. 

INTRODUCTION 
Relational communication that was once reserved for face-
to-face  (FtF)  encounters  has  spilled  into  the  realm  of 
technology-mediated communication [47]. Individuals now 
use  technology  to  initiate,  maintain,  and  even  dissolve 
relationships, and close relational ties are more likely to use 
multiple communication channels to communicate than are 
weak ties [16]. Yet, scholars are just beginning to uncover 
how technology-mediated communication differs from FtF 
communication in many relational contexts.  

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be  honored. 
Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or  republish,  to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02...$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820080

383

rather 

in  which 

to  use  mediated 

One  context 
the  use  of  communication 
technologies  is  becoming  more  prevalent  is  interpersonal 
conflict  [48,  13,  37,  5].  Understanding  how  individuals 
communicate  during  conflict  is  important  since  conflict  is 
inevitable  in  interpersonal  relationships,  and  how  partners 
handle conflict can greatly impact relational outcomes (see 
[39]  for  a  review),  as  well  as  mental  and  physical  well-
being (see [24] for a review). 
One  group  of  people  who  are  particularly  drawn  to  using 
technology  to  communicate  with  relational  partners  are 
people  with  lower  levels  of  self-esteem.  Studies  have 
demonstrated  that  people  with  lower  levels  of  self-esteem 
(LSEs)  prefer 
than  FtF 
communication in a variety of contexts, likely because the 
ambiguity  of  mediated  communication  can  reduce  face-
threat (e.g, [21, 43]). Yet, it may be that the communication 
channels  LSEs  prefer  are  actually  ill-suited  to  their 
communication  and  relational  needs.  For  instance,  one 
study found that while LSEs were drawn to Facebook as a 
way  to  connect  with  others  through  self-disclosure,  their 
disclosures  were  low  in  positivity  and  high  in  negativity, 
which resulted in undesirable feedback from others [11]. In 
the realm of close relationships, however, an open question 
is:  Do  people  with  lower  levels  of  self-esteem  have  more 
negative relational experiences when using the channels of 
communication that they prefer?  
In romantic relationships, LSEs are biased toward negative 
interpretations  of  their  partners’  behavior  and  HSEs  are 
biased  toward  positive  interpretations  of  their  partners’ 
behavior [33, 34]. The goal of this work is to understand the 
relationship  between  self-esteem  and  communication 
channel in romantic couple conflict, a context in which self-
esteem-related biases are particularly salient. The majority 
of previous research in this area has involved hypothetical 
situations,  self-reports  of  past  interactions,  or  controlled 
experiments  with  strangers.  The  current  work,  however, 
examines  the  roles  of  self-esteem  and  communication 
channel 
in  real-time  communication  among  romantic 
couples.  LSEs  are  biased  toward  negative  interpretations, 
especially  in  ambiguous  contexts,  and  how  individuals 
interpret  their  partners’  communication  and  behavior  is 
crucial  to  relational  well-being  [33].  Yet,  we  know  little 
about  how  communication  channel  can  influence  this 
process  for  romantic  couples.  The  current  work  aims  to 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

those  biases 

contribute to our knowledge of how self-esteem biases are 
enacted  by  examining 
in  a  mediated 
communication  setting.  By  understanding  the  extent  to 
which  self-esteem  biases  differ  across  communication 
channels, we can see whether the communication channels 
LSEs prefer are the ones that are actually harmful to their 
relational well-being.  

less  sensitive 

LITERATURE REVIEW 
Self-Esteem in Romantic Relationships 
Self-esteem  represents  how  one  feels  about  one’s  self,  or 
one’s  sense  of  worth,  and  is  drawn  in  large  part  from  our 
perceptions of what others think of us. Individuals with low 
self-esteem  (LSEs)  tend  to  have  trouble  in  their  romantic 
relationships  [33].  LSEs  are  biased 
toward  negative 
interpretations of their partners’ behavior and are sensitive 
to  feelings  of  threat  and  rejection.  In  addition,  LSEs 
dramatically underestimate how positively they are viewed 
by their partners and have lower relational well-being [33] 
and lower relational satisfaction [10, 33]. When faced with 
relationship  difficulties,  LSEs  search  for  information  to 
validate  their  thoughts  that  their  partner  does  not  care  for 
them and distance themselves from their partners as a way 
to protect themselves from getting hurt [34].  
In  contrast  to  LSEs,  individuals  with  high  self-esteem 
(HSEs) have positive biases when it comes to their partners, 
and  tend  to  interpret  their  partners’  communication  and 
behavior  favorably.  HSEs  are  also 
to 
relational threats, and respond to threats by emphasizing the 
value  of  their  relationship  and  drawing  closer  to  their 
partners  [34].  The  fact 
they  feel  secure  about 
themselves  likely  helps  HSEs  to  derogate  relationship 
threats or signs of rejection in order to focus on the positive 
aspects of the relationship. 
Yet, while LSEs pursue the goal of avoiding rejection, they 
also pursue the competing goal of attaining closeness with a 
relational partner [25]. The pursuit of these competing goals 
is explained by the risk regulation system [32]. Murray and 
colleagues explain that “the thoughts and behaviors that are 
critical  for  establishing  satisfying  close  connections  with 
others  necessarily  increase  both  the  short-term  risk  of 
rejection  and  long-term  pain  of  rejection”  ([32],  p.642). 
Since  LSEs  are  so  sensitive  to  rejection,  their  self-
protection  goals  often 
their 
relationship-enhancement goals. 
Murray  and  colleagues  have  found  that  LSEs  “read  too 
much  into  problems”  with  their  partners,  interpreting  the 
problems  as  signs  of  fading  feelings  or  commitment  [34]. 
Furthermore,  Bellavia  and  Murray  [31]  found  that  LSEs 
over 
their  dating  partners’  negative  moods, 
internalizing responsibility and hurt feelings when the cause 
of  the  mood  was  actually  ambiguous.  While  LSEs  may 
exhibit negative interpretations because they are searching 
for possible signs of rejection, LSEs may also be unwilling 
to accept positive feedback from their partners since doing 

take  precedence  over 

interpret 

that 

384

so  would  not  be  consistent  with  their  self-concepts  [27]. 
This  line  of  work  suggests  that  LSEs  are  biased  toward 
negative interpretations, tend to overanalyze situations with 
their partners, and tend to believe the worst in ambiguous 
situations.  
Overall,  we  know  that  LSEs  are  negatively  biased  toward 
their partners’ communication and behavior, and that these 
negative  biases  are  particularly  salient  in  threatening 
contexts  such  as  interpersonal  conflict.  Yet,  it  is  possible 
that  the  use  of  certain  communication  channels  may 
actually heighten these biases, since the amount and type of 
social cues that help individuals interpret information differ 
across channels.   

(CMC) 

lower  mood  states 

Self-Esteem,  Relationships,  and  Technology-mediated 
Communication 
When it comes to the domain of romantic couple conflict, 
previous research has suggested that there are drawbacks of 
using  technology-mediated  communication.  For  instance, 
Burge and Tatar found that couples discussing a conflict via 
mediated  communication  (phone  and  IM)  may  experience 
significantly 
than  couples  who 
communicated  FtF  [5].  Another  study  found  that  when 
individuals choose email over FtF to discuss a conflict, they 
perceive  their  partners  and  themselves  as  more  avoidant 
[29].  In  addition,  Coyne  and  colleagues  found  that  using 
text  messaging  to  discuss  serious  issues  or  broach  a 
potentially  confrontational  topic  with  one’s  partner  was 
associated with increased levels of negative communication 
in the relationship overall [8].  
Using  computer-mediated  communication 
is 
typically thought of as a convenient way to avoid or ignore 
one’s communication partner in face-threatening situations 
like  conflict  (e.g.,  [28,  36]).  This  is  likely  because 
affordances typical of channels like text messaging and IM 
(e.g.,  reduced  visibility,  increased  editability,  reduced 
amounts of nonverbal cues) create an environment that can 
be more ambiguous than FtF communication. For instance, 
if  while  texting  one’s  partner  becomes  unresponsive  for 
several  minutes,  it  would  be  hard  to  know  whether  one  is 
being  ignored  or  whether  the  partner  is  attending  to 
something important that suddenly came up.  Or, if one sees 
their  partner  is  taking  a  long  time  to  compose  his/her 
message,  it  would  be  hard  to  know  whether  the  partner  is 
hesitant about responding or just taking great care to craft a 
thoughtful  response.  This  ambiguity  can  lead  people  to 
draw on the available cues to form impressions [49], which 
can 
assessments  of  one’s 
communication  partner  [38].  Walther  describes  this  as  the 
“hyperpersonal  model”  of  communication,  which  mainly 
focuses  on  how  individuals  idealize  or  form  positively-
biased 
their  communication  partners. 
However,  it  is  possible  that  in  ambiguous  contexts, 
negatively  biased  impressions  may  form  if  people  are 
inclined to view their partners negatively. 

impressions  of 

exaggerated 

result 

in 

SESSION: RELATIONSHIPS AND ROMANCE

Despite the previously described drawbacks of using CMC 
during  a  conflict,  there  is  also  evidence  that  the  use  of 
technology-mediated  communication  may  actually  be 
helpful  for  individuals  with  insecurities.  In  a  study  of 
individuals  in  dating  relationships,  increased  frequency  of 
text  messaging  was  associated  with  more  positive 
relationships  for  highly  avoidant  participants  (those  who 
have  a  dismissive,  independent  attachment  to  relational 
partners)  but  not  for  less  avoidant  participants  [30].  This 
finding  suggests  that  text  messaging  affords  avoidant 
individuals  a  unique  opportunity  to  connect  with  their 
partners. In addition, greater use of social network sites was 
associated with increased levels of intimacy and support in 
relationships for anxiously attached participants (those who 
have a worried, dependent attachment to relational partners) 
but not for securely attached participants. Furthermore, [42] 
found  that  individuals  in  romantic  relationships  seek  out 
mediated  channels  to  better  manage  their  emotions  or  to 
find a less face-threatening way to offer a heartfelt apology 
after a conflict. These findings suggest that the use of text-
based  communication  may  lead  to  positive  relational 
their 
outcomes 
in 
relationships.  This  work,  however,  did  not 
focus 
specifically  on  the  role  self-esteem  plays  in  mediated 
communication.  
In  this  study,  we  examine  the  extent  to  which  self-esteem 
biases  manifest  in  mediated  communication  compared  to 
FtF  communication.  To  do  this,  we  brought  romantic 
couples to a lab, asked them to discuss a conflict either FtF 
or  via  mediated  communication,  and  then  asked  them  to 
provide assessments of the discussion. 

for  people  who 

insecure 

feel 

HYPOTHESES 
After  couples  discuss  a  conflict,  how  do  self-esteem  and 
communication channel influence their assessments of that 
discussion? We predict that self-esteem-related biases will 
be stronger during mediated, text-based conversations than 
during FtF conversations, since the increased ambiguity of 
text-based  communication  may  make  it  easier  to  perceive 
what one is already inclined to perceive. More specifically, 
we  predict  that  during  mediated  conversations,  LSEs’ 
negative  biases  will  be  heightened  and,  as  a  result,  LSEs 
will  have  more  negative  experiences  with  the  interaction 
than  LSEs  who  have  FtF  conversations.  In  addition,  we 
predict that during mediated conversations, HSEs’ positive 
biases will be heightened and, as a result, HSEs will have 
more  positive  experiences  with  the  interaction  than  HSEs 
who have FtF conversations. 

Overall Satisfaction with the Interaction 
Based  on  prior  literature  about  the  role  of  self-esteem  in 
relationships, we predict: 
H1a: LSEs will report lower ratings of satisfaction with the 
interaction than will HSEs. 

Individuals 

communicating 

Based  on  prior  literature,  which  suggests  that  the  use  of 
mediated  communication  during  conflict  has  negative 
outcomes, we predict:  
H1b: 
via  mediated 
communication  will  report  lower  ratings  of  satisfaction 
with  the  interaction  than  will  individuals  communicating 
FtF.  
And due to the biasing effects described earlier, we predict: 
H1c: LSEs will report lower ratings of satisfaction with the 
interaction  when  communicating  with  their  partners  via 
mediated  communication  than  when  communicating  FtF, 
while  HSEs  will  report  higher  ratings  of  satisfaction  with 
the interaction when communicating with their partners via 
mediated communication than when communicating FtF.  

Perceived Change in Relational Quality 
In addition, individuals’ self-esteem-related biases may also 
influence  how  they  feel  a  particular  conflict  episode 
impacts  the  state  of  their  relationship,  since  LSEs  often 
devalue or seek to limit dependence on their relationships in 
order  to  avoid  further  rejection  (e.g.,  [32]).  Previous 
research  has  demonstrated  that,  in  self-reports  of  past 
relational conflicts, the use of mediated communication was 
associated with reports of the conflict having more negative 
impact  on  relational  quality  [43].  This  same  work  did  not 
find a relationship between self-esteem and assessments of 
a  conflict’s  impact  on  relational  quality.  It  is  possible, 
however, that self-esteem biases are more easily detected in 
the moment than via self-reports of a past event. Therefore, 
we predict: 
H2a:  Lower  levels  of  self-esteem  will  be  associated  with 
more negative perceived change in relational quality. 
H2b:  Conflicts 
associated  with  more  negative  perceived  change 
relational quality than will FtF conflicts. 
H2c:  Lower  levels  of  self-esteem  will  be  associated  with 
more  negative  perceived  change  in  relational  quality  for 
conflicts in mediated communication than for FtF conflicts, 
while  higher  levels  of  self-esteem  will  be  associated  with 
more  positive  perceived  change  in  relational  quality  for 
conflicts in mediated vs. FtF communication.  

in  mediated  communication  will  be 
in 

METHOD 
The  study  design  draws  on  a  number  of  instrumentations 
from  various  studies  of  couple  communication,  including 
studies of couple conflict (e.g., [1, 7, 14, 22, 44]). In these 
studies,  partners  typically  interact  in  some  way  (e.g., 
discuss  a  conflict  topic)  and  provide  feedback  about  the 
experience.  There  is  also  a  long  history  of  studies  that 
examine  aspects  of 
interpersonal  communication  and 
impression formation across different channels (e.g., [3, 4, 
17]). In addition, Burge and Tatar [5] applied a version of 
the  couple  conflict  paradigm  across  three  communication 
channels (FtF, phone, and IM). The methodology employed 

385

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

to  discuss  an  argument 

in this study draws on Burge and Tatar’s design (assigning 
couples 
in  a  particular 
communication  channel  and  then  having  couples  report 
individually on their experiences), on Afifi and colleagues’ 
[1]  prompt  for  collecting  potential  conflict  discussion 
topics, and on various aspects of existing laboratory-based 
work  that  examines  interpersonal  communication  across 
communication channels. 

Participants 
Participants (N = 176) were 88 romantic couples who were 
either  students  or  staff  at  a Midwestern  U.S.  university  or 
members of the surrounding community. Participants’ ages 
ranged  from  18  to  56  (M  =  23.48,  SD  =  4.85).  Each 
participant  received  $25  for  participating  and  the  study 
lasted about an hour.  
Eighty-four  couples  were  heterosexual  and  four  couples 
were  same-sex  couples  (two  were  male-male  couples  and 
two were female-female couples). Half of participants were 
female  and  half  were  male.  The  majority  of  participants 
were  Caucasian  (58%),  with  18%  Asian/Pacific  Islander, 
9% Hispanic/Latino, 8% African-American, and 7% Mixed 
Race/Other  (one  participant  did  not  report  his/her  race). 
Relationship length ranged from 1 month to 12 years, with 
an  average  of  23.7  months.  The  majority  of  couples 
reported that they were “seriously dating” (72%), with 6% 
“dating  casually,”  7%  “engaged,”  9%  “married,”  and  6% 
“life partners.” Thirty-three percent of couples reported that 
they lived together while 67% of couples reported that they 
did  not  live  together.  Nine  percent  of  couples  described 
themselves  as  being  in  a  long-distance  relationship,  while 
91%  of  couples  described  themselves  as  being  in  a  non-
long-distance relationship.  

Procedure 
To investigate the extent to which self-esteem biases were 
present  across  different  communication  channels,  couples 
were  randomly  assigned  to  one  of  two  conditions:  Instant 
Messenger  (IM)  or  Face-to-Face  (FtF)  communication. 
Upon  arriving  at  the  lab,  couples  in  both  conditions  were 
consented  together,  and  then  they  were  put  into  two 
separate rooms to fill out a series of questionnaire items.  
First, participants filled out a series of questionnaire items 
about themselves (including a measure of self-esteem) and 
about their relationship (including their relationship status). 
Participants  were  then  provided  with  a  short  definition  of 
‘conflict’:  “A  conflict  is  an  instance  where  you  and  your 
partner are at odds with each other,” and each partner was 
prompted  to  provide  a  list  of  four  topics  that  tend  to  be 
conflict  inducing  in  their  relationship  (see  [1]  p.110  for 
procedure  details).  Participants  were  told  not  to  list  any 
topics  they  were  uncomfortable  discussing,  that  their 
partner  was  also  being  asked  to  make  a  list,  that  their 
partner  would  never  see  the  participant’s  list,  and  that  the 
researcher  would  compare  their  list  with  their  partner’s  in 
order to pick a topic to discuss.  

The  researcher  then  compared  the  lists  and  searched  for  a 
mutually listed topic. If multiple topics listed were mutual, 
the  researcher  chose  the  first  topic  that  was  suggested  in 
both lists. If partners listed more than one mutual topic but 
in different orders, one partner was randomly selected and 
the topic that was higher on that partner’s list was selected. 
If  participants  submitted  lists  that  did  not  have  any 
overlapping issues, one partner was randomly selected and 
the  first  issue  on  that  partner’s  list  was  discussed.  All 
participants wrote at least one topic.  
After  the  topic  was  chosen,  the  researcher  separately 
informed each participant that they would be discussing this 
topic with their partner in the next stage of the study. If the 
partners  mutually  listed  the  topic,  both  wordings  were 
presented  to  the  partners  verbatim.  Partners  were  told  the 
topic  in  their  words  first  and  in  their  partner’s  words 
second.  If  the  partners  did  not  list  a  mutual  topic,  the 
researcher  explained  that  this  was  the  case  and  the 
researcher  randomly  selected  one  of  them  and  picked  the 
first item from that list.   
At this point, the study diverged depending on the condition 
to which couples were assigned. Accordingly, the FtF and 
IM conditions are discussed separately below. 

Face-to-Face Condition 
For participants in the FtF condition, partners were brought 
together in one room to discuss their topic. The researcher 
then told participants that they would have eight minutes1 to 
discuss the topic and that they would receive a one-minute 
warning before time was up. They were told that they did 
not  have  to  use  all  of  the  allotted  time  and  that  either 
partner could alert the researcher when they were done, if 
they  finished  early.  Then,  the  researcher  started  a  video 
recording  and  explained  that  once  she  left  the  room,  the 
participants could start talking. When the participants were 
done  talking,  the  researcher  came  back  into  the  room, 
stopped  the  recording,  and  escorted  the  partners  to  their 
separate rooms. Then the researcher copied the video file to 
each  of  the  partner’s  local  computers  and  returned  to  the 
participants’  rooms  and  told  them  that,  for  the  next  step, 
they  were  going  to  review  a  video  of  the  interaction  they 
just had with their partners. Participants then reviewed the 
interaction  and  answered  some  questions  about  specific 
things  their  partners  said  during  the  interaction.  Lastly, 
participants  answered  questions  about 
their  overall 
satisfaction with the interaction and their perceived change 
in  relational  quality  resulting  from  the  conflict  discussion. 
Finally, to restore their relationship to a more positive state, 
participants were instructed to list three things that they like 
about their relationship. Then they were debriefed.  
                                                             
1  This  length  of  time  is  similar  to  other  studies  where  couples 
discuss a conflict (e.g., [2]). 
2  Participants  in  the  FtF  condition  had  8  minutes  to  talk  while 
participants in the mediated condition had 16 minutes to talk since 
individuals tend to produce words at a lower rate when typing than 

386

SESSION: RELATIONSHIPS AND ROMANCE

IM Condition 
Participants in the IM condition remained in their separate 
rooms  after  they  were  told  which  topics  they  would  be 
discussing.  The  researcher  then  opened  up  an  Instant 
Messaging  client  on  each  of  the  participants’  computers. 
Partner  A’s  screen  name  was  “Participant  A”  and  Partner 
B’s screen name was “Participant B.” (Participants also had 
a  sticky  note  on  the  bottom  of  their  monitors  to  remind 
them of which letter they were assigned to). The researcher 
separately explained to participants that they would have 16 
minutes2  to  discuss  the  topic  with  their  partners,  and  that 
they  would  receive  a  two-minute  warning  when  time  was 
almost finished. As in the FtF condition, participants were 
told that they did not have to use all of the allotted time and 
that either partner could alert the researcher when they were 
done, if they finished early. 
Once  the  time  was  up  or  once  participants  were  finished, 
participants reviewed a PDF transcript of the conversation 
they  just  had  with  their  partners  and  answered  some 
questions about specific things their partners said during the 
interaction. As in the FtF condition, participants in the IM 
condition  also  answered  questions  about  their  overall 
satisfaction with the interaction and their perceived change 
in  relational  quality  resulting  from  the  conflict  discussion. 
They  also  completed  the  relationship-restoring  task  and 
were debriefed. 
Full  IRB  approval  was  obtained  for  this  study  from  the 
authors’ institution and all data was anonymized.   

MEASURES  
Items were measured on a 7-point Likert scale (1 = strongly 
disagree, 7 = strongly agree) unless otherwise indicated.  

Independent Variables 
Communication Channel 
Half of the couples in the study communicated via instant 
messenger and half communicated face-to-face.  

Self-Esteem  
Participants  completed  the  10-item  Rosenberg  self-esteem 
scale [40], which included items like “On the whole, I am 
satisfied with myself,” and “I take a positive attitude toward 
myself” (M = 5.47, SD = .95, α = .89). 

insecurity 

the  feelings  of 

Partner-Specific Attachment Anxiety 
In addition to self-esteem, attachment anxiety is a construct 
that  reflects 
in  romantic 
relationships.  Anxiously  attached  (vs.  securely  attached) 
individuals  are  insecure  about  their  relationship  partners, 
and search for information to corroborate these insecurities 
                                                             
2  Participants  in  the  FtF  condition  had  8  minutes  to  talk  while 
participants in the mediated condition had 16 minutes to talk since 
individuals tend to produce words at a lower rate when typing than 
when speaking (see [19], [18] for examples).  

[12]. The trait of self-esteem has been found to have similar 
effects  in  romantic  relationships  as  the  trait  of  attachment 
anxiety  [6].  In  other  words,  individuals  with  low  self-
esteem  (LSEs)  act  in  similar  ways  to  anxiously  attached 
individuals,  and  individuals  with  high  self-esteem  (HSEs) 
act  in  similar  ways  to  securely  attached  individuals.  In 
addition, securely attached individuals tend to have higher 
levels  of  self-esteem  than  do  individuals  with  less  secure 
attachment  styles  (see  [26]  for  a  brief  review).  Yet, 
attachment  anxiety  and  self-esteem,  while  related,  are 
typically treated as independent constructs (e.g., [15]).  
Partner-specific  attachment  anxiety  was  measured  using  a 
modified portion of the Experiences in Close Relationships 
Scale  (ECR)-Short  Form  [53]  which  contained  a  six-item 
measure  of  attachment  anxiety  (M  =  3.12,  SD  =  .99,  α  = 
.68). (Example item: “I need a lot of reassurance that I am 
loved by my partner.”)  

Relationship Satisfaction  
Participants  completed  a  10-item  relationship  satisfaction 
scale  [41],  which  included  items  like  “My  partner  fulfills 
my  needs  for  intimacy,”  and  “I  feel  satisfied  with  our 
relationship” (M = 6.23, SD = .69, α = .90).  

Dependent Variables 
Overall Satisfaction with the Interaction 
Participants  filled  out  a  one-item  measure  from  the  Iowa 
Communication  Record  [9]:  “Please  indicate  the  extent  to 
which  you  came  away  satisfied  with  the  interaction”  (1  = 
not  at  all  satisfied,  7  =  very  satisfied),  (M  =  5.38,  SD  = 
1.45).  

Perceived Change in Relational Quality  
Participants completed a 3-item scale measuring the extent 
to  which  the  conflict  discussion  changed  or  impacted  the 
quality  of  the  relationship  [20]:  “After  your  discussion 
today, did your relationship become …?” “more distant (1) 
or closer (7)”, “weaker (1) or stronger (7)”, “more sad (1) 
or happier (7)” (M = 5.36, SD = 1.13, α = .95).  

ANALYSIS 
Given  that  participants  are  part  of  a  couple,  it  is  possible 
that  participants’  answers 
to  questions  about  overall 
satisfaction  with  the  interaction  and  perceived  change  in 
relationship  may  not  be  wholly  independent  of  their 
partners’  answers.  To  determine  whether  a  significant 
proportion  of  the  variance  in  the  dependent  variables  are 
accounted for by the couple, which we refer to as the dyad, 
a series of intraclass correlations were conducted using the 
double entry method [23]. There was a positive, significant 
intraclass  correlation  between  one’s  overall  satisfaction 
with the interaction and one’s partner’s overall satisfaction 
(r = .33, p < .01). The intraclass correlation between one’s 
ratings  of  the  conflict’s  impact  on  relational  quality  and 
one’s partner’s ratings of the conflict’s impact on relational 
quality  was  .23  (p  <  .01).  The  size  of  these  correlations 

387

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

in 

that, 

attachment 

suggests 
the  cases  where  correlations  were 
significant,  there  is  a  lack  of  independence  between  the 
measures taken within a dyad. 
To  control  for  the  effect  of  the  dyad  and  for  the  role  of 
variables  that  are  known  to  be  correlated  with  self-esteem 
(partner-specific 
relationship 
satisfaction),  two  mixed  effects  hierarchical  regression 
models were conducted to examine the role of self-esteem, 
communication  channel  (condition),  and  the  interaction 
effect  between  self-esteem  and  channel  (independent 
variables)  on  overall  satisfaction  with  the  interaction,  and 
perceived change in relational quality. In these models, the 
individual,  nested  in  the  pair,  was  included  as  a  random 
effect.  Relationship 
satisfaction  and  partner-specific 
attachment anxiety were included as control variables.  

anxiety, 

the 

trend 

RESULTS 
Overall Satisfaction with the Interaction 
Participants  rated  the  extent  to  which  they  were  satisfied 
with  the  interaction  (the  conflict  discussion  they  had  with 
their  partners).  Results  (presented  in  Table  1)  revealed  a 
main  effect  of  self-esteem  at 
level  (H1a 
supported),  such  that  higher  levels  of  self-esteem  were 
associated  with  higher  ratings  of  satisfaction  with  the 
interaction.  Results  also  revealed  a  significant  interaction 
effect (at the trend level) of self-esteem × channel such that 
higher  levels  of  self-esteem  were  associated  with  higher 
ratings of overall satisfaction with the interaction (i.e., the 
conversation) in IM than they were in FtF (H1c supported). 
Or,  put  another  way,  lower  levels  of  self-esteem  were 
associated with lower ratings of overall satisfaction with the 
interaction in IM than they were in FtF. Examination of the 
slope  of  the  two  lines  (see  Figure  1),  reveals  that  while 
ratings  of  overall  satisfaction  with  the  interaction  vary  by 
levels of self-esteem for participants in the IM condition (B 
=  .43,  t  =  2.72,  p  <  .01),  self-esteem  does  not  have  a 
significant effect on ratings of overall satisfaction with the 
interaction for participants in the FtF condition (B = .01, t = 
.07, p = .95). This suggests that self- esteem biases were not 
present  in  the  FtF  condition,  but  were  present  in  the  IM 
condition.  
There was no main effect of channel (H1b not supported). 
As  for  the  control  variables,  higher  levels  of  relationship 
satisfaction  were  associated  with  higher  ratings  of  overall 
satisfaction  with 
interaction,  but  partner-specific 
attachment  anxiety  was  not  a  significant  predictor  of 
satisfaction with the interaction. 

the 

Perceived Change in Relational Quality 
In  terms  of  participants’  reports  of  perceived  change  in 
relational quality after the conflict discussion, there was no 
main effect of self-esteem (H2a not supported) or channel 
(H2b not supported) (See Table 2). However, there was an 
interaction effect such that for LSEs, perceptions of change 
in relational quality were more negative for those who  

388

Variable 
Intercept 
Relationship Satisfaction 
Partner-specific Attachment Anxiety 
Self-Esteem 
Channel [FtF] 
Self-esteem × Channel [FtF] 

B 
SE 
.34  1.40 
.16 
.57 
.12 
.09 
.12 
.22 
−.04 
.11 
.11 
−.21 

p 
.81 
.00** 
.43 
.06^ 
.69 
.06^ 
R2 = .12 

** p  <.01, * p < .05, ^ p < .10 
Effect of Dyad: Variance = 1.94, SE = .21, Upper CI = 1.56, 
Lower CI = 2.38 
Table 1. Model predicting ratings of overall satisfaction with 

the interaction. 

 

 

Figure 1. Self-esteem x channel (FtF vs. IM) predicting ratings 

of overall satisfaction with the interaction. 

 

  
communicated  via  IM  than  they  were  for  those  who 
communicated FtF, and for HSEs, perceptions of change in 
relational  quality  were  more  positive  for  those  who 
communicated  FtF.  The  slope  of  the  line  in  the  IM 
condition is statistically significant (B = .27, t = 2.24, p < 
.05), while the slope of the line in the FtF condition is not 
statistically  significant  (B  =  −.11,  t  =  -.87,  p  =  .38)  (See 
Figure  2).  This  suggests  that  self-esteem  biases  were  not 
present  in  the  FtF  condition,  but  were  present  in  the  IM 
condition.  Higher  levels  of  relationship  satisfaction  were 
also significantly associated with more positive perceptions 
of change in relational quality. In other words, individuals 
who  were  more  satisfied  in  their  relationships  rated  the 
conflict’s impact on relational quality as more positive than 
did 
their 
relationships. Partner-specific attachment anxiety was not a 
significant  predictor  of  perceived  change  in  relational 
quality. 

individuals  who  were 

satisfied 

less 

in 

SESSION: RELATIONSHIPS AND ROMANCE

Variable 
Intercept 
Relationship Satisfaction 
Partner-specific Attachment Anxiety 
Self-Esteem 
Channel [FtF] 
Self-esteem × Channel [FtF] 

B 
SE 
1.28  1.08 
.12 
.53 
.09 
.11 
.09 
.08 
−.05 
.08 
.09 
−.19 

p 
.24 
.00** 
.24 
.37 
.55 
.05* 
R2 = .13 

** p  <.01, * p < .05, ^ p < .10 
Effect of Dyad: Variance = 1.15, SE = .13, Upper CI = 1.44, 
Lower CI = .94 

Table 2. Model predicting ratings of perceived change in 

relational quality. 

 

 

 

Figure 2. Self-esteem x channel (FtF vs. IM) predicting ratings 

of perceived change in relational quality. 

DISCUSSION 
Previous  research  has  found  that  people  with  lower  levels 
of self-esteem prefer to use mediated communication across 
a  variety  of  relational  contexts.  The  current  research 
suggests that the text-based mediated channels LSEs desire 
may  actually  be  detrimental  to  their  relationships.  Higher 
levels of self-esteem were associated with higher ratings of 
overall  satisfaction  with  the  interaction  in  IM  than  they 
were in FtF, and lower levels of self-esteem were associated 
with 
the 
interaction  in  IM  than  they  were  in  FtF.  The  same  results 
were  found  for  ratings  of  perceived  change  in  relational 
quality. LSEs reported that the conflict had a more negative 
impact on relational quality after communicating with their 
partners  via  IM  than  they  did  after  communicating  with 
their partners FtF. These findings provide evidence for the 
fact  that  individuals’  self-esteem  related  biases  were 
exhibited when communicating via IM. 

lower  ratings  of  overall  satisfaction  with 

389

like 

The  fact  that  LSEs  have  different  experiences  with  their 
romantic  partners  based  on  which  communication  channel 
they  use  is  of  crucial  importance,  given  the  popularity  of 
technology-mediated  channels 
text-messaging  and 
SNSs, and the fact that several studies have now shown that 
individuals use technology-mediated communication during 
a conflict with their romantic partners. If using a text-based 
technology  like  IM  during  a  conflict  becomes  the  norm, 
rather than the exception, LSEs may be at an even further 
disadvantage than they already are given their biases. One 
solution may be to suggest using multiple channels during a 
conflict  to  reap  the  benefits  that  each  channel  uniquely 
provides. For instance, [42] found that CMC can be helpful 
during  a  conflict  as  a  way  to  ease  into  a  future  FtF-based 
conflict  discussion  and 
that  different  channels  can 
compliment each other in different ways. Individuals could 
use  a  variety  of  communication  channels  across  a  conflict 
discussion to best handle their insecurity-related biases and 
their relational goals.  
In addition, these findings may have implications for people 
in long-distance relationships (LDRs) since they have less 
FtF communication with their partners (e.g., [46]). Previous 
research  has  demonstrated  that  LDRs  are  different  from 
non-LDRs  in  several  ways.  For  instance,  people  in  LDRs 
are  more  likely  to  avoid  conflict,  engage  in  selective 
positive  self-presentation  [45],  and  idealize  their  partners 
relative  to  people  in  non-LDRs  [46].  However,  for  people 
in LDRs with low self-esteem, the reliance on technology-
mediated  communication  may  actually  be  a  detriment  to 
their  relationships.  Yet,  people  in  LDRs  may  have  more 
channel choices than just FtF and IM; future research could 
investigate the extent to which our findings hold for people 
in LDRs and across different communication channels like 
video chat, which has benefits and drawbacks for people in 
LDRs that are unique from other channels [35]. 
Results  were  not  entirely  in  line,  however,  with  what  we 
hypothesized. Self-esteem-related biases were not exhibited 
in the FtF condition. The lack of self-esteem-related biases 
in the FtF condition may be due to sentiment override [54], 
such 
relationship 
satisfaction  were  stronger  predictors  of  ratings  of  overall 
satisfaction  with  the  interaction  than  were  levels  of  self-
esteem. However, it may be that the ambiguity of IM was 
enough to trigger participants’ self-esteem biases such that 
these  biases  influenced  ratings  of  overall  satisfaction  with 
the 
influence  of 
relationship  satisfaction.  Given  that  more  elements  of  the 
interaction  that  typically  indicate  meaning  (e.g.,  partner’s 
facial expressions, tone of voice) were unknown in the IM 
condition, it is possible that this ambiguity triggered LSEs’ 
instincts to question their partners’ acceptance and devalue 
their  relationships  and  HSEs’  instincts  to  draw  closer  to 
their partners and enhance their relationships.  
Another  possible  explanation  is  that  LSEs  and  HSEs 
actually  experience  similar  levels  of  satisfaction  with  the 

interaction  above  and  beyond 

that  participants’  high 

levels  of 

the 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

interaction  in  IM  but  that,  because  LSEs  have  a  stronger 
preference for, and potentially higher expectations of, using 
CMC during a conflict with their partner (as found in [43]), 
when their experiences do not live up to their expectations, 
they experience cognitive dissonance and thus lower levels 
of  satisfaction  with  the  interaction.  Alternatively,  HSEs 
may actually reaffirm their relationship after an IM conflict 
discussion  (through  higher  ratings  of  satisfaction  with  the 
interaction),  precisely  because  the  ambiguity  of  IM  made 
them have a more negative experience than they might have 
expected. This supposition is somewhat complementary to 
the  hypothesized  relationship  between  self-esteem  and 
channel (IM’s ambiguity allows HSEs more room to project 
their  positive  biases),  since  in  both  cases,  HSEs  project 
positive  biases.  But,  in  this  alternative  explanation,  the 
positive  biases  emerge  to  counteract  any  negative  feelings 
resulting  from  communicating  via  IM,  as  opposed  to  the 
hypothesized  relationship,  which  is  that  HSEs’  already 
positive  biases  would  be  even  more  positive  given  more 
room for interpretation.  
Earlier,  we  discussed  Walther’s  hyperpersonal  model  of 
communication,  which  posits  that  in  text-based  mediated 
communication,  people  may  form  more  exaggerated 
impressions  given  that  there  are  fewer  relational  cues  to 
draw on than there are in FtF communication. The current 
findings suggest, however, that the hyperpersonal model of 
communication  does  not  fully  account  for  the  individual-
difference level traits that influence the processing of social 
information in mediated communication. Individuals make 
use  of  the  cues  available  to  form  impressions  of  their 
communication  partners,  but  this  finding  suggests  that 
individuals enter into conversations with pre-set biases that 
also  influence  the  ways  in  which  they  form  impressions. 
This  finding  then  suggests  that  future  work  investigating 
theories of mediated communication should not neglect the 
biases that individuals bring to an interaction, whether they 
be related to self-esteem or other traits. Furthermore, while 
the  hyperpersonal  model  allows  for  the  possibility  that 
hyperpersonal communication can be negative, this part of 
the  model  is  not  fully  theorized.  Future  research  should 
further  investigate  how  hyperpersonal  communication  can 
lead  to  interactions  that  are  intensified  in  a  negative 
manner,  and  how  individual  difference  biases  like  self-
esteem  or  personality 
this  communication 
process. 

influence 

External Validity 
Many of the conflict topics discussed by participants have 
been identified as relational conflict issues in previous work 
(see  [37]  for  a  review).  Topics  discussed 
included: 
communication  styles,  time  management,  responsibilities, 
one 
past 
relationships,  jealousy,  trust,  lying,  sex  life,  relationship 
commitment  level,  living  situation,  and  plans  for  the 
future/life choices. Also, it is possible that participants held 
back during their discussions due to the fact that they were 

problem/shortcoming, 

partner’s 

personal 

in  a  laboratory  setting.  However,  we  asked  participants 
“How realistic was your conversation with your partner” (1 
= not realistic at all, 7 = very realistic). The average score 
was 5.74, suggesting that there is some external validity to 
the study.  

levels  of 

self-esteem’  are  used 

Limitations and Future Work 
An important caveat to this work is that, while ‘LSEs’ and 
‘lower 
somewhat 
interchangeably, self-esteem was measured as a continuous 
variable  and  not  as  a  categorical  variable  (e.g.,  low  self-
esteem  vs.  high  self-esteem),  suggesting  that  analyses  did 
not truly compare individuals with low vs. high self-esteem. 
Future  work  should  examine  how  people  who  are  much 
lower 
in  self-esteem  make  assessments  of  conflict 
discussions  with 
their  partners  across  communication 
channels.  
In  addition,  since  only  nine  couples  in  the  study  were  in 
long-distance relationships, we do not have enough data to 
analyze whether our findings may differ for people in long-
distance vs. non-long-distance relationships. Since couples 
in  long-distance  relationships  may  use  technology  to 
communicate in unique ways, future work should examine 
whether  these  findings  hold  for  people  in  long-distance 
relationships.  
Lastly,  this  work  focuses  on  one  form  of  CMC  –  IM. 
Results  may  differ  across  other  forms  of  mediated 
communication,  such  as  text  messaging,  email,  and  video 
chat, which are all distinct from IM in several ways. Also, 
while  this  study  examined  a  conflict  discussion  that 
occurred  in  one  communication  channel,  previous  work 
suggests that couples use multiple channels to communicate 
during  a  conflict  [42,  43].  Future  work  should  focus  on 
examining  the  extent  to  which  self-esteem  biases  are 
enacted  across  other  forms  of  CMC,  as  well  as  on  how 
experiences  communicating  through  one  channel  might 
influence perceptions of the interaction in another channel. 

CONCLUSION 
Overall,  findings  suggest  that  individuals’  self-esteem 
biases  are  stronger  in  CMC  than  in  FtF  when  it  comes  to 
their satisfaction with the interaction and assessments of the 
conflict’s  impact  on  relational  quality.  This  suggests  that 
while  people  with  lower  levels  of  self-esteem  prefer 
mediated communication, their preferred channels may not 
be  best  suited  for 
to  worse 
interpersonal outcomes.  

their  biases  and 

lead 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We thank Danielle Pierre for her help with data collection, 
members  of  the  CollabLab  for  their  support,  and  the 
anonymous  reviewers  for  their  suggestions  and  insights, 
which greatly improved this work. 

390

SESSION: RELATIONSHIPS AND ROMANCE

REFERENCES 
1.  Tamara D. Afifi, Andrea Joseph, and Desiree Aldeis. 
2012. The "standards for openness hypothesis": Why 
women find (conflict) avoidance more dissatisfying than 
men. J. of Social and Personal Relationships, 29(1), 
102-125.  

2.  Christin E. Bates and Jennifer A. Samp. 2011. 

Examining the effects of planning and empathic 
accuracy on communication in relational and 
nonrelational conflict interactions. Communication 
Studies, 62(2), 207-223. 

3.  Nathan Bos. Judy Olson, Darren Gergle, Gary Olson, 

and Zach Wright. 2002. Effects of four computer-
mediated communications channels on trust 
development. CHI 2002, 135-140. 

4.  Eliane M. Boucher, Jeffrey T. Hancock, and Philip J. 
Dunham. 2008. Interpersonal Sensitivity in Computer-
Mediated and Face-to-Face Conversations. Media 
Psychology, 11, 235-258.  

5.  Jamika D. Burge and Deborah Tatar. 2009. Affect and 
dyads: Conflict across different technological media. In 
S. Harrison (Ed.), Media Space 20+ Years of Mediated 
Life (pp. 123-144): Springer. 

6.  Lorne Campbell, Jeffry A. Simpson, Jennifer Boldry, 

and Deborah A. 2005. Perceptions of conflict and 
support in romantic relationships: The role of 
attachment anxiety. J. of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 88(3), 510-513.  

7.  Nancy L. Collins and Brooke C. Feeney. 2004. Working 

models of attachment shape perceptions of social 
support: Evidence from experimental and observational 
studies. J. of Personality and Social Psychology, 87(3), 
363-383.  

8.  Sarah M. Coyne, Laura Stockdale, Dean Busby, 

Bethany Iverson, and David M. Grant. 2011. "I luv u :)": 
A descriptive study of the media use of individuals in 
romantic relationships. Family Relations, 60, 150-162.  

9.  Steve Duck, Deborah Rutt, Margaret Hoy Hurst, and 

Heather Strejc. 1991. Some evident truths about 
conversations in everyday relationships: All 
communications are not created equal. Human 
Communication Research, 18(2), 228-267.  

10. Frank D. Fincham and Thomas N. Bradbury. 1993. 
Marital satisfaction, depression, and attributions: A 
longitudinal analysis. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 64, 442-452.  

11. Amanda L. Forest and Joanne V. Wood. 2012. When 

social networking is not working: Individuals with low 
self-esteem recognize but do not reap the benefits of 
self-disclosure on Facebook. Psychological Science, 
23(3), 295-302.  

12. Chris R. Fraley and Phillip R. Shaver. 2000. Adult 

romantic attachment: Theoretical developments, 

391

emerging controversies, and unanswered questions. 
Review of General Psychology, 4, 132-154.  

13. Brandi N. Frisby and David Westerman. 2010. Rational 

actors: Channel selection and rational choices in 
romantic conflict episodes. Journal of Social and 
Personal Relationships, 27(7), 970-981.  

14. John M. Gottman, James Coan, Sybil Carrere, and 

Catherine Swanson. 1998. Predicting marital happiness 
and stability from newlywed interactions. Journal of 
Marriage and Family, 60(1).  

15. Joshua Hart, Phillip R. Shaver, and Jamie L Goldenberg. 

2005. Attachment, self-esteem, worldviews, and terror 
management: Evidence for a Tripartite security system. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88(6), 
999-1013.  

16. Caroline Haythornthwaite. 2005. Social networks and 

internet connectivity effects. Information, 
Communication & Society, 8(2), 125-147.  

17. Andrew C. High and Scott E. Caplan. 2009. Social 

anxiety and computer-mediated communication during 
initial interactions: Implications for the hyperpersonal 
perspective. Computers in Human Behavior, 25, 475-
482.  

18. Elizabeth V. Hobman, Prashant Bordia, Bernd Irmer, 

and Artemis Chang. 2002. The expression of conflict in 
computer-mediated and face-to-face groups. Small 
Group Research, 33(4), 439-465.  

19. L. Crystal Jiang, Natalie N. Bazarova, and Jeffrey T. 

Hancock. 2013. From perception to behavior: 
Disclosure reciprocity and the intensification of 
intimacy in computer-mediated communication. 
Communication Research, 40(1), 125-143.  

20. Kristen L. Johnson and Michael E. Roloff. 2000. 

Correlates of the perceived resolvability and relational 
consequences of serial arguing in dating relationships: 
Argumentative features and the use of coping strategies. 
Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 17(4-5), 
676-686.  

21. Adam N. Joinson. 2004. Self-esteem, interpersonal risk, 

and preference for e-mail to face-to-face 
communication. CyberPsychology & Behavior, 7(4), 
479-485.  

22. K. Laura Keck and Jennifer A. Samp. 2007. The 

dynamic nature of goals and message production as 
revealed in a sequential analysis of conflict interactions. 
Human Communication Research, 33, 27-47.  

23. David A. Kenny, Deborah A. Kashy, William L. Cook. 

2006. Dyadic Data Analysis. New York, NY: The 
Guilford Press. 

24. Janice K. Kiecolt-Glaser and Tamara L. Newton. 2001. 

Marriage and health: His and hers. Psychological 
Bulletin, 127(4), 472-503.  

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

25. Mark R. Leary and Roy F. Baumeister. 2000. The nature 
and function of self-esteem: Sociometer theory In M. P. 
Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental psychology (pp. 
1-62). San Diego, CA: Academic Press. 

26. Geoff MacDonald and Mark R. Leary. 2012. Individual 

differences in self-esteem. In M. R. Leary & J. P. 
Tangney (Eds.), Handbook of Self and Identity. New 
York, NY: The Guilford Press. 

27. Denise C. Marigold, John G. Holmes, and Michael 

Ross. 2007. More than words: Reframing compliments 
from romantic partners fosters security in low self-
esteem individuals. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 92(2), 232-248.  

28. Erich R. Merkle and Rhonda A. Richardson. 2000. 
Digital dating and virtual relating: Conceptualizing 
computer mediated romantic relationships. Family 
Relations, 49, 187-192.  

29. Monique M. Mitchell, Caroline T. Rankin, Scott C. 

D'Urso, and Patty Malone. 2002. The impact of intention 
to handle conflict face-to-face or via e-mail on 
perceived conflict resolution style. Paper presented at 
ICA 2002. 

30. Jennifer N. Morey, Amy L. Gentzler, Brian Creasy, Ann 

M. Oberhauser, and David Westerman. 2013. Young 
adults’ use of communication technology within their 
romantic relationships and associations with attachment 
style. Computers in Human Behavior, 29, 1771-1778.  

31. Sandra L. Murray, Gina M. Bellavia, Paul Rose, and 
Dale W. Griffin. 2003. One hurt, twice hurtful: How 
perceived regard regulates daily martial interaction. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84(1), 
126-147.  

32. Sandra L. Murray, John G. Holmes, Nancy L. Collins, . 
2006. Optimizing assurance: The risk regulation system 
in relationships. Psychological Bulletin, 132(5), 641-
666.  

33. Sandra L. Murray, John G. Holmes, and Dale W. 

Griffin. 2000. Self-esteem and the quest for felt security: 
How perceived regard regulates attachment processes. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78(3), 
478-498.  

34. Sandra L. Murray, Paul Rose, Gina M. Bellavia, John G. 

Holmes, and Anna G. Kusche. 2002. When rejection 
stings: How self-esteem constrains relationship-
enhancement processes. Interpersonal Relations and 
Group Processes, 83(3), 556-573. 

35. Carman Neustaedter and Saul Greenberg. (2012). 

Intimacy in long-distance relationships over video chat. 
CHI 2012753-762. 

36. Patrick B. O'Sullivan. 2000. What you don't know won't 

hurt me: Impression management functions of 
communication channels in relationships. Human 
Communication Research, 26(3), 403-431.  

37. Ofcom. (2013). Communications Market Report 

http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/binaries/research/cmr/c
mr13/2013_UK_CMR.pdf. . 

38. Artemio Ramirez, Jr., Joseph B. Walther, Judee K. 

Burgoon, and Michael Sunnafrank. 2002. Information-
seeking strategies, uncertainty, and computer-mediated 
communication: Toward a conceptual model. Human 
Communication Research, 28(2), 213-228.  

39. Michael Roloff and Kari P. Soule. 2002. Interpersonal 

Conflict: A review. In M. L. Knapp & J. A. Daly (Eds.), 
Handbook of Interpersonal Communication, 3rd edition. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

40. Morris Rosenberg. 1965. Society and the adolescent 

self-image. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
41. Caryl E. Rusbult, John M. Martz, and Christopher R.  
Agnew. 1998. The investment model scale: Measuring 
commitment level, satisfaction level, quality of 
alternatives, and investment size. Personal 
Relationships, 5, 357-391.  

42. Lauren E. Scissors and Darren Gergle. 2013. “Back and 

forth, back and forth”: Channel switching in romantic 
couple conflict. CSCW 2013, 237-248.  

43. Lauren Scissors, Michael E. Roloff, and Darren Gergle. 
2014. Room for interpretation: The role of self-esteem 
and CMC in romantic couple conflict. CHI 2014, 3953-
3962.  

44. Alan Sillars, Traci Smith, and Ascan Koerner. 2010. 

Misattributions contributing to empathic (in) accuracy 
during parent-adolescent conflict discussions. Journal of 
Social and Personal Relationships, 27(6), 727-747. 

45. Laura Stafford. 2010. Geographic distance and 

communication during courtship. Communication 
Research, 37(2), 275-297. 

46. Laura Stafford and Andy J. Merolla. 2007. Idealization, 

reunions, and stability in long-distance dating 
relationships. Journal of Social and Personal 
Relationships, 24(1), 37-54.   

47. Stephanie Tom Tong and Joseph B. Walther. 2011. 

Relational maintenance and computer-mediated 
communication. In K. B. Wright & L. M. Webb (Eds.), 
Computer-mediated communication in personal 
relationships (pp. 98-119). New York: Peter Lang. 

48. Monique Mitchell Turner, Scott C. D'Urso, Caroline T. 

Rankin, and Patty Callish Malone. 2003. Cognition 
during conflict: The impact of communication medium 
and perceived intentions on attributions. Paper 
presented at ICA 2003.  

49. Joseph B. Walther. 1992. Interpersonal effects in 

computer-mediated interaction: A relational perspective. 
Communication Research, 19(1), 52-90.  

50. Joseph B. Walther. 1996. Computer-mediated 
communication: Impersonal, interpersonal, and 

392

53. Meifen Wei, Daniel W. Russell, Brent Mallinckrodt, and 

David L. Vogel. 2007. The experiences in close 
relationship scale (ECR)-short form: Reliability, 
validity, and factor structure. J. of Personality 
Assessment, 88, 187-204.  

54. Robert L. Weiss. 1980. Strategic behavioral marital 

therapy: Toward a model for assessment and 
intervention. In J. P. Vincent (Ed.), Advances in family 
intervention, assessment, and theory (Vol. 1, pp. 229-
271). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press. 

SESSION: RELATIONSHIPS AND ROMANCE

hyperpersonal interaction. Communication Research, 
23(1), 3-43.  

51. Joseph B. Walther. 2011. Theories of computer-

mediated communication and interpersonal relations. In 
M. L. Knapp & J. A. Daly (Eds.), The handbook of 
interpersonal communication (4th ed., pp. 443-479). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

52. Joseph B. Walther, Tracy Loh,and Laura Granka. 2005. 

Let me count the ways: The interchange of verbal and 
nonverbal cues in computer-mediated and face-to-face 
affinity. J. of Language and Social Psychology, 24(1), 
36-65.  

 

 

393

