CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Collaborative Analytics and Brokering in Digital 

Humanitarian Response 

Daniel Hellmann
College of IST, 

Penn State University

University Park, PA USA

deh198@ist.psu.edu

Carleen Maitland
College of IST, 

Penn State University

University Park, PA USA
cmaitland@ist.psu.edu

Andrea Tapia
College of IST, 

Penn State University

University Park, PA USA

atapia@ist.psu.edu

in 

in  digital  humanitarian  efforts, 

ABSTRACT 
During  large  scale  humanitarian  crises,  relief  practitioners 
identify data used for decision making and coordination, as 
critical  to  their  operations.  Implicit  in  this  need  is  the 
required  capabilities  for  analyzing  data.  Given  the  rapidly 
evolving  systems  of  collaborative  data  management  and 
analysis 
information 
scientists and practitioners alike are keen to understand the 
role of data analytics in response operations. Through a case 
study  of  a digital  humanitarian  collaborative  effort,  we 
examine  the  processes  for  big  and  small  data  analytics, 
specifically  focusing  on  data  development,  sharing,  and 
collaborative analytics. Informed by theories of articulation 
work and collaborative analytics, we analyze data from in-
depth  interviews  with  digital  humanitarians.  Our  findings 
identify  key  practices  and  processes  for  collaborative 
analytics in resource constrained environments, particularly 
the  role  of  brokering,  and 
turn  generate  design 
recommendation for collaborative analytic platforms.  
Author Keywords 
Collaborative Analytics; Big Data; Brokering; Articulation; 
Crisis Informatics; Humanitarian Aid; Ebola 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.3 Group and Organization Interfaces 
INTRODUCTION
Humanitarian  crises  require  rapid  formation  of  data 
processes.  As  the  members  of  a  response  network  deploy, 
they begin to identify and share data resources. These data 
sharing  efforts  often  span  both  in-situ  responders  who  are 
producing data as well as consuming analytic outputs of data 
analyses,  and  digital  humanitarians,  who  from  a  distance 
attempt  to  contribute  to  the  response.  These  so-called 
“Digital Humanitarians” represent an emerging phenomenon
of  technologically  driven  social  organization,  enabling 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must be  honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy  otherwise, or republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820067.

1284

international scale data sharing and creating both the social 
and technical infrastructure for collaborative analytics [17]. 
Here we define collaborative analytics as the processes by 
which organizations share and analyze data, inputs as well as 
outputs, through a digital platform for communication and 
information  transfer.  Some  key  features  of  such  a  system 
include active participation of stakeholders and contributors 
in the analytic process and brokering activities to promote 
and direct participation. 
While  the  concept  of  collaborative  analytics  bears  some 
resemblance  to  crowdsourcing  models,  it  should  be  noted 
that  where  crowdsourcing  fundamentally  relies  on  using 
participant input in an analytic process, they are generally not 
a  party  to  defining  the  desired  analysis.  In  contrast, 
participants in a collaborative analytic process constitute an 
ICT connected community of practice. Each member of the 
community  contributes  a  valuable  resource  as  part  of  a 
mutually beneficial collaboration.  
Where  resources  are  constrained,  as  is  often  the  case  in 
humanitarian  response, 
there  are  many  uncertainties 
surrounding the potential for collaborative analytics. While 
pundits extoll the virtues of big data for humanitarian relief, 
precisely how the data will be transformed into actionable 
analytic outputs is unclear. 
The  goal  of  this  research  is  to  contribute  to  a  theory  of 
collaborative  analytics  by  providing  insight  into  how  the 
context of a crisis, including the nature of the crisis, as well 
as  the  physical  and  organizational  characteristics,  impacts 
how digital humanitarians engage in collaborative analytics. 
In particular, we investigate how data are collected, shared, 
and  utilized  through  analyses.  What  type  of  work  is 
involved? Which  factors  hinder  or contribute positively to 
collaborative analytics?  
following  sections  we  provide  background 
In 
information  on  humanitarian 
response  organizations, 
collaborative  analytics  and  articulation  work.  This  is 
followed  by  a  description  of  our  case  study  and  data 
collection methods. Finally, we present the analytic results, 
discussion, and conclusion. 

the 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

future 

stability,  developed 

toward 

information  management  hurdles 

LITERATURE REVIEW 
Organizational Factors 
The  ability  of  humanitarian  organizations  to  effectively 
engage in collaborative analytics will be influence by their 
network relations and the degree of change their networks 
can endure while either maintaining or developing stability 
[2].  Entering  collaborative  agreements  can  pressure 
organizations to change or innovate. Though this process can 
be temporarily disruptive, it can also serve as an investment 
in 
through  harmonized 
interdependent  business  processes  with  network  partners 
[6,9]. 
Research has shown NGO’s and relief organizations address 
common 
through 
collaboration  geared 
resource  pooling  and 
reallocation [14]. Other times, new synergies are developed 
through  data  sharing  activities,  which  can  compound  the 
value of participating organizations’ data through the sharing 
of  analytic  outcomes.  A  great  deal  of  this  research  has 
centered on these data sharing practices or opportunities to 
capitalize on novel data sources such as social media and big 
data.  There  are,  however,  many  hurdles.  Sometimes  the 
quality  or  trustworthiness  of  the  data  fails  to  meet 
organizational  standards  or  needs  [32].  Other  times,  there 
exists concern on the part of the organization that the process 
of leveraging big data or social media is not well understood. 
One hurdle with data analytics, big and small, is identifying 
the process to distill useful data from raw content, and more 
importantly,  guaranteeing  that  process  does  not  obscure 
important  contextual  information  embedded  in  the  data 
collection process [2]. Burns (2014) nonetheless advocates 
for  pursuing  these  new  techniques  with  an  appropriate 
perspective that recognizes Big Data as more than just data, 
but also an all new set of analytic practices. The ultimate key 
is to understand those practices and tie them effectively to 
organizational decision making. 
Data Lifecycle in Humanitarian Response 
Due  to  the  resource  constraints  of  humanitarian  response, 
data collection can be challenging and may involve paper-
digital  workflows  [5].        If  data  is  to  be  repurposed  from 
existing  systems,  there  must  be  clear  understanding  of  its 
structure as well as the data management practices used to 
maintain  the  data  [10].    Deviation  from  intended  data 
management  practices,  particularly  those  hardened  into 
systems, can make repurposing data difficult as information 
capture  no  longer  adheres  to  expected  norms.    However, 
once the content, syntax and structure of the information is 
understood,  strategies  for  combining  heterogeneous  data 
enable integration of content from a wide variety of sources 
can  be  developed  [18,25,27].      For  example,  social  media 
have proven to be a rich source of contextual references and 
time sensitive indicators of ground conditions during crisis 
events [21,28,31,36].

is  found 

Collaborative Analytics 
The concept of collaborative analytics developed here refers 
to  an  architecture  of  collaboration  designed  to  bring 
stakeholders  in  a  community  of  practice  together  for  the 
purpose of sharing data and analytic results. The community 
will also establish and nurture the relationships necessary to 
further  leverage  analytics  toward  data  driven  decision 
making.  We anticipate key work related concepts in such a 
system will include invisible work, concepts of articulation, 
and especially anticipation work. While similar notions have 
been put forth for data sharing hubs, our research sheds light 
on how collaborative analytics operates in a  humanitarian,
and  hence  resource  constrained,  environment.  Concepts 
similar to collaborative analytics have been suggested in a 
somewhat  cursory  fashion  in  scholarship  on  participatory 
analytics,  focusing  primarily  on  participant 
led  data 
collection  and  visualization  [7,20].  Collaborative  visual 
analytics covers many similar concepts in that there is a focus 
on  data  sharing  and  analytics  with  appropriate  software 
affordances  to  support  distributed  teams.  An  important 
distinction 
in  brokering  activities.  Whereas 
collaborative  visual  analytics  manages  brokering  through 
software based agents [3,12,19], our concept relies on human 
based interactions.  
Articulation as a Means 
Articulation  work,  or  the  invisible  work  that  happens  to 
prepare for or enable visible work, is important to analyzing 
how  tools  fit  to  a  particular  task  [26]. As  collaborative 
analytics relies on a digital platform, the fit of the platform 
will influence the success of community of practice. As set 
forth  in  Integration  of  Computing  and  Routine  Work  [8],
Fitting,  Augmenting,  and  Working  Around  are  three 
strategies which comprise the definition of articulation work 
in computing. This concept identifies work itself as a series 
of tasks in a lattice which describes how the tasks relate to 
and  support  each  other.  The  articulation  work  comprises 
actions  taken  to  adjust  the  lattice  and  is  typical  of  any
management or planning type activities. One of the primary 
focuses of articulation work is that it addresses contingencies 
and disruptions to the expected evolution of work tasks [30]. 
In that way it is a form of contingent adaptation or innovation 
that  enables  the  continuation  of  computer  based  work. 
Recent  interpretations  of  this  concept  have  extended  it 
toward “Anticipation Work”, which is articulation done in 
preparation  for  expected  technological  innovations  [29].
Preparation  for  adoption  of  emerging  technologies  is 
especially important for humanitarian collaborative analytics 
as  such  preparation  highlights  a  problem  or  a  need  and 
anticipated solution. 
The Role of Brokering 
Another  key  facet  of  collaborative  analytics  related  to 
articulation work is the role of brokers and the articulation 
work they engage in on behalf of their associates. Brokers 
can  assist  in  finding  solutions  to  misalignment  of  work 
processes by using professional connections or knowledge to 
address issues of undersupply or misalignment of resources. 

1285

to 

fill 

in  order 

This ability is the result of a brokers position as a boundary 
spanner  within  an  organization  or  institution  [22].    As 
boundary  spanners,  part  of  their  functional  value  is  as 
mediator  of  Common  Ground.    Common  ground  becomes 
critical  when  conflicting  priorities  between  collaborators 
emerge  [4].    Dedicated  brokers  who  help  develop  and 
maintain common ground also provide value by handling the 
articulation  work  for  collaborators,  allowing  collaborators 
more time to focus on individual priorities. 
The Confluence of Articulation and Brokering 
In addition to mediating work related issues though boundary 
objects  and  with  an  eye  toward  assisting  establishment  of 
common  ground  between  collaborators,  brokering  offers  a 
number of other social problem solving advantages in a crisis 
context.    During  times  of  war,  other  social  conflict,  or 
disasters, civil infrastructures are frequently damaged.  This 
disruption  causes  a  massive  upheaval  to  the  elements  of 
society  that  depend  on  these  civil  infrastructures.    The 
government  and  other  parties  responsible  for  maintaining 
and repairing the infrastructure may not be in a position to 
respond quickly, or may have lost the trust of the populace.  
Under  such  circumstances  individuals  will  engage  in 
articulation 
to  develop  alternative  civil 
infrastructures  and  services 
the  gap  where 
institutionalized  serviced  have  failed  [15].    As  individuals 
find ways to work around the breakdowns in social services, 
they develop and rely on close knit social network of trust 
[24].  Through these networks, trustworthy connections can 
be  brokered  in  order  to  secure  goods,  services,  or  reliable 
information.    While  these  examples  pertain  mostly  to  the 
“victims” of social disruption, response personnel also must 
engage in a great deal of articulation work as the response 
effort begins.  Crises are so diverse that preparing for inter-
organizational collaboration can be a daunting task.  In this 
case,  the  broker  of  knowledge  about  expertise  and  data 
resources  enables  workarounds  and  adjustments  that  keep 
collaborative efforts moving forward [13]. 
METHOD 
These  concepts  of  collaborative  analytics  and  articulation 
frame our analysis of a community of digital humanitarians 
formed  during  a  recent  crisis.  In  particular,  we  examine  a 
network  of  practitioners  responding  virtually  to  the  Ebola 
crisis in West Africa.  The goal is to extend the body of work 
related  to  how  social  processes,  specifically  brokering  a 
collaborative  analytic  environment,  truly  work  and  the 
degree to which they are generalizable across applications. 
For the past year, the African Ebola epidemic has devastated 
populations  with  approximately  27,000  human  cases 
reported across five west African countries, Spain, and the 
US, resulting in over 11,000 fatalities [37]. Dozens of major 
charities are engaged in efforts to provide medical assistance 
or  logistics  support  to  the  relief  effort.  Many  developed 
nations and private corporations have pledged monetary as 
well  as  material  support  to  these  efforts  as  well.  The 

1286

SESSION: NON-PROFITS AND HUMANITARIAN RESPONSES

epidemic  represents  one  of  the  most  severe  and  unique 
examples of human crisis in recent history.  
The duration of the epidemic is one of its most distinctive 
features.    When  one  considers  the  basic  nature  of  this 
particular crisis and other examples of disease epidemics as 
opposed to natural disasters and other breakdowns of civil 
infrastructure, disease events tend to be more protracted. A 
disaster may dramatically impact society, but once the event 
is over, response becomes more straightforward. There are 
of course ripples to deal with, but the event at the core of the 
disaster is over, which certainly simplifies assessing damage 
and coordinating response.  Disease events, especially those 
with  a  viral  growth  rate,  are  not  characterized  by  a  semi 
governing of the negative impacts.  The disaster continues to 
grow at exponential rates, making the response effort more 
dynamic and difficult to gauge and plan for simply because 
it isn’t over yet.   The disruption to civil normalcy is recycled 
through the spread of the disease. 
If a silver lining can be found regarding this tragedy, it is that 
this duration offers the opportunity to study various aspects 
of  the  response  and  to  develop  knowledge  which  will 
improve the response in future epidemics. 
For the scope of this paper, our dataset has been constrained 
to a subset of our overall interview subjects primarily defined 
as  participants  in  the  Digital  Humanitarianism  movement.  
This assures our focus is truly the perspectives of individuals 
involved in a global scale cooperative effort to develop and 
share  data  or  analytic  resources  in  support  of  the  Ebola 
response. 
individual 
backgrounds vary greatly. While many are volunteers, some 
are compensated for their work in some way.  Those who are 
compensated tend to be in coordination or  leadership type 
roles of the participating organizations.  The level of effort 
that these individuals apply to their activity is subsequently 
much  higher  than  the  typical  digital  humanitarian.    Our 
research indicates that coordinators within this community 
tend  to  participate  on  a  half  to  full  time  equivalent  level, 
while  more  casual  participants 
to  contribute 
sporadically in something like 10-20 hour chunks, frequently 
during free time such as evenings and weekends. The result 
is a relatively decentralized federation of collaborators with 
a  broad  array  of  commitment 
interests.  
Furthermore, the heavy reliance on volunteer labor drives a 
need for asynchronous interaction. 
Data Collection 
The first step of the data collection is to identify an initial list 
of  interview  subjects  spanning  the  demographic  elements 
related to our project as identified through a literature review. 
Interview  subjects  with  demographic  backgrounds  such  as 
data  scientists, 
relief  practitioners,  brokers,  domain 
researchers,  or  some  combination  of  these  identities  and 
roles were sought as key informants. Subjects were recruited 
through the professional networks of the research team.  A 
snowball  method  was  used  to  identify  and  recruit  through 
mutual  contacts.  The  following 
lists  provide  subject 

  Amongst  digital  humanitarians, 

levels  and 

tend 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

demographics  and  a  summary  of  the  interview  guide 
questions. 
Interview Demographics 

1. Response context - Which aspect(s) or stages of the 

response is your organization involved in 
(sensitization, treatment, logistics, etc.)? 

2. Decision making process - Has your organization 
made use of externally sourced data in its decision 
making? Were these raw data or analytic outputs 
(maps, graphs, models)? What Types of data, 
sources, and formats are you most interested in? 
How does your organizational unit (office, work 
group, team) deal with uncertainty in data and 
statistical analyses? 

3. Data availability - Are the data you need largely 
available? If data are collected at intervals (daily, 
weekly, monthly), are they reliably available?  

4. Analytic techniques - What types of analyses do 
you use, if any, to improve the Ebola response or 
limit the disease spread? How do you identify the 
audience and how often do you interact with the 
intended audience of analytic products?  Do they 
provide feedback that helps shape your work? Are 
there analyses you need that are not available? 

5. Output format - Are the outputs of your analyses 
(charts, graphs, maps) configurable? If so, how?  

6. Organization structure – Describe your 

organizational structure and hierarchy. Do you 
collaborate internally or with external 
organizations?  If so, can you describe those 
activities in terms of purpose or nature of work? 

 

The interviews were audio (and at times video) recorded with 
the  participant’s  permission.  Semi-transcripts  were 
developed  for  each  interview  by  working  significant 
timestamps, discussion threads, and illustrative quotes into 
interview notes during a secondary review. This process is 
reminiscent of the hermeneutic circle used to develop more 
rich understanding of text through recursive reinterpretation 
in light of context. Organizing thematic discussion threads 
within the notes and expanding those toward semi-transcript 
type content also bears some resemblance to Agar’s language 
[1].  In this case thematic discussion threads are similar to 
strips  used  to  organize  content  topics.  The  difference 
between 
the  method  employed  here  and  prominent 
applications  of  Agars  method  in  other  qualitative  research 
[34] is in the role of breakdown. Instead of using breakdowns 
in  the  available  coding  schema  to  extend  the  schema  and 
develop  understanding  of  the  strip  meaning  in  an  existing 
text, divergence or recirculation of the discussion topic in the 
actual interview or audio recording was used to define a new 
note or note thread as appropriate.  Adaptation of the coding 
schema is then handled during analysis.  As a result, each 
note then has its own meaning in the context of the thematic 
thread  it  has  been  logged  under,  and  each  thread  can  be 
interpreted as the sum of meanings of its notes. This process 
represents  a  completely  open  form  of  interpretive  reading 
based upon literal reading of the initial note set prior to actual 
code  based  analysis  [16].  Once  the  final  notes  were 
developed,  copies  were  sent  to  the  interview  subjects  to 

1287

1. High level director of global humanitarian aid 

brokering non-profit with 20+ years experience in 
technology and management 

2. Data Scientist and Geographer engaged with 

multiple prominent data analytics nonprofits from 
the humanitarian aid community. Has 10+ years 
experience in both global and field operations. 

3. Executive with a prominent technology and 
connectivity support startup. Has 10+ years 
experience in government and industry. 

4. Data Scientist and Medical Doctor engaged with 

multiple prominent non-profits from the 
humanitarian aid community. Has 15+ years 
experience in both global and field operations. 

5. Professor of crisis informatics and humanitarian aid 

researcher with 15+ years experience 

6. Professor of crisis informatics and humanitarian aid 

researcher with 15+ years experience. 

7. Professor of crisis informatics and humanitarian aid 

researcher with 15+ years experience between 
academia and industry. 

8. Professor of Communications with 15+ years 

experience between academia, humanitarian aid, 
and environmental non-profits. 

9. Epidemiologist with 5+ years experience brokering 
spatial epidemiology support for humanitarian aid 
NGO's.  

10. Retired Technology Professional with 5+ years 

volunteer service in humanitarian aid. 

11. Founder of major humanitarian aid and crisis 

informatics non profit 

12. Open source software development executive with 
5 years volunteer experience in development based 
non-profits 

13. Technology and data science executive with 5 

years volunteer experience in humanitarian 
volunteer non-profits 

14. Entrepreneur with 10+ years experience in both 

government and volunteer non-profits. 

15. Technology and Business Manager with 5+ years 

experience in volunteer non-profits 

16. Entrepreneur with 5+ years experience in 

volunteer non-profits. 
Interview Guide Summary 
The  questions,  whose  answers  and  relevance  are  likely  to 
vary with category, are defined in harmony with the research 
questions. The framework consists of five components, two 
reflecting the users’ perspectives and three reflecting the data 
analytic context. Underlying the framework is an interest in 
multi-level governance and organizational structure, as well 
as the work associated with big data analyses and their use in 
decision making.  

SESSION: NON-PROFITS AND HUMANITARIAN RESPONSES

implications 

limited network access are well chronicled, here we examine 
the  specific 
for  collaborative  analytics, 
including data sharing, articulation work, and brokering. 
Finding #1 – Lack of connectivity in coverage or bandwidth, 
inhibits widespread availability of shareable data and creates 
design constraints when disseminating analytic outputs. 
 
Digital humanitarians rely heavily on internet connectivity 
for nearly all aspects of their work.  It also has implications 
for  their  identity.  The  following  quote  from  a  prominent 
crisis  informatics  practitioner  could  not  illustrate  this  any 
better.  

“one of the things that hits home for many of us in the 
humanitarian world is pure connectivity”… [I teach my 
field analysts to] … “toggle down to the most limited 
bandwidth options and create redundant pathways for 

collaborative sharing” 

“So [Social Media Company] has funded the initial 
phase directly with [Humanitarian IT Coordinator] to 
try to get some VSAT (Very Small Aperture Terminal) 
capacity for the NGO’s working in the area and they 

(Social Media Company & Humanitarian IT 

Coordinator) then asked us to get involved to look at 

more terrestrial options” 

In short, the lack of quality connectivity influences nearly all 
aspects of their work, how data is collected and transmitted 
as  well  as  how  analytic  outputs  are  formatted  for 
dissemination.  In a low connectivity environment,  reports 
sent  to  the  field  need  to  communicate  key  facts  while 
consuming  limited  bandwidth. 
  Aside  from  the  data 
volume/bandwidth issues, network accessibility is a design 
constraint  that  influences  how  information  is  presented, 
formatted and transmitted. For instance, bulleted facts in a 
text  message/SMS  are  more  accessible  than  a  report  that 
must  be  downloaded  on  a  computer,  viewed,  read,  and 
potentially interpreted.   
 
Finding #2 – Simply the potential, rather than the actuality, of 
being able to share data, incentivized digital data capture and 
‘driving data around.’ 
 
While for some digital data capture, as opposed to paper or 
whiteboard  based  work,  presents  a  significant  information 
and  technology  hurdle  for  the  Ebola  response,  there  were 
others who despite limited network, hardware and software 
resources,  embarked  on  the  arduous  process  of  capturing, 
managing and transferring digital data. Simply the potential 
that  someday,  someone  could  potentially  use  the  data 
provided an incentive to perform this work.   

perform  member  checking  and  clarification  of  any 
discrepancies.  
While  most  of  the  interviews  conducted  were  one  on  one 
between the researcher and subject, one particular interview 
was  conducted  as  a  group,  yielding  16  subjects  across  14 
interviews.    Table  1  summarizes  the  metadata  for  the 
resulting interview semi-transcripts.  
 

Interview  Time (minutes) 

Semi-transcript Pages 

PS-1 

PS-2 

PS-3 

PS-4 

PS-5 

PS-6 

PS-7 

PS-8 

PS-9 

PS-10 

PS-11 

PS-12 

PS-13 

PS-14 

48 

35 

52 

35 

23 

88 

60 

82 

70 

60 

54 

78 

75 

180 

3 

2 

4 

4 

2 

6 

5  

2 

3 

1 

1 

2 

2 + video demo 

5 + video demo 

Table 1 : Interview Results Metadata 

Analysis 
Once semi-transcripts were developed, the notes were loaded 
into a common analytic environment to perform qualitative 
coding. The coding schema was developed by extending a 
list  of  thematic  factors  generated  to  support  the  interview 
guide.    The  result  was  a  hierarchical  coding  schema  that 
reflected  concepts  from  the  interview  guide  as  well  as 
additional concepts emerging from a cursory reading of the 
interview data. The coding environment supported dynamic 
updates  to  coding  decisions  as  well  as  opportunities  to 
concurrently  code  single  items  with  multiple  codes.    A 
summary worksheet compiled the raw counts of codes to a 
summary  table  from  which  basic  statistics,  diagrams,  and 
pattern analysis could be performed. This summary dataset 
supports both longitudinal and cross-sectional analysis of the 
interviews [16]. The entire workbook design is dynamic and 
scalable  such  that  revisions  to  the  coding  schema,  coding 
analysis,  and  addition  of  new  data  is  straightforward  to 
implement. 
FINDINGS  
In summary, our findings begin with the direct implications 
of a lack of network connectivity. While the challenges of 

1288

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

“The operational data at the district level was being 
collected and managed on a whiteboard, but if you 

don’t have connectivity, that’s what works” 

“They had hardware and they had software and then 
the data was being collected and put into spreadsheets, 
but in most cases, they had big issues with connectivity, 

so they could not share that data backward” 

“Most of these ETU’s (Ebola Treatment Unit) and 
NGO groups were sharing things on USB drives, and 
manually driving them from village to village in order 
to collect and share data. So anything that can be done 
with regard to Wifi coverage to help these data teams 
share data is something we are very interested in” 

It is interesting to note the multitude of responses to a lack of 
connectivity  when  managing  data.  In the case of the  first 
quote,  a  lack  of  connectivity  seems  to  have  driven  analog 
(paper/whiteboard) type data captures.  It is possible that the 
whiteboard approach described is meant to facilitate group 
work within an office.  The emphasis however on “collected 
and managed” seems to indicate that the whiteboard really is 
the authoritative operational dataset.  To contrast this with 
the  first  quote,  the  second  quote  indicates  that  computer 
assets were available and actively used, but in the absence of 
connectivity  or  some  vehicle  for  sharing,  the  effort  to 
maintain digital copies of the data becomes harder to justify, 
and the value in that effort becomes moot.  This then raises 
the question of why the computer based work was done at 
all?  Perhaps the anticipation of future opportunities to share, 
or a desire to build a historical data base for future analysis 
incentivized the investment in digital data management.     
In  the  third  quote,  we  find  an  example  of  digital  data 
management  and  data  sharing  enabled  through  removable 
media.    This  is  an  example  of  improvisation,  Fitting  or 
Working  Around 
terms,  whereby 
collaborators change the structure or procedure of their work 
in order to address some deficiency or misalignment.  In this 
case the lack of connectivity precludes network based data 
sharing  and  collaboration,  so  the  next  best  alternative  of 
thumb drives and physical transportation of data is used to 
share data and make arrangements for collaboration. 
Hence,  we  observe  a  variety  of  responses  to  the  resource 
scarcity,  with  varying 
for  collaborative 
analytics.  
Finding #3 – Collaboration is conducted mostly through the 
use of free and/or thin client communication and information 
sharing technologies. 
 
Notions of collaboration tended to accompany discussion of 
data  sharing  and  analysis,  which  as  it  turns  out  is  deeply 
interconnected  to  connectivity.  Subjects  differed  on  their 
opinions as to which attributes or functionalities were most 
important, but lightweight and free applications (e.g.Skype) 
that streamline communication are common. 

implications 

articulation 

in 

“It’s a nice collaborative infrastructure, but can almost 

kill you when you have a lot of crisis things going 

on”… on the “Tyranny of Skype” 

“and then when you talk about the (collaboration) 

solutions that are sought, it is very much the standard 

tools that even we are using because a lot of the 

connections go back into the field and around. It’s a lot 
of Dropbox, it’s a lot of Google docs, it’s a lot of Skype 

it’s a lot of Excel and office solutions and 

spreadsheets.” 

instead  of  managing 

The  first  quote  regarding  “The  Tyranny  of  Skype”  offers 
some  insight  into  design  principles  for  communication 
systems intended to support relief practitioners.    Managing 
information overload becomes critical to staying focused on 
priorities.  Systems that allow communication to be easily 
compartmentalized into manageable dialogs on the fly may 
offer some advantages to collaborators [11].  In the second 
quote we begin to see the types of applications commonly 
used.  Again, basic word processing, spreadsheet, and file or 
document  sharing  functionality  sees  widespread  adoption, 
but  many  of  these  applications,  and  specifically  their  key 
affordances,  are  dependent  on  connectivity.    One  key 
concept to note is the difference between synchronous and 
asynchronous  interaction.    Jones  et  al.  (2008)  highlights 
asynchronous collaboration as an affordance for  managing 
information overload [11].  Here, in the case of the Ebola 
response, 
information  overload, 
asynchronous communication helps ameliorate intermittent 
network  outages.  This  is  a  critical  design  feature  for 
collaboration  platforms  in  low  resource  environments, 
particularly where remote field work is involved.  
 
Finding #4 –Data and resource sharing activities often require 
brokering actions. 
 
deeply 
Collaboration 
interdisciplinary,  and  by 
involves 
coordinating the activities of actors with different concerns 
and priorities.  Empowering collaboration then requires some 
kind of facilitator willing to invest the invisible articulation 
work necessary to promote buy in and cooperation from the 
various actors.  These individuals must function as boundary 
spanners, demonstrating insight into each individual domain 
of the collaborative effort in ways that build relationships, 
common  ground,  and  result  in  collaborative  action.    The 
following  quotes  from  one  such  broker  of  collaborative 
action highlight the nuance of this effort, and it’s criticality 
to collaborative success. 

is 
its  very  nature, 

the  Ebola 

response 

in 

“In the Ebola response there are a number of GIS 

professionals helping to facilitate and map out a lot of 
the disease transmission, as well as where the flow of 
cases from one geographic region to another occurs.  
However there still tends to be a little bit of a divide 

1289

between the doctors, who are concerned about taking 
care of patients, the epidemiologists who want to get 
the numbers from the doctors, and the GIS professional 
who want the numbers from the epidemiologists.  And 
so a lot of this is about how to best explain why this is 

important to other individuals.”   

The  follow  on  to  the  first  quote  illustrates  the  need  for 
invisible  articulation  work,  and  a  broker  type  activity,  to 
assist  in  the  development  and  maintenance  of  common 
ground between collaborators. 

“So I spend a lot of my time explaining to GIS 

professionals why epidemiologists collect the data that 
they do, and explaining to epidemiologists how looking 
at their data from a spatial standpoint is important.” 

descriptions 

of 

distributed 

analytics 

collaborative 

themselves  slightly  from 

Throughout  the  course  of  the  research,  these  types  of 
nuanced 
collaboration 
empowered through various forms of brokering activity were 
common.    In  the  case  illustrated,  brokering  took  a  very 
traditional form as an intermediary handled dialog between 
actors to enable cooperation.  Frequently however, brokering 
takes a slightly different asynchronous form.  Brokers in this 
digital humanitarian community frequently develop thematic 
contact  lists  and  data  inventories  to  help  streamline  their 
activities.  These lists are shared with collaboration networks 
through various channels in order to promote connecting the 
right people to achieve a given goal.  By adopting this model, 
the  brokers  disconnect 
the 
brokering process while still acting as a connection between 
the communities they seek to empower. 
DISCUSSION  
In  general,  our  findings  support  the  notion  that  within  a 
humanitarian 
environment, 
articulation  and  anticipation  work  are  handled  by 
intermediaries [8,29,30] or brokers, who recruit participants 
and stakeholders, help solicit access to data and computing 
resources,  facilitate  and  moderate  communications,  and 
connect analytic needs  with  data resources and participant 
skillsets. In a resource constrained environment, the potential 
for data sharing can expand the availability of digital data 
and systems must take into account many mechanisms for 
data  transfer  and  submission.  Further,  as  collaborative 
analytics are inherently interdisciplinary, brokers will play a 
key  role  in  realizing  the  promise  of  ‘big  data’  for 
humanitarian response.  
Consequences of the Findings 
Through interpretive qualitative analysis  some  key themes 
have  been  identified  as  useful  when  considering  design 
constraints  or  assessing  the  mechanics  of  sociotechnical 
systems  in  the  Ebola  response  context.    First  is  the 
omnipresent  role  connectivity  plays  in  the  system.    There 
does  appear  to  be  some  degree  of  contradiction  regarding 
whether 
certain  data 
management  behaviors.    Nonetheless,  the  prevalence  of 
some  reference  to  connectivity  as  well  as  the  discussion 

reliable 

connectivity  drives 

1290

SESSION: NON-PROFITS AND HUMANITARIAN RESPONSES

to 

topics  that  coincide  with  references  to  connectivity  issues 
matter quite a bit.  First and foremost, connectivity enables 
network  based  data  sharing  through  peer  to  peer  data 
exchanges, data portals, and data services.  Without reliable 
connectivity for all members of a collaborative network, the 
next  best  option  becomes  physical  transfer  by  external 
media.  This adjustment to a breakdown can create logistic, 
security,  and  data  integrity  issues  that  consume  time  and 
valuable resources [15,24].  The ability to easily share helps 
to alleviate these issues, and as illustrated through Finding 
#2,  provides  incentives  to  the  members  of  the  response 
community  to  capture,  maintain,  and  share  quality  digital 
data.    Furthermore,  by  enabling  ease  of  data  sharing  and 
incentivizing digital data management, the groundwork for 
rollup  of  data  and  local  analysis  toward  a  collaborative 
analytics capability is established [26]. 
With  regard 
the  data  management  practices  and 
information behaviors potentially driven by access to reliable 
connectivity, the  storyline presented through interpretation 
of the interview field seems to indicate the presence of some 
mitigating  variable.    Universally,  the  interview  subjects 
agreed  that  connectivity  is  a  significant  part  of  the 
collaboration  and  information  environment  of  the  Ebola 
response,  but  the  lack  of  connectivity  resulted  in  a  broad 
range of responses from field practitioners.  If the ability to 
share incentivizes digital data capture and maintenance, and 
sharing  is  best  enabled  though  connectivity,  many  might 
conclude that the absence of connectivity would promote the 
paper  and  whiteboard  based  workflows.    In  actuality,  the 
interviews  seemed  to  indicate  that  even  in  the  absence  of 
connectivity, sometimes data was still captured analog then 
converted to digital without any reasonable expectation that 
it could be shared soon.  At other times, data was born digital, 
but due to a lack of connectivity, transferred using external 
media physically transferred by motor vehicles from site to 
site. Perhaps the notion that the ability to share in and of itself 
incentivizes  digital  data  management  needs 
to  be 
deconstructed  further.    The  ability  to  share  without  some 
benefit to the actor who must invest extra effort may not be 
recognized  as  a  positive  incentive.    In  this  context  then, 
perhaps the difference in data management behavior under 
circumstances of limited connectivity is  also influenced in 
part by the degree to which that actor is actively engaged, or 
even  interested  in,  digital  analysis  of  their  data  and 
subsequent sharing and collaboration with a community of 
practice [8,29,30]. So while collaborative analytics depends 
heavily on the ability to share with ease, and ease of sharing 
in many cases is enabled by connectivity, for a cooperative 
data  driven  analytic  environment  to  emerge  certain  social 
elements must co-exist. 
Effective  collaborative  analytics  requires,  amongst  other 
things, data sharing opportunities that incentivize digital data 
management as well as an interest in the potential benefit of 
participation.    Interest  can  be  promoted  through  brokering 
activities  while  concepts  like  anticipation  work  help  to 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

explain  why  individuals  and  organization  may  or  may  not 
manage data digitally [29].                    
Examples of these dynamics are already emerging, with data 
sharing  and  access  mitigated  to  a  certain  degree  in  recent 
years through implementation of humanitarian aid and crisis 
informatics  data  portals  such  as  The  Humanitarian  Data 
Exchange  (HDX)  as  well  as  the  establishment  of  various 
digital  volunteer  support  groups  such  as  the  Digital 
Humanitarians  Network 
(DHN),  Crisis  Mappers, 
Humanitarian Open Street Map teams (HOT), Standby Task 
force (SBTF) and countless others.  To prepare for technical 
aspects  of  collaboration  these  groups  have  developed  or 
identified standards and provided data sharing infrastructures 
[29].  From  a  social  interaction  standpoint  they  have  also 
enabled  collaboration  brokering  activities  across  many 
different  events  and  applications  [23].    With  that  said, 
localized  operational  data  sets developed  within  data  silos 
have  a  number  of  issues.    The  unique  localized  datasets 
frequently needed for the Ebola response are still often times 
publicized  through  shared  data  inventory  records  and 
dropbox  folders.    So  the  data  is  shared  via  connectivity 
empowered architectures, but is really only openly shared as 
far as the collaborative network of the owner spans.  Such an 
approach  is  agile,  and  the  resources  to  support  the  IT 
component  are  low  cost,  making  the  solution  attractive  in 
resource constrained environments.  The downside to these 
advantages  is  that  it  requires  extra  articulation  work  and 
brokering effort to keep accurate records of what kind of data 
is available and who possesses the most recent copies [35].  
Metadata also becomes a factor when data development and 
maintenance becomes decentralized and uncoordinated.  As 
data and results from local analysis are made available in a 
collaborative environment, the temporal dimension of data 
as  well  as  its  provenance  may  become  important,  further 
emphasizing the criticality of well understood data models 
and useful metadata.   
Aside  from  the  transparency  issues  of  managing  valuable 
data  sources  this  way,  there  exists  the  issue  of  leveraging 
heterogeneous data sources.  While there are techniques for 
addressing  this  issue,  effectively  integrating  the  disparate 
data sources requires a great deal of background knowledge, 
which returns us to the value of the broker.  In addition to 
brokering  knowledge  about  data  holdings,  brokering 
activities  also  occur  to  connect  collaborators  who  have 
complementary  skills  or  needs  [35].  Social  networks 
reflecting  more  semantically  driven  content  controlled  by 
and open to user communities might support navigating this 
space more effectively [33]. Skype group chats are one of the 
most prominent tools for such activities.  In this case, group 
chats are established for certain communities of interest and 
membership is grown through a snowball recruiting method 
where members invite newcomers to the community into the 
chat  session.    From  there  introductions  can  be  made  and 
skills, needs, or questions can be socialized.  Key members 
of  the  community  emerge  as  brokers  of  knowledge  and 
professional  connections, 
frequently  spanning  across 

multiple  communities  of  interest  and  engaging  to  support 
numerous activities.  Their value is that they bring together 
disparate  actors  with  complementary  skills,  goals,  or 
resources [22].  Mediation of the collaborative relationships 
then  helps  promote  effective  collaboration  toward  goals.  
Management  of  the  cooperative  effort  may  become  even 
more  important  in  the  context  of  collaborative  analytics, 
where datasets and analysis of many contributors are brought 
together in an analytic environment.  In that sense, perhaps 
designing for the articulation needs of the broker may benefit 
the  collective  by  empowering 
those  who  promote 
cooperation. 
Implications for Design 
Based on our current list of findings, design considerations 
to support a collaborative analytics environment would need 
to address the key features of the socio-technical system in a 
way that is more integrated than currently possible.  The first 
issue  to  address  is  that  of  connectivity.    Solutions  that 
support  asynchronous  interaction  between  collaborators  is 
one  way  to  get  around  intermittent  access.    A  second 
connectivity issue is insufficient bandwidth to support data 
access  and  sharing.  Articulation,  or  working  around  the 
issue, is currently the only available option.  In these cases 
the  user  must  experiment  with  data  access  options  and 
determine  by  trial  and  error  the  best  strategy  to  for  data 
sharing.    Sometimes  that  may  mean  reducing  file  size  by 
reformatting or editing data.  Perhaps affordances that ease 
this process would enable more effective workarounds.  For 
instance, if a dataset or document needed to be shared with a 
group, perhaps it could be served in multiple forms and the 
user community messaged with the options and bandwidth 
requirements rather than offered a “take it or leave it when 
you  can”  option.    While  this  paradigm  could  certainly 
become  part  of  standard communication  and  collaboration 
etiquette, i.e. sending “small” and “large” versions, perhaps 
a more advanced option would work.  Affordances built into 
ICT’s  which  allow  users  to  dynamically  and  intelligently 
scope  data  shared  with  them  prior  to  transfer  might  be  an 
option.  
The  existence  of  brokering  activities  also  present  many 
opportunities  to  design  useful  affordances.    Brokering 
inherently  relies  on  the  leverage  of  social  networks  and 
concepts  such  as  social  or  professional  capital  and  trust.  
While  social  media  sites  like  LinkedIn  or  Facebook  offer 
opportunities for collaborators to explore each other social 
networks, the opportunity to integrate a more semantically 
driven  social  and  professional  network  would  benefit  the 
concept  of  collaborative  analytics  dramatically.    From  a 
semantic standpoint, users would then be interested not just 
in “who is connected to who” but also much deeper network 
information like why they are connected, what types of skills 
and interests can be found in a network or it’s communities.  
These types of information are already captured and utilized 
in many existing platforms, but if such platforms could be 
extended to also describe who has access to what kinds of 
data,  hardware  or  software,  or  perhaps  even  identify 

1291

collaborative cohorts (existing or potential) with experience 
in a certain domain, the advantages to collaborative analytics 
for humanitarian aid would be significant. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presents the initial findings of research into the 
data  and  analysis  requirements  of  the  2014/15  Ebola 
response.  The goal of the project is to understand the data 
sharing,  collaboration  networks,  and  analytic  activities  of 
data scientists and humanitarian aid personnel participating 
in the response effort in terms of specific operational needs. 
Through this understanding, the role of Big Data and analytic 
techniques in a collaborative environment can be clarified. 
Additionally,  a  better  understanding  of  the  collaborative 
systems that exists to support the response effort will help 
inform future design of collaborative architectures as well as 
identify key concepts and technologies for development and 
adoption in future infectious disease response efforts.  The 
results of this research have identified internet connectivity, 
brokering  within  digital  humanitarian  networks  as  key 
elements to consider while designing sociotechnical systems 
and related applications. Connectivity empowers digital data 
architectures  needed  to  support  the  response.    Brokering 
socializes  knowledge  about  data  sources  while  promoting 
action  between  collaborators.    The  role  of  Big  Data  and 
analytics will become clearer as data architectures, methods 
for data collection, and collaborative processes mature and 
achieve  widespread  adoption.
In  the  meantime,  design 
should focus on supporting the vehicles that are flexible in 
affordances so user communities can continue to experiment 
with workarounds and collaboration methods for unique and 
unpredictable environments. 
The  nature  of  the  environment  in  and  of  itself  also  has 
implications for the generalizability of our findings.  In the 
Ebola context one of our key findings was centric to poor 
connectivity.  This situation was closely connected to a need 
for more significant articulation work and a stronger role for 
brokering.  If connectivity were not an issue, perhaps some 
of  these  findings  would  change.    In  that  sense,  findings 
driven  heavily  by  the  lack  of  connectivity  may  be 
generalizable  only  to  similar  applications.    With  that  said, 
other findings have the potential to be generalizable across 
theory.    The  importance  of  an  institutionalized  brokering 
process  to  handle  articulation  work  for  the  collaborative 
cohort seems to be deeply entrenched in the identity of digital 
humanitarians  with  most  interviews  indicating  that  across 
different disaster response projects, the tasks brokers took on 
may change, but the need for brokers was consistent. 
Future  research  may  develop  additional  insight  through 
focus  on  local  operations  centric  data  use  and  the  role 
analytics plays in response decision making.  Additionally, 
capturing  a  more  “in  situ”  perspective  will  likely  help 
identify  opportunities  for  more  advanced 
techniques 
common to Big Data approaches offering  significant impact 
to  future  response  operations. 
  This  knowledge  will 
ultimately help shape a vision for investment and adoption 

1292

SESSION: NON-PROFITS AND HUMANITARIAN RESPONSES

of  certain  system  design  practices  and  innovations  within 
collaborative practices throughout the humanitarian aid and 
crisis informatics community. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors would like to thank all of the study participants 
for their time and willingness to contribute perspectives, the 
CSCW 2016 review committee for their comments regarding 
early drafts, and the National Science Foundation for funding 
through grant #1519023. 
REFERENCES 

1. Michael H. Agar. 1985. Speaking of Ethnography.

Sage University Paper series on Qualitative
Research Methods 2: 5–79.
http://doi.org/10.4135/9781412985895

2. Ryan Burns. 2014. Rethinking big data in digital
humanitarianism: practices, epistemologies, and
social relations. GeoJournal.
http://doi.org/10.1007/s10708-014-9599-x

3. Chee Seng Chong, Bong Zoebir, Alan Yu Shyang

Tan, et al. 2012. Collaborative analytics for
predicting expressway-traffic congestion.
Proceedings of the 14th Annual International
Conference on Electronic Commerce - ICEC ’12:
35–38. http://doi.org/10.1145/2346536.2346542

4. Gregorio Convertino, Helena M. Mentis,

Aleksandra Slavkovic, Mary Beth Rosson, and John
M. Carroll. 2011. Supporting common ground and
awareness in emergency management planning.
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction 18, 4: 1–34.
http://doi.org/10.1145/2063231.2063236

5. Nicola Dell, Trevor Perrier, Neha Kumar, Mitchell
Lee, Rachel Powers, and Gaetano Borriello. 2015.
Paper-Digital Workflows in Global Development
Organizations. Proceedings of the 18th ACM
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work & Social Computing - CSCW ’15, ACM
Press, 1659–1669.
http://doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675145

6. Amydee M. Fawcett and Stanley E. Fawcett. 2013.

Benchmarking the state of humanitarian aid and
disaster relief: A systems design perspective and
research agenda. Benchmarking: An International
Journal 20, 5: 661–692. http://doi.org/10.1108/BIJ-
07-2011-0053

7. Daniel Filokik, Markus Rittenbruch, and Marcus

Foth. 2014. Participatory Data Analytics

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Collaborative Interfaces for Data Composition and 
Visualisation. VINCI 2014, 248–249. 

8. Les Gasser. 1986. The integration of computing and

routine work. ACM Transactions on Information
Systems 4, 3: 205–225.
http://doi.org/10.1145/214427.214429

9. TM Harrison, Theresa Pardo, J. Ramon Gil–Garcia,

Fiona Thompson, and Dubravka Juraga. 2007.
Geographic information technologies, structuration
theory, and the world trade center crisis. Journal of
the American Society for Information Science and
Technology 58, 1998: 2240–2254.
http://doi.org/10.1002/asi

10. Monika Alise Johansen, Jeremiah Scholl, Per
Hasvold, Gunnar Ellingsen, and Johan Gustav
Bellika. 2008. “Garbage in, garbage out.”
Proceedings of the ACM 2008 conference on
Computer supported cooperative work - CSCW ’08,
ACM Press, 525.
http://doi.org/10.1145/1460563.1460646

11. Quentin Jones, Mihai Moldovan, Daphne Raban,

and Brian Butler. 2008. Empirical evidence of
information overload constraining chat channel
community interactions. Proceedings of the ACM
2008 conference on Computer supported
cooperative work - CSCW ’08, ACM Press, 323.
http://doi.org/10.1145/1460563.1460616

12. Paul Keel. 2006. Collaborative Visual Analytics:

Inferring from the Spatial Organization and
Collaborative Use of Information. 2006 IEEE
Symposium On Visual Analytics And Technology,
IEEE, 137–144.
http://doi.org/10.1109/VAST.2006.261415

13. Benedikt Ley, Thomas Ludwig, Volkmar Pipek,

Dave Randall, Christian Reuter, and Torben
Wiedenhoefer. 2014. Information and Expertise
Sharing in Inter-Organizational Crisis Management.
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW)
23, 4-6: 347–387. http://doi.org/10.1007/s10606-
014-9205-2

14. Edgar a. Maldonado, Carleen F. Maitland, and
Andrea H. Tapia. 2009. Collaborative systems
development in disaster relief: The impact of multi-
level governance. Information Systems Frontiers
12, 1: 9–27. http://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-009-
9166-z

15. Gloria Mark and Bryan Semaan. 2008. Resilience

in collaboration. Proceedings of the ACM 2008
conference on Computer supported cooperative
work - CSCW ’08, ACM Press, 137.
http://doi.org/10.1145/1460563.1460585

16. J. Mason. 2002. Qualitative Researching. Sage

Publishing, London.

17. Patrick Meier. 2015. Digital Humanitarians. CRC

Press, Boca Raton, FL.

18. André Fabiano de Moraes and Lia Caetano Bastos.
2010. Framework of integration for collaboration
and spatial data mining among heterogeneous
sources in the web. Proceedings of the 1st ACM
SIGSPATIAL International Workshop on Data
Mining for Geoinformatics - DMG ’10, 19–28.
http://doi.org/10.1145/1869890.1869893

19. Kristi Morton, Magdalena Balazinska, Dan

Grossman, Robert Kosara, and Jock Mackinlay.
2014. Public Data and Visualizations : How are
Many Eyes and Tableau Public Used for
Collaborative Analytics ? SIGMOD Record 43, 2:
17–22.

20. Michael Muller, Susanne Hupfer, Stephen Levy,

Daniel Gruen, Andrew Sempere, and Reid
Priedhorsky. 2011. Circles of Crowdsourcing : The
Social Organization of Participatory Sensing.
MobileHCI. Retrieved from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd
=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Citation&list_uids=
5470364 

21. Leysia Palen and Sarah Vieweg. 2008. The
emergence of online widescale interaction in
unexpected events. Proceedings of the ACM 2008
conference on Computer supported cooperative
work - CSCW ’08, ACM Press, 117.
http://doi.org/10.1145/1460563.1460583

22. Suzanne D Pawlowski and Daniel Robey. 2004.
Bridging User Organizations : and the Work of
Brokering Technology Knowledge Information.
MIS Quarterly 28, 4: 645–672.

23. Suzanne D. Pawlowski, Dan Robey, and Arjan

Raven. 2000. Supporting shared information
systems: boundary objects, communities, and
brokering. Proceedings of the twenty first
international conference on Information systems,
329–338. Retrieved from
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=359759

1293

SESSION: NON-PROFITS AND HUMANITARIAN RESPONSES

33. Sebastian Tramp, Philipp Frischmuth, Timofey
Ermilov, Saeedeh Shekarpour, and Sören Auer.
2012. An Architecture of a Distributed Semantic
Social Network. Semantic Web – Interoperability,
Usability, Applicability 1: 1–16.

34. E. M. Trauth and L. M. Jessup. 2000.

Understanding computer mediated discussions:
Positivist and interpretive analysis of group support
system use. MIS Quarterly 24, 1: 43–79.
http://doi.org/10.2307/3250979

35. Murray Turoff, Michael Chumer, Xiang Yao, and

Bartel Van De Walle. 2004. " The Design of a
Dynamic Emergency Response Management
Information System (DERMIS THE DESIGN OF
A DYNAMIC EMERGENCY RESPONSE
MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM
(DERMIS). 54: 1–35. Retrieved from
http://is.njit.edu/turoff

36. Sarah Vieweg, Amanda L. Hughes, Kate Starbird,
and Leysia Palen. 2010. Microblogging during two
natural hazards events. Proceedings of the 28th
international conference on Human factors in
computing systems - CHI ’10: 1079.
http://doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753486

37. 2014 Ebola Outbreak in West Africa - Case Counts

| Ebola Hemorrhagic Fever | CDC. Retrieved
November 21, 2014 from
http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/outbreaks/2014-
west-africa/case-counts.html

24. Bryan Semaan and Gloria Mark. 2011. Technology-

mediated social arrangements to resolve
breakdowns in infrastructure during ongoing
disruption. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction 18, 4: 1–21.
http://doi.org/10.1145/2063231.2063235

25. Jingkuan Song, Yang Yang, Yi Yang, Zi Huang,

and Heng Tao Shen. 2013. Inter-media hashing for
large-scale retrieval from heterogeneous data
sources. Proceedings of the 2013 international
conference on Management of data - SIGMOD ’13,
785. http://doi.org/10.1145/2463676.2465274

26. Susan Leigh Star and Anselm Strauss. 1999. Layers

of Silence, Arenas of Voice: The Ecology of
Visible and Invisible Work. Computer Supported
Cooperative Work (CSCW) 8, 1-2: 9–30.
http://doi.org/10.1023/A:1008651105359

27. Kate Starbird and Leysia Palen. 2013. Working and
sustaining the virtual “Disaster Desk.” Proceedings
of the 2013 conference on Computer supported
cooperative work - CSCW ’13, ACM Press, 491.
http://doi.org/10.1145/2441776.2441832

28. Anthony Stefanidis, Andrew Crooks, and Jacek

Radzikowski. 2011. Harvesting ambient geospatial
information from social media feeds. GeoJournal
78, 2: 319–338. http://doi.org/10.1007/s10708-011-
9438-2

29. Stephanie B Steinhardt and Steven J Jackson. 2015.

Anticipation Work. Proceedings of the 18th ACM
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work & Social Computing - CSCW ’15, 443–453.
http://doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675298

30. Anselm Strauss. 1988. The Articulation of Project

Work: An Organizational Process. The Sociological
Quarterly 29, 2: 163–178.
http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1533-8525.1988.tb01249.x

31. J Sutton, Leysia Palen, and Irina Shklovski. 2008.
Backchannels on the front lines: Emergent uses of
social media in the 2007 southern California
wildfires. Proceedings of the 5th International
ISCRAM Conference, 1–9.

32. Andrea H. Tapia and Kathleen Moore. 2014. Good

Enough is Good Enough: Overcoming Disaster
Response Organizations’ Slow Social Media Data
Adoption. Computer Supported Cooperative Work
(CSCW) 23, 4-6: 483–512.
http://doi.org/10.1007/s10606-014-9206-1

1294

