CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Monitoring and Trust in Virtual Teams 

4417 North Quad, 105 South State St., Ann Arbor, MI 48109 

Lionel P. Robert Jr.  
School of Information 
University of Michigan  

lprobert@umich.edu   

ABSTRACT 
This study was conducted to determine whether monitoring 
moderated the impact of trust on the project performance of 
57  virtual 
teams.  Two  sources  of  monitoring  were 
examined: internal monitoring done by team members and 
external monitoring done by someone outside of the team. 
Two  types  of  trust  were  also  examined:  affective-based 
trust, or trust based on emotion; and cognitive trust, or trust 
based  on  competency.  Results  indicate  that  when  internal 
monitoring  was  high,  affective  trust  was  associated  with 
increases  in  performance.  However,  affective  trust  was 
associated  with  decreases  in  performance  when  external 
monitoring was high. Both types of monitoring reduced the 
strong positive relationship between cognitive trust and the 
performance of virtual teams. Results of this study provide 
new insights about monitoring and trust in virtual teams and 
inform both theory and design. 
Author Keywords 
Monitoring; trust; virtual teams. 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.3.5; H.4.3; K.6.0 

General Terms 
Human factors; design; measurement. 
INTRODUCTION 
Monitoring  is  a  type  of  control  that  can  have  important 
implications  for  trust,  a  vital  component  of  better  team 
performance  in  virtual  teams  [18].  Research  on  virtual 
teams indicates that monitoring can facilitate or hinder the 
development  of  trust  [16,21,59].  However,  we  know  very 
little  about  how  monitoring  or  being  monitored  might 
hinder  or  support  trust  in  the  facilitation  of  better  team 
performance in virtual teams [63]. 
In this paper, we define monitoring as the act of observing 
the actions of others to determine whether they comply with 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal  or  classroom  use  is  granted  without  fee  provided  that  copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for  components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be 
honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or 
republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific  permission  and/or  a 
from 
Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:17)$15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820076 

fee.  Request  permissions 

245

lauded 

identified 

a predefined set of behaviors [21,59]. Trust is defined as an 
individual’s willingness to become vulnerable to the actions 
of  others  with  the  expectation  that  others  will  follow 
through on their commitments [50,51]. Monitoring and trust 
are  two  important  topics  in  the  Computer  Supported 
Cooperative  Work  (CSCW)  community.  For  example, 
CSCW  scholars  have  studied  how  awareness  systems  can 
help  geographically  dispersed  teams  compensate  for  their 
lack of a shared context [5,9,17,28,35]. This is often done 
by allowing team members to monitor the actions of their 
teammates by providing real-time detailed status updates or 
audit  trails  [24,71,72,79].  These  awareness  systems  allow 
teammates to see what was done, how it was done and who 
did it. 
However,  the  ability  to  monitor  others  is  not  without 
drawbacks, and this problem has not gone unnoticed in the 
(CSCW)/Human  Computer  Interaction  (HCI)  community. 
Although  many  studies  have 
the  benefits  of 
awareness systems that entail monitoring (for a review see 
[70]),  other  CSCW/HCI  scholars  have 
the 
problems  that  can  arise  as  a  result  of  monitoring  through 
awareness systems [30]. Specifically, Olson and Olson [56] 
warned  that  monitoring  could  be  problematic  for  trust. 
Despite this, no follow-up research has explicitly articulated 
or examined the conditions under which monitoring may or 
may not present a problem for trust in such teams. 
Consequently, our lack of knowledge about how monitoring 
might  influence  the  effects  of  trust  presents  both  a 
theoretical  problem  for  social  scientists  and  a  conundrum 
for  designers  of  collaborative  systems.  To  address  this 
problem,  we  examined  whether  monitoring  moderates  the 
impact  of  trust  on  the  performance  of  virtual  teams.  Our 
goal  is  to  understand  when  monitoring  undermines  or 
strengthens  the  impact  of  trust  in  virtual  teams.  To 
accomplish  this,  we  put  forth  a  research  model  asserting 
that  the  relationship  between  trust  and  performance  in 
virtual  teams  depends  on  the  type  of  trust  as  well  as  the 
source of monitoring. 
This  study  differentiates  between  cognitive  trust  rooted  in 
ability and affective trust derived from strong interpersonal 
emotional connections [39]. Whereas trust in general can be 
described as the willingness of someone to be dependent on 
the actions of others, differences in cognitive and affective 
trust determine the foundation of this vulnerability [52]. For 
example,  allowing  someone  to  perform  a  task  on  your 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

their 

to  determine  whether 

behalf because you believe that person can accomplish the 
task  is  an  example  of  cognitive  trust.  However,  allowing 
someone to perform a task on your behalf because you are 
emotionally  close  to  that  person  would  be  an  example  of 
affective trust. 
This  study  also  differentiates  between  internal  monitoring 
done by team members and external monitoring done by an 
outside evaluator. Typically, monitoring involves assigning 
tasks and duties to team members and observing when and 
whether such tasks are carried out. One common example 
of monitoring is the request for status updates about work 
currently being performed [19]. Another type of monitoring 
is  giving  comments  or  feedback  on  the  work  previously 
performed  [11].  Requests  for  status  updates  by  team 
members 
teammates  are 
following  through  on  their  commitments  is  an  example  of 
internal monitoring [16]. For instance, team members may 
ask other members whether they have completed their tasks 
or why their tasks were not completed on time [19]. Status 
updates  required  by  someone  outside  of  the  team  are  an 
example of external monitoring. For example, a supervisor 
may  inquire  about  whether  a  job  has  been  completed  or 
why it has not [11,32]. Supervisors may also ask why their 
instructions were or were not followed [33]. These  are all 
examples of monitoring.     
To  empirically  test  this  model  we  conducted  a  study 
involving  57  virtual  teams.  Results  of  our  study  indicated 
that  both  internal  and  external  monitoring  moderated  the 
impacts of cognitive and affective trust on the performance 
of  virtual  teams.  Both  internal  and  external  monitoring 
decreased  the  otherwise  positive  relationship  between 
cognitive  trust  and  performance.  However,  the  findings 
related to affective trust were much more complex.  
The goal of this study is to provide theoretical insights that 
can be used to inform the design of collaborative systems. 
To that end, this study contributes to theory in the following 
ways: First, it identifies why monitoring might be beneficial 
or detrimental to the performance of virtual teams. Second, 
it  highlights  the  important  role  that  monitoring  has  on  the 
effects of trust in virtual teams. Third, it demonstrates why 
the source of monitoring and the type of trust are important 
to  understanding  the  relationship  between  monitoring  and 
trust in virtual teams. In addition, the results of this study 
may  have  implications  for  the  design  of  collaborative 
systems.  By  identifying  the  boundary  conditions  under 
which monitoring could be helpful or harmful, the results of 
this  study  have  the  potential  to  inform  designers  about 
when collaborative systems should provide monitoring.  
BACKGROUND 
Monitoring is normally done by specifying a predefined set 
of  behaviors  [21,59].  This  predefined  set  of  behaviors  is 
typically  an  agreed-upon  or  well-understood  set  of 
expectations [42]. These expectations help to ensure that an 
individual’s  behavior  is  directed  at  achieving  a  desired 
outcome  [21].  Because  monitoring  seeks  to  alter  an 

individual’s  behavior  it  is  often  referred  to  as  a  type  of 
behavioral  control 
[42,49].  Behavioral  controls  are 
considered effective when individuals exhibit the intended 
pre-specified behaviors [21,43,59]. 
Monitoring  of  teams  has  been  found  to  be  a  particularly 
popular and beneficial type of control [19,45]. Monitoring 
increases  both  cooperation  and  coordination  in  teams 
[13,14].  Individuals  are  more  likely  to  cooperative  and 
fulfill  obligations  to  the  team  when  others  are  observing 
their  actions;  as  such,  monitoring  encourages 
team 
members  to  fulfill  their  commitments  to  the  team [20,45]. 
Monitoring allows team members to better coordinate their 
actions with one another [18]. By monitoring the actions of 
others,  team  members  know  when  their  input  to  the  task 
process is needed and when to step in on behalf of others 
[29,48].  Therefore,  the  ability  to  coordinate  work  among 
teammates is a particularly important element for successful 
teamwork.  
Monitoring  can  be  done  internally  by  team  members  or 
externally  by  outside  evaluators  [47].  Internal  monitoring 
typically  involves  team  members  setting  expectations  and 
observing  whether  members  meet  or  fail  to  meet  these 
expectations [21]. External monitoring is done by someone 
who is not a member of the team but normally evaluates the 
team  performance  [7].  Evaluators  normally  seek 
to 
determine whether the team and its members are following 
through  with  their  commitments  [32,42].  Both  types  of 
monitoring  have  been  shown  to  motivate  members  to 
follow  through  on  their  commitments  and  allow  team 
members to coordinate their efforts [31,41].  
Much  of  the  research  on  monitoring  in  virtual  teams  has 
been  directed  at  understanding  the  impact  of  internal 
monitoring  on  trust.  Trust  in  teams  is  fostered  when  a 
teammate  engages  in  actions  that  conform  to  the  positive 
expectations  of  other  team  members  [60,65].  Similarly  to 
monitoring, trust has been linked to performance gains by 
promoting cooperation and coordination within teams. For 
example,  trust  has  been  found  to  promote  knowledge 
sharing and using, which facilitated better decision-making 
in  both  face-to-face  and  virtual  teams  [66].  Trust  has  also 
been  found  to  increase  performance  in  collocated  teams 
performing  a  building  design  task  [23]  and  increased 
performance  in  organizational  teams  engaged  in  planning 
and problem-solving [26].  
There  have  been  mixed  findings  on  the  relationship 
between  internal  monitoring  and  trust  in  virtual  teams. 
Several  studies  have  found 
internal  monitoring 
increases  the  salience  of  members’  behavior  (i.e.  draws 
more  attention  to  it)  [21,59].  Increases  in  the  salience  of 
behavior  are  normally  measured  by  what  team  members 
focus on or remember from previous interactions [21,59]. In 
one  study,  internal  monitoring  was  negatively  related  to 
trust  in  virtual  teams  because  it  increased  the  salience  of 
reneging  —  instances  of  members  failing  to  fulfill  their 
commitment  [59].  In  another  study,  internal  monitoring 

that 

246

SESSION: DISTRIBUTED TEAMS

increased  the  salience  of  all  behavior,  both  reneging  and 
commitment  fulfilling  [21].  But  individuals  were  also 
predisposed to see what they wanted to see based on their 
disposition  to  trust  [21].  So,  internal  monitoring  increased 
the  salience  of  others’  behavior  but  individuals  high  in 
disposition to trust interpreted that behavior more positively 
than  individuals  low  in  disposition  to  trust.  However, 
another study found that monitoring was positively related 
to  trust  in  virtual  teams  because  it  encourages  compliance 
and provides a record of it [16].  
Despite  the  importance  of  and  the  progress  made  toward 
understanding the relationship between internal monitoring 
and  trust  in  virtual  teams,  several  areas  of  study  remain 
largely  unexplored.  First,  we  know  very  little  about  how 
monitoring  might  influence  the  effects  of  trust.  Yet  it  is 
very likely that the effects of monitoring and trust overlap 
at some point during a team’s tenure. Second, although we 
have  made  progress  on  understanding  the  relationships 
between internal monitoring and trust, no such progress has 
been  made  on  understanding  the  relationship  between 
external monitoring and trust. Because external monitoring 
is performed by someone outside of the team it is likely to 
have  different  implications  for  the  impacts  of  trust  on 
performance.  Finally, 
not 
differentiated  between  types  of  trust.  Research  on  the 
relationship between employees and supervisors has found 
that  cognitive-based 
(developed  by  assessing 
someone’s  ability)  and  affective-based  trust  (derived  from 
emotional  bonds)  can  produce  completely  different 
outcomes 
to  advance  our 
understanding in all three of these areas.  Figure 1 presents 
the research model. 

[16].  This  paper  seeks 

previous 

studies 

have 

trust 

(cid:4)(cid:25)(cid:22)(cid:12)(cid:20)(cid:18)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:1)
(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:18)(cid:15)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:15)(cid:18)(cid:14)

(cid:5)(cid:18)(cid:22)(cid:12)(cid:20)(cid:18)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:1)
(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:18)(cid:15)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:15)(cid:18)(cid:14)

(cid:3)(cid:19)(cid:14)(cid:18)(cid:15)(cid:22)(cid:15)(cid:24)(cid:12)

(cid:8)(cid:20)(cid:23)(cid:21)(cid:22)

(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:12)(cid:11)(cid:22)(cid:15)(cid:24)(cid:12)(cid:1)

(cid:8)(cid:20)(cid:23)(cid:21)(cid:22)

(cid:9)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:23)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:1)(cid:8)(cid:12)(cid:10)(cid:17)(cid:1)
(cid:7)(cid:12)(cid:20)(cid:13)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:10)(cid:18)(cid:11)(cid:12)

 

Figure 1. Research Model 

interrelated  and 

CONCEPTUALIZING VIRTUAL TEAM PERFORMANCE 
Teams are often formed with the purpose of accomplishing 
a  set  of 
interdependent  objectives. 
Typically team performance is conceptualized in a way that 
captures  how  well  the  teams  meet  or  exceed  these 
objectives.  For  example,  teams  assembled  to  complete  a 
project  are  routinely  judged  by  how  well  their  evaluator 
believes  their  project  was  done  [7,45,55,64].  Similarly,  in 
this  paper  team  performance  is  conceptualized  as  project 
performance  judged  by  how  well  the  team’s  evaluator,  in 
this case their instructor, believes their project was done.   

247

that  cognitive-based 

literature  has  found 

RESEARCH MODEL  
trust 
Prior 
promotes cooperation and coordination [38,51]. In general, 
team members are much more willing to cooperate with and 
coordinate with individuals they believe are competent [22]. 
This is, in part, because they believe their efforts are more 
likely to lead to a successful outcome when they engage in 
social  exchanges  with  others  they  believe  can  and  will 
follow  through  on  their  commitments  [50].  Specifically, 
this  belief  that  others  will  follow  on  their  commitments 
encourages  all  team  members  to  put  forward  more  effort. 
An example of this was found by De Jong and Elfring [19]. 
They studied teams in a tax department of a multinational 
consultancy  firm.  Their  study  found  that  team  trust  based 
competency was positively associated with team members’ 
effort and ultimately performance. Team performance was 
measured by the team’s supervisor’s rating of how well the 
team accomplished its tasks.  
Cognitive-based  trust  can  also  lead  to  better  coordination. 
Individuals have limited cognitive or attentional resources. 
Trusting others allows team members to focus on their own 
tasks without worrying whether others will follow through 
[51]. This also allows them to act with certainty under the 
assumption  that  other  team  members  will  follow  through, 
which  also  promotes  coordination  in  teams  [73].  For 
example,  Kanawattanachai  and  Yoo  [40]  examined  38 
virtual teams of master of business administration students. 
The  researchers  found  that  cognitive  trust  was  associated 
with increases in coordination. Coordination was measured 
as  the  degree  to  which  virtual  teams  believed  their 
teammates  understood,  carefully  considered  and  acted  on 
the actions taken by other team members. This measure of 
coordination  was  associated  with increases in virtual team 
performance. Performance was determined by how well the 
team performed on its class project.   
The  benefits  of  internal  monitoring  should  suppress  the 
effects  of  cognitive  trust  because  they  work  to  promote 
cooperation  and  coordination  in  much  the  same  way  as 
cognitive  trust.  Internal  monitoring  can  increase  the  effort 
put forth by individuals. Team members are more inclined 
to  exert  effort  when  they  believe  others  are  watching 
[2,38,45],  which  is  one  of  the  benefits  associated  with 
cognitive  trust.  The  process  of  observing  the  actions  of 
one’s  teammates  requires  both  continued  attention  and 
contact  among  team  members  [21,67].  This  continued 
attention  and  contact  ensures  that  team  members  are  kept 
aware  of  one  another’s  activities  [18].  Awareness  of  one 
another’s  activities  allows  team  members  to  synchronize 
their actions [48,73]. For example, Marks and Panzer [48] 
found that when flight simulation teams observed what their 
teammates were doing, this acted as a feedback mechanism 
that 
to  better  flight 
performance  on  the  simulation.  Contact,  awareness  and 
synchronization, facilitated through internal monitoring, all 
act as mechanisms to promote coordination and cooperation 
within teams [45,62].  

improved  coordination  and 

led 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

their 

commitments,  which 

The impacts of cognitive trust on team performance appear 
to be similar to the impacts of internal monitoring. As such, 
we would expect the impact of cognitive trust to be greatly 
diminished  in  the  presence  of  high  internal  monitoring. 
Therefore, we would expect cognitive trust to be associated 
with increases in virtual team performance when the use of 
internal  monitoring  is  low.  However,  when  the  use  of 
internal  monitoring  is  high,  cognitive-based  trust  should 
have little impact on the performance of virtual teams. 
H1: Cognitive trust has a strong positive relationship with 
team performance when internal monitoring is low but has 
little  or  no  relationship  with  team  performance  when 
internal monitoring is high. 
External  monitoring  should  also  moderate  the  relationship 
between cognitive-based trust and performance in much the 
same  way  as  internal  monitoring.  Typically,  external 
monitoring  takes  place  when  managers  or  supervisors 
observe the behavior of their employees [42,43]. Managers 
routinely inquire into what team members have or have not 
done [32,42]. These inquiries are done to ensure that team 
members  are  engaging 
in  cooperative  behaviors  by 
fulfilling  their  commitments  to  the  team  [57].  Research 
supports  this  assertion  and  has  found  that  when  managers 
engage  in  monitoring,  employees  are  more  inclined  to 
fulfill 
facilitates  more 
cooperation  and  coordination 
[31,41].  For  example, 
Carbonell  and  Rodriguez-Escudero  [11]  examined  new 
product  development 
teams.  They  measured  external 
monitoring  by  asking  team  managers  how  much  they 
engaged  in  activities  like  observing  whether  their  teams 
achieved  their  goals  or  provided  feedback  to  teams  about 
their  goal  attainment.  The  authors  found  that  external 
monitoring  increased  participation  among  team  members 
and  also  reduced  conflict  and  ambiguity  over  role 
assignments  within  the  team,  both  of  which  are  strong 
indicators of increases in cooperation and coordination.    
These  increases  in  cooperation  and  coordination  through 
external  monitoring  can  lead  to  better  team  performance. 
An  example  of  the  link  between  external  monitoring  and 
team  performance  was  found  by  Henderson  and  Lee  [33]. 
They studied 48 information systems design teams from 10 
companies.  The  authors  measured  external  monitoring  by 
asking team members to indicate the degree to which their 
manager  kept  track  of  and  provided  feedback  on  their 
that  external 
performance.  The  authors  discovered 
monitoring  was 
team 
performance. Team performance was measured as the team 
supervisor’s rating of how efficient and effective the teams 
were at meeting their goals.   
Because external monitoring increases team performance in 
much  the  same  way  as  cognitive  trust,  the  impact  of 
cognitive trust should diminish in the presence of external 
monitoring.  As stated earlier, cognitive trust has also been 
linked  to  team  performance  by  in  part  because  cognitive 
trust 
by 

associated  with 

coordination 

cooperation 

positively 

facilitates 

and 

improvements 

encouraging team members to fulfill their commitments to 
their  team  [50].  Therefore,  when  external  monitoring  is 
high,  any  impact  from  cognitive  trust  is  less  likely  to 
provide  additional 
in  cooperation  and 
coordination over and above external monitoring.    
H2: Cognitive trust has a strong positive relationship with 
team performance when external monitoring is low but has 
little  or  no  effect  on  team  performance  when  external 
monitoring is high. 
Unlike cognitive trust, affective trust is not based on ability 
and  competency  [52].  Affective  trust  is  often  based  on 
similarities  between  individuals  [39].  It  is  often  derived 
from  personal  relationships  that  develop  outside  of  work 
[68].  Affective  trust  normally  takes  longer  to  develop  in 
virtual  teams  than  cognitive  trust  [39,68].  Cognitive  trust 
can  be  very  dynamic,  increasing  or  decreasing  based  on 
whether an individual fulfills or fails to fulfill commitments 
[65]. Affective trust is more robust and can withstand more 
violations of trust by other team members; therefore it can 
often exist long after it should [74,75].  
Affective  trust  also  has  several  performance  benefits. 
Virtual teams often fail to fully utilize the unique expertise 
of their members [21,66,77]. Team members are less likely 
to  share  information  when  they  believe  they  will  be 
belittled,  ignored  or  seen  as  incompetent  [25,66,78]. 
Affective  trust  represents  a  safe  atmosphere  where  team 
members  are  comfortable  sharing  information  with  their 
teammates  [12,68].  Virtual  teams  with  a  high  level  of 
affective trust have members who are more inclined to view 
their teammate’s problem and their team’s problem as their 
own problem [39,52]. Because of this, people in teams with 
high  affective  trust  tend  to  take  on  additional  roles  on 
behalf  of  the  team  [3,12,52].  These  individuals  not  only 
accomplish  their  own  task  but  also  assist  teammates  in 
accomplishing 
in 
cooperative  work  settings  has  been  associated  with 
increases in performance [40,51,52]. 
However,  affective  trust  can  have  drawbacks.  High  levels 
of  strong  emotional  trust  have  been  associated  with 
complacency  [45].  Team  members  may  assume  the  other 
members are holding up their end of the bargain when, in 
fact, some members are not. Virtual teams high in affective 
trust  can  also  be  more  concerned  about  maintaining  good 
relations between members [4,54]. As a result, when a team 
member  fails  to  fulfill  commitments,  other  team  members 
are 
that  member  for  poor 
performance  [45].  This  is  particularly  problematic  for 
virtual  teams  high  in  affective  trust.  According  to  prior 
literature  [38,75,76],  team  members  high  in  affective  trust 
are  less  likely  to  be  sensitive  to  reneging.  This  is  because 
“emotions and affective attachments, in turn, can influence 
trust by increasing the ‘feel’ that another is trustworthy [38] 
and  by  positively  biasing  perceptions  of  trustworthiness, 
attributions,  and  motivations  that  are  relevant  to  trust 
maintenance  [75]”  [76,  p.  610].  As  such,  teams  high  in 

[52].  Such  behavior 

less  willing 

to  call  out 

tasks 

their 

248

SESSION: DISTRIBUTED TEAMS

damaging 

accountable  without 

affective trust are more likely to allow individual members 
multiple chances to renege [52]. As a result, virtual teams 
high  in  affective  trust  are  likely  to  sustain  repeated 
violations of trust before action is taken.  
Internal monitoring is likely to allow members to hold one 
another 
intra-team 
relationships [16]. When virtual teams routinely engage in 
internal  monitoring,  members  who  have  failed  are  less 
likely to take it personally when their lack of performance 
is  highlighted.  In  turn,  because  their  failure  is  highlighted 
by a routine team activity no one individual has to confront 
any  particular  team  member.  This  helps  virtual  teams  to 
maintain  good  interpersonal  relationships  while  holding 
others  accountable.  Internal  monitoring  can  also  make  a 
team  member’s  repeated  failures  salient,  increasing  the 
likelihood of the team taking action to correct the problem 
[18,45]. At the same time, these virtual teams benefit from 
the  openness  and  willingness  of  team  members  to  share 
information and take on extra roles on behalf of the team. 
H3:  Affective  trust  has  a  strong  positive  relationship  with 
team performance when internal monitoring is high but has 
a strong negative relationship with team performance when 
internal monitoring is low. 
External  monitoring  is  likely  to  have  negative  effects  on 
virtual  teams  high  in  affective  trust.  Unlike  internal 
monitoring,  monitoring  that  originates  from  outside  the 
team  may  be  viewed  as  an  unwanted  intervention.  Virtual 
teams  with  strong  impersonal  bonds  can  develop  a  shared 
identity [66]. External monitoring can be seen as a threat to 
this  shared  identity,  a  threat  that  violates  the  team’s 
psychologically safe environment [10,25]. As a result, team 
members might be less likely to share unique and important 
information  when  they  believe  they  are  being  monitored 
externally [25]. This can undermine an important benefit of 
affective-based trust for virtual teams. 
External  monitoring 
is  also  associated  with  detailed 
instructions that can force unwanted changes in team work 
processes. Several studies have linked external monitoring 
to detailed instructions [7, 61]. An example of the potential 
negative  effects  associated  with  detailed  instructions  was 
found  by  Bonner  et  al.  [7].  They  measured  external 
monitoring  by  asking  former  team  members whether  their 
managers  provided  detailed  instructions  along  with  their 
monitoring activities. Project performance was measured by 
asking  former  team  members  how  well  their  team  met 
project  performance  objectives.  They  studied  new  product 
development  teams  and  found  that  when  managers  gave 
detailed instructions to their teams, performance decreased.   
Detailed 
instructions  can  be  particularly  problematic 
because  teams  with  high  emotional  bonds  often  develop 
work 
and 
prospective-taking [7, 10]. This is done by accommodating 
each  member’s  schedule  or  personal  preference.  These 
accommodations are less likely to occur when members are 

consensus-building 

assignments 

through 

249

to 

through 

to  cater 

primarily 

communicated 

[64,65].  Typically, 

given  specific  instructions  from  external  monitors  on  how 
work should be performed. When such consensus-building 
is  replaced  by  hierarchical  directives,  team  members  are 
more likely to disengage. This explanation is often used to 
understand  why  outside 
interventions  are  sometimes 
associated with decreases in the amount of effort members 
contribute in teams with strong emotional bonds [72]. 
H4: Affective trust has a strong negative relationship with 
team performance when external monitoring is high but has 
a strong positive relationship with team performance when 
external monitoring is low. 
METHOD 
Data Collection and Participants  
To test these hypotheses, we conducted a web-based survey 
of virtual teams. Data were collected from an online global 
campus  designed 
the  needs  of  current 
professional,  full-time,  employed  students.  Participants 
were  enrolled  in  a  human  resource  management  online 
graduate program. The teams were considered to be virtual 
because  all  members  were  geographically  dispersed  and 
they 
electronic 
communications 
individuals  were 
randomly  assigned  to  teams.  However,  the  final  decision 
was  determined  by  the  instructor.  In  fact,  all  decisions 
about  team  size,  projects  and  scoring  were  made  by  each 
instructor,  with  no  input  from  this  paper’s  author(s).  And 
none of the classes was taught by the author(s).  
The  participants’  ages  ranged  from  26  to  62  years,  with  a 
mean of 37 years. Seventy-three percent of the participants 
were  female.  Participants  had  an  average  of  11.9  years  of 
prior full-time work experience. A total of 214 individuals 
in 57 teams participated in the study. The size of the teams 
averaged  4  and  ranged  from  3  to  5.  The  average  team 
project  lasted  about  60  days.  Participants  took  part  in  a 
team  project  as  part  of  their  course  requirement  and 
received  extra  credit  for  completing  the  survey.  The  team 
project accounted for 25% of the students’ final grade.  
Virtual Platform  
All the teams had access to the same collaboration system. 
This  system  afforded 
to 
communicate  through  chat,  email  and  video.  The  system 
allowed teams to monitor the action of their teammates. For 
example,  users  could  set  automatic  reminders  which 
informed the teams when assignments were coming due and 
who  was  responsible  for  accomplishing  the  work.  Teams 
members  also  routinely  employed  the  system  to  inquire 
about  the  status  of  individual  assignments.  The  instructor 
also  had  full  access  to  the  system  and  could  also  monitor 
the team’s progression or lack of it.     
Measurement 
The participants were assured their responses would be kept 
confidential.  They  were  also  informed  that  only  the 
researcher(s) would see their responses, and their responses 
would  in  no  way  influence  their  grade.  The  survey 

the  opportunity 

the 

teams 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

the  same 

this  assumption  by  empirically  verifying 

consisted of 17 questions and took about 10‒15 minutes to 
complete.  All  perceptual  measures  used  a  seven-point 
Likert scale. 
Team  measures  were  obtained  by  aggregating  individual 
responses.  To  justify  these  aggregations  individual  team 
members  needed  some  level  of  agreement  or  similarity  in 
their  response  to  answering  questions  regarding  each 
construct. Intra-class correlation coefficient one — ICC(1) 
— is typically used to justify this aggregation by measuring 
the  within-team  agreement  [6].  The  logic  holds  that  to 
justify the aggregation of individual responses to the team 
level,  members  within 
team  should  have 
responded  similarly  to  the  same  items.  ICC(1)  is  used  to 
test 
that  a 
significant portion of the variance in responses is explained 
by  team  membership.  For  example,  an  ICC(1)  of  .10 
indicates that 10% of the variance in responses is a result of 
team  membership.  In  other  words,  we  can  predict  10%  of 
the variance in an individual team member’s response based 
on  his  or  her  team  membership.  Intra-class  correlation 
coefficient two — ICC(2) — is normally used to assess the 
reliability of the construct at the team level [6]. Both were 
employed in this study.    
Control Variables  
We used several control variables to reduce the possibility 
of  alternative  explanations.  We  controlled  for  team  tenure 
(amount time the team was together), team size, team grade 
point  average,  task  interdependency  and  instructor.  These 
control  variables  were  chosen  because  they  have  been 
found  to  influence  performance  in  studies  of  graduate 
teams,  in  particular  those  examining  trust  or  monitoring, 
e.g., [18,45,64].   
Independent Variables 
The items measuring the independent variables were taken 
from well-established prior literature, specifically the same 
literature  base  that  motivated  this  study.  This  is  also  the 
literature base this study is designed to inform. Therefore, 
employing  many  of  the  same  measures  used  in  prior 
literature allows us to better situate our findings with those 
in the prior literature. Additionally, all measurement items 
used  in  this  study  were  developed  and  validated  by  other 
researchers.  
Items measuring affective trust should capture the extent to 
which  members  care  for  one  another,  while 
items 
measuring cognitive trust should quantify how much team 
members  believe  they  can  count  on  one  another  to  get 
things  done  on 
these 
constructs  are  well  represented  by  McAllister’s  [52] 
operationalization of both constructs. McAllister’s [52] was 
one  of  the  first  papers  to  develop  measurement  items  for 
each  of  these  constructs,  which  have  been  used  in  many 
other  studies,  e.g.,  [26,37,39,68].  An  example  of  an  item 
measuring  cognitive  trust  include  “I  know  I  can  count  on 
the  other  team  members,”  while  an  example  of  affective 

their  behalf.  Items  measuring 

250

to  which 

the  course 

instructor  engaged 

trust included “I would have to say that we (my team) have 
made  considerable  emotional  investments  in  our  working 
relationship. 
Items measuring monitoring should represent the degree to 
which  someone  observed  and  paid  attention  to  the  actions 
of others to ensure that they complied [33]. The internal and 
external monitoring items were taken from Henderson and 
Lee [33] and Crisp and Jarvenpaa [16]. Both papers capture 
the extent to which team members and evaluators observed 
and paid attention to the actions of team members. All the 
measurement  items  except  for  external  monitoring  were 
directly adopted. The items measuring external monitoring 
were  adapted  for  the  context.  Specifically,  the  term 
“supervisor”  was  replaced  with  the  term  “instructor.”  In 
other  words,  the  reference  to  external  monitoring  was  the 
degree 
in 
monitoring.  The items are listed in Table 1. 
Dependent Variable  
Team Performance Score and Team Project Description 
The project score given to the team by their instructor was 
used  as  the  performance  measure.  Every  team  performed 
the same type of project; an assessment of an organization’s 
current human resource system. The project required teams 
to  evaluate  an  organization’s  hiring,  training,  evaluation 
and promotion practices. Every team had their own unique 
client. The project involved several phases. The first phase 
required teams to interview client representatives to assess 
their  views  on  the  system.  The  clients  agreed  to  provide 
access to employees and formal documentation on their HR 
systems  for  the  project.  In  the  second  phase,  the  teams 
created  individual  reports  based  on  the  data  from  their 
interviews  and  documentation analysis.  In  the  third  phase, 
teams then looked for patterns and trends across individual 
reports.  In  the  final  phase,  the  team  produced  a  written 
report  that  outlined  their  assessment  of  the  system. The 
team  submitted  one  project  to  its  instructor.  Project 
performance scores ranged from 0 to 100.  
 
This course and the team project were selected for several 
reasons.  First,  the  ages  and  work  experience  of  the 
participants  were  similar  to  those  of  the  organizational 
workers  surveyed  in  past  studies,  e.g.,  [7,19,68].  This 
allows  the  research  model  to  be  empirically  tested  with 
older,  more  experienced  individuals  similar  to  workers  in 
organizations. Second, the project score provided us with a 
standard objective measure that allowed performance across 
all  teams  to  be  compared.  This  is  similar  to  other  studies 
examining  the  implications  of  control  and  trust,  e.g., 
[16,36,39]. Finally, the team project was both important and 
relevant  to  the  participants’  educational  aspirations.  The 
participants  were  enrolled  in  a  human  resource  (HR) 
graduate  degree  program  and  the  team  project  represented 
an application of their current knowledge on an HR-related 
project.  As  such,  the  team  project  was  seen  as  an 
appropriate representation of the team’s success. 

SESSION: DISTRIBUTED TEAMS

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics 

 

reliabilities.  Construct 

reliabilities 

RESULTS 
To validate the measurement model we first examined the 
construct 
are 
summarized in Table 2. All construct reliabilities are at the 
acceptable  threshold  of  .70  or  above.  Discriminant  and 
convergent validity of the constructs was assessed in three 
ways.  First,  convergent  and  discriminant  validity  were 
assessed by examining the average variance shared (AVE) 
along  the  diagonals  of  a  correlation  matrix.  The  AVE 
represents  how  much  of  the  latent  construct’s  variance  is 
captured by the items used to measure it. AVE scores at or 
above .5 are an indication of convergent validity [27]. This 
means  that  the  measurement  items  being  used  captured  at 
least  half  of  the  variance  associated  with  that  latent 
construct.  As seen in Table 2, the AVE scores were all at 
or above .5, indicating adequate convergent validity [27].  
Discriminant validity was assessed by determining whether 
the AVE of a construct was higher than its correlation with 
other constructs. The logic behind this test is that the items 
measuring  a  construct  should  represent  more  of  that 
construct’s  variance  than  other  items  measuring  other 
constructs.  As  seen  in  Table  2,  the  AVE  scores  of  all 
constructs  were  larger  than  their  corresponding  row  and 
column  correlations, 
indicating  adequate  discriminant 
validity [27].  
Second, discriminant and convergent validity were assessed 
through an exploratory factor analysis (EFA). As shown in 
Table  1,  all  items  loaded  at 
.7  or  above  on  their 
corresponding  construct  and  only  one  item  had  a  cross-
loading of .4 or higher. We then assessed the psychometric 
properties  of 
the 
appropriateness  of  the  measurement  model  for  cognitive 
trust,  affective  trust,  and  external  and  internal  behavioral 
control.   
Finally,  a  confirmatory  factor  analysis  (CFA)  at  the  team 
level  of  analysis  was  performed.  CFA  is  similar  to  EFA, 
with additional restrictions. A CFA imposes a structure on 
the data that presupposes not only what is related but what 
is  also  not  related  [34].  In  other  words,  the  CFA  predicts 
that items measuring the construct should be related to the 

the  perceptual  measures  and 

then 

construct and items not measuring the construct should not 
be related to the construct. 
The CFA imposes a structure on what should be related and 
what should not be related and compares it to the structure 
of  the  actual  data.  The  degree  to  which  the  proposed 
structure matches the actual structure of the data determines 
the fit between the two. High fit or similarity between the 
two  means  that  the  measurement  model  is  valid.  The 
prominent  fit  index  used  to  measure  fit  or  misfit  is  the 
comparative fit index (CFI) [53]. Values of the CFI range 
from  0,  indicating  no  fit,  to  1,  indicating  a  perfect  fit.  
Because  of  the  small  team-level  sample  size  and  the 
number  of  indicators  in  the  measurement  model,  we 
conducted  the  CFA  using  an  item-parceling  procedure 
outlined  by  Landis  et  al.  [44].  Another  prominent  fit 
measure  is  the  standardized  root-mean-square  residual 
(SRMR), which measures the average standardized residual 
per  degree  of  freedom  [34].  SRMR  is  a  standardized 
measure  of  the  discrepancy  between  the  proposed  model 
and  the  actual  data.  Values  for  SRMR  range  from  0  to  1. 
Both measures are used to complement each other [34,53]. 
CFI values ≥ .95 and SRMR values ≤ .08 are considered to 
be an indication of a good fit [34]. 
The  chi-square  values  were  also  reported  to  provide  a 
means  for  comparing  the  relative  fit  of  the  models.  Using 
the covariance matrix, 2-factor and 4-factor solutions were 
modeled.  The  initial  2-factor  model,  which  modeled 
internal and external monitoring as one latent construct and 
both  cognitive  and  affective 
latent 
construct, showed poor fit to the data (χ2 = 6.72, df = 19, p 
< .05; CFI = .68; SRMR = .14). The 4-factor model, which 
modeled  internal  and  external  control  as  well  as  cognitive 
and  affective  trust  as  separate  latent  constructs  showed  a 
good fit to the data (χ2 = 1.8, df = 14, p < .05; CFI = .97; 
SRMR  =  .04).  Paths  representing  the  loading  of  each 
indicator  were  all  significant  and  above  .8  on  its  latent 
factor.  The  results  suggest  that  this  4-factor  model  fit  the 
data  well,  with  all  fit  indices  meeting  acceptable  levels.  
Overall,  both  tests  taken  together  provide  support  by 
discriminant and convergent validity of our measure model. 
  

trust  as  another 

251

I can talk freely to my team about difficulties I am having at work and know that my team will want to listen. 
If I share my problems with my team, I know s(he) would respond constructively and caringly. 
I would have to say that we (my team) have made considerable emotional investments in our working relationship. 
We trust each other a lot in my team. 
I know I can count on the other team members. 
The other team members know they can count on me. 
I trust all of the other team members. 
Our instructor paid attention to how this team's performance stands. 
Our instructor monitored our actions. 
Our instructor paid attention to what people do on this team. 
Our instructor monitored what members did to make sure they comply. 
We paid attention to how this team's performance stands. 
My team monitored the actions of its members. 
We paid attention to what people do on this team. 
My team monitored what members do to make sure they comply. 

Table 2. Factor Loadings 

.86
.88
.80
.25
.01
.26
.01
.01
.13
.10
.03
.06
.13
.15
.11

.27
.44
.12
.75
.81
.71
.84
.10
-.10
.20
.07
.24
.21
.20
.13

.12
.14
.20
.30
.21
.04
.22
.88
.85
.84
.81
.26
.30
.23
.25

Variable 

Mean 

Std. Dev. 

Reliability 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

Affective-Based Trust 
Cognitive-Based Trust 
External Monitoring  
Internal Monitoring 
Size 
Task Interdependency 
Team grade point average 
Tenure 

Performance 

4.28 
5.10 
3.55 
4.83 
3.77 
4.87 
3.36 
60.00 

86.50 

0.95 
0.86 
1.07 
1.04 
0.70 
0.70 
0.35 
15.80 

8.50 

0.91 
0.92 
0.90 
0.94 
N/A 
0.80 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 

(.70)    
.59 ** 
.30  * 
.58 ** 
-.30  * 
.28  * 
.26  * 
.09    

  
  
(.70) 
  
.23 
  
.65  ** 
-.21 
  
.37  ** 
.39  ** 
.20 
  

  
  
  
  
(.70)    
.16    
-.01    
.00    
-.01    
-.09    

  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  
  
  
(.70)    
-.35  **  (N/A) 
.34  ** 
.31  * 
.11    

  
  
  
  
  
-.21    
-.08    
-.24    

  
  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
(.50)    
(N/A) 
0.25    
0.34 **  -0.03 

.15    

.26  * 

-.05    

.08    

.07    

0.27  * 

.13 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  

(N/A) 

0.02 

Notes:       1.      Average Variance Extracted (AVE) in on the diagonal. 
                 2.     Significance of correlations: *p < .05; **p < .01 
                 3.     N = 57 

  

  

  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

Table 3. Correlation Matrix 

  
  
  

  
  

  
  
  

  
  
  

  
  
  

  
  
  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  

  
  
  

252

Affective Trust  Cognitive Trust 

External 

Monitoring 

Internal 

Monitoring 

.17
.25
.30
.08
.14
.05
.07
.11
.14
.23
.21
.82
.82
.92
.92

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

SESSION: DISTRIBUTED TEAMS

is  done 

to  determine  whether 

 
To  determine  whether  it  was  appropriate  to  aggregate 
individual  data  to  the  team  level,  the  ICC  values  for  the 
aggregated  constructs  were  derived  from  a  one-way 
analysis of variance [6]. The random effects ANOVA-based 
F-statistic for each scale was significant at p < 0.05. Scores 
were  as  follows:  external  control,  ICC(1)  =  .44,  ICC(2)  = 
.76; internal control, ICC(1) = .43, ICC(2) = .75; cognitive 
trust, ICC(1) = .36, ICC(2) = .70; affective trust, ICC(1) = 
.37, ICC(2) = .70; and task interdependency, ICC(1) = .24, 
ICC  (2)  =  .56.  All  ICC(1)  and  ICC(2)  scores  were  at  or 
above the recommended levels for a field study [6].  
Hierarchical  regression  analysis  was  used  to  test  the 
proposed  model.  Hierarchical  regression  analysis  uses 
ordinarily least squared (OLS) regression to empirically test 
regression  models  that  are  nested.  This  allows  regression 
models  to  be  compared  with  one  another  as  additional 
variables  are  added.  In  particular,  comparisons  are  often 
done  between  models  with  or  without  moderation  effects. 
This 
the  addition  of 
moderation  effects  significantly  increases  the  variance 
explained in the dependent variable.      
The  research  model  was  also  tested  with  partial  least 
squares  and  the  results  were  similar.  All  continuous 
variables  were  standardized,  as  suggested  by  Aiken  and 
West  [1],  in  order  to  reduce  multicollinearity.  The  results 
are  shown  in  Table  3.  Model  1  shows  the  effects  of  the 
controls  on  the  dependent  variable.  Model  2  shows  the 
direct effects of cognitive and affective trust, and external 
and  internal  control.  Model  3  includes  the  interaction 
effects. The control variables explained 19% of the variance 
and  were  non-significant  (F6,50  =  1.94,  p  >  .05).  Model  2, 
the main effects model, explained 28% of the variance and 
was  significant  (F10,46  =  2.16,  p  <  .05).  Model  3,  which 
included  the  interactions  effects,  explained  54.5%  of  the 
variance and was significant (F14,42 = 3.55, p > .001). The 
addition  of  the  interaction  effects  increased  the  variance 
explained  by  26%  (F  =  2.5,  p  >  .001).  In  addition,  the 
moderation  effects  were  plotted 
their 
interpretation.    High  and  low  levels  of  each  variable 
involved  in  the  interaction  were  represented  by  one 
standard deviation above and below the mean [1]. 
H1, internal monitoring moderates the impact of cognitive 
trust on team performance, was supported. The interaction 
between  internal  monitoring  and  cognitive  trust  on  team 
performance  was  significant  (β=  -3.8;  p  <  .01).  The 
relationship  is  plotted  in  Figure  2  to  further  facilitate  the 
interpretation of the interaction.  
H2, external monitoring moderates the impact of cognitive 
trust on team performance, was supported. The interaction 
between  external  monitoring  and  cognitive  trust  on  team 
performance was significant (β= -3.00; p < .05). The plotted 
interaction is displayed in Figure 3.   

facilitate 

to 

 
  
  
  
Independent Variables 
  
  
  
  
Control Variables 
    Team Ability (GPA) 
    Team Tenure 
  
    Team Size 
  
    Task Interdependency 
  
    Instructor 
R Square 
  
  
F  
  
Main Effects 
  
    Affective Trust 
  
    Cognitive Trust 
  
    External Monitoring 
    Internal Monitoring 
R Square 
  
F  
Interactions Effects 
Monitoring 
Monitoring 
Monitoring 
Monitoring 
R Square 
F  
  
Change in R Square 
Significant Level 
continuous variables were standardized 
*p < .05; **p < .01 

Team Performance 
  
Model 1    Model 2    Model 3   
    
     
  
  
    
     
  
  
0.88   
0.56    -0.11    
-0.41    -1.20     -2.30   
0.33   
0.22    
0.17   
2.74 * 
2.50 * 
2.50 * 
7.40 ** 
7.30 ** 
5.30 * 
19.0%   
     
    
1.93   
     
    
    
     
    
0.50   
     -0.05    
    
2.40    
2.80   
     -2.54 * 
-2.50 * 
     -0.04     -1.80   
    
     28.0%    
    
    
1.81   
     
    
    
    
     
7.85 ** 
      -2.30 * 
  
    
      -3.80 * 
      -3.00 * 
    
    
      50.6%   
    
     
2.21 * 
      22.6%   
    
    
  
2.5 * 

n= 57 Unstandardized Regression coefficients are reported. All 

    Cognitive Trust X  External 

    Affective Trust X  External 

    Cognitive Trust X  Internal 

  
  

  
  
  

    Affective Trust X  Internal 

  

Table 3. Regression Analysis 

100

95

90

85

80

75

70

65

e
c
n
a
m
r
o
f
r
e
P
m
a
e
T

 

93

82

Low Internal Monitoring

High Internal Monitoring

83

78

Low Cognitive Trust

High Cognitive Trust

 

Figure 2. Interaction between Internal Monitoring and 

Cognitive Trust 

253

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

100

95

90

85

80

75

70

65

e
c
n
a
m
r
o
f
r
e
P
m
a
e
T

 

93

82

Low External Monitoring

High External Monitoring

80

80

Low Cognitive Trust

High Cognitive Trust

 

Figure 3. Interaction between External Monitoring and 

Cognitive Trust 

H3,  internal  monitoring  moderates  the  impact  of  affective 
trust on team performance, was supported. The interaction 
between  internal  monitoring  and  affective  trust  on  team 
performance was significant (β= 7.85; p < .001). Figure 4 is 
the plotted interaction of the relationship.  

100

95

90

85

80

75

70

65

e
c
n
a
m
r
o
f
r
e
P
m
a
e
T

 

93

77

90

74

Low Internal Monitoring

High Internal Monitoring

Low Affective Trust

High Affective Trust

 

Figure 4. Interaction between Internal Monitoring and 

Affective Trust 

H4, external monitoring moderates the impact of affective 
trust on team performance, was supported. The interaction 
between  external  monitoring  and  affective  trust  on  team 
performance  was  significant  (β=  -2.3;  p  <  .05).  The 
relationship is displayed in Figure 5.  

100

95

90

85

80

75

70

65

e
c
n
a
m
r
o
f
r
e
P
m
a
e
T

 

84

83

89

79

Low External Monitoring

High External Monitoring

Low Affective Trust

High Affective Trust

Figure 5. Interaction between External Monitoring and 

Affective Trust 

 

254

in 

in 

the 

than  one  standard  deviation  (+/-8) 

Summary of the Results 
Results  of  this  study  clearly  show  that  both  internal  and 
external  monitoring  decrease 
strong  positive 
relationship  between  cognitive  trust  and  performance.  For 
example,  virtual  teams  high  in  cognitive  trust  that  did  not 
engage  in  internal  monitoring  or  were  not  externally 
monitored had an average performance score of just above 
93  (see  Figures  2  and  3).  Virtual  teams  high  in  cognitive 
trust  that  did  engage  in  internal  monitoring  or  were 
externally monitored had an average performance score of 
82  (see  Figures  2  and  3).  This  11-point  difference  was 
greater 
team 
performance.  
Results  of  this  study  highlight  the  important  differences 
between internal and external monitoring when it comes to 
affective  trust.  Affective  trust  had  a  strong  negative 
relationship  with  performance  when  virtual  teams  did  not 
engage 
internal  monitoring  but  a  strong  positive 
relationship  with  performance  when  virtual  teams  did 
engage in internal monitoring (see Figure 4). The opposite 
appeared to be true for external monitoring. Affective trust 
had a strong negative relationship with performance when 
virtual  teams  were  subjected  to  external  monitoring  but  a 
strong  positive  relationship  with  performance  when  they 
were not (see Figure 5).  
Overall,  this  study  shows  that  the  effects  of  trust  on  the 
performance  of  virtual  teams  are  heavily  dependent  on 
monitoring. Trust in virtual teams has been found to have a 
positive  relationship  [39,  58]  or 
in  some  cases  no 
relationship  [3,  36]  with  performance.  This  quandary 
parallels  the  findings  by  scholars  who  study  trust  in 
collocated  teams  (see  [23]).  In  many  cases  scholars  have 
turned  their  attention  to  understanding  when  and  under 
what  circumstances  trust  facilitates  better  teamwork  [18]. 
Results  of 
identify  monitoring  as  a  key 
contingency  variable  that  determines  when  trust  leads  to 
better performance. The current literature on this topic has 
not  taken  into  account  the  possible  moderation  role  of 
monitoring,  let  alone  how  the  source  of  monitoring  might 
matter. Therefore, this study contributes to the literature by 
highlighting when trust might facilitate, reduce or have no 
relationship with performance in virtual teams. 
DISCUSSION 
This study provides new insights into how monitoring can 
facilitate or hinder team performance by altering the effects 
of trust in virtual teams. Research on monitoring and trust 
in  virtual  teams  has  examined  whether  monitoring  can 
facilitate or hinder the growth of trust [21]. The implicit or 
explicit  assumption  is  that  monitoring  can  impact  team 
performance by increasing or decreasing trust. However, as 
the  results  of  this  study  have  shown,  monitoring  can  also 
alter  the  impacts  of  trust  on  team  performance.  Yet  we 
know  very  little  about  how  monitoring  might  alter  the 
effects  of  trust.  As  we  have  shown  in  this  study,  when 
monitoring 
from 

this  study 

range 

occurs 

the 

results 

can 

SESSION: DISTRIBUTED TEAMS

from  such 

complementing  to  undermining  the  effects  of  trust.  Thus, 
this goes beyond existing knowledge and contributes to our 
understanding  of  when  monitoring  and  trust  might  lead  to 
better  or  worse  performance  in  virtual  teams.  In  the 
following  sections,  we  discuss  the  limitations  associated 
with  the  study  followed  by  the  implications  of  theory, 
design and practice. Then the conclusions are presented.   
Limitations 
Like  all  cross-sectional  research  this  study  has  several 
limitations. First, monitoring and trust were captured using 
self-reported  items.  Self-reported  items  can  be  biased. 
However,  by  using  an  objective  measure  of 
team 
performance rather than a team self-reported measure, this 
study  reduces  the  impact of  such  bias.  Second,  the  design 
implications are based on a projection of the study’s results.  
However,  this  study  did  not  examine  virtual  teams  using 
awareness  systems.  Future  research  should  manipulate  the 
types  of  awareness  systems  used  by  virtual  teams.  The 
results 
research  would  provide  stronger 
recommendations  and  insight  for  design.  Finally,  future 
research should seek to understand how culture may or may 
not  change  the  impact  of  monitoring.  Individuals  from 
different  cultures  may  react  differently  to  monitoring  or 
being monitored.  
Design Implications  
Implications  for  design  can  be  derived  from  the  findings. 
However,  these  findings  are  based  on  the  assumption  that 
internal  and  external 
awareness  systems  allow 
monitoring  of  virtual 
these 
recommendations  should  be  interpreted  as  implications 
related  to  when,  whether  and  how  awareness  systems 
should  be  designed  to  support  internal  and  external 
monitoring.    
At 
regarding 
awareness  systems  that  allow  internal  monitoring  seem 
paradoxical.    On  one  hand  internal  monitoring  can  be 
problematic  by  reducing  the  performance  of  virtual  teams 
by suppressing the positive effects of cognitive trust. On the 
other  hand, 
increase 
performance by allowing virtual teams to take advantage of 
their affective trust. One way to accommodate the effects of 
internal  monitoring  on  both  types  of  trust  is  to  design  a 
dynamic awareness system that automatically increases and 
decreases the ability of virtual teams to engage in internal 
monitoring  based  on  whether  the  virtual  team’s  members 
are  fulfilling  their  commitments.  For  example,  in  teams 
with  high  cognitive  trust  the  system  could  discourage 
monitoring  by  making  it  difficult  to  accomplish.  On  the 
other  hand,  in  virtual  teams  low  in  cognitive  trust  the 
system could suggest and encourage virtual teams to engage 
in monitoring.  
Dynamic awareness systems that automatically increase and 
decrease  internal  monitoring  could  provide  two  benefits. 
First,  they  could  allow  teams  to  fully  benefit  from  their 
cognitive trust without the need of internal monitoring. We 

internal  monitoring  can  help 

first  glance  design 

recommendations 

that  extent, 

teams.  To 

for 

255

the 

in 

level  of 

trust  also  engage 

internal  monitoring  by 

would expect the need for monitoring to decrease as team 
members  fulfilled  their  commitments  and  we  would  also 
expect cognitive trust to be high in such teams. As a result, 
as  members  fulfilled  their  commitments  cognitive  trust 
would  increase  while  internal  monitoring  by  dynamic 
awareness  systems  would  decrease.  This  implication  for 
design is derived from the finding related to hypothesis 1. 
Second,  dynamic  awareness  systems  might  also  benefit 
virtual teams high in affective trust. Affective trust is likely 
to  lead  to  decreases  in  performance  when  virtual  team 
members are not engaged in internal monitoring because of 
repeated reneging [38,75]. This is because in virtual teams 
high  in  affective  trust,  team  performance  is  likely  to  be 
diminished  for  a  longer  time  period  from  the  problems 
associated  with  reneging  while  waiting  for  team  members 
to call out other members [75]. However, this problem can 
be  avoided  with  the  help  of  dynamic  awareness  systems. 
When  reneging  occurs  dynamic  awareness  systems  can 
automatically increase internal monitoring. This, in turn, is 
likely  to  draw  attention  to  the  reneging.  By  dynamically 
adjusting 
the 
occurrences  of  reneging,  these  systems  can  ensure  that 
teams  with  affective 
internal 
monitoring.  This  may  reduce  the  possibility  that  affective 
trust will be associated with decreases in performance.  
Finally, based on the findings associated with hypotheses 2 
and  4,  external  monitoring  seems  to  provide  no  benefit  to 
virtual  teams.  These  findings  suggest  that  the  ability  of 
awareness  systems  to  provide  external  monitoring  may  be 
problematic.  This  leaves  designers  of  such  systems  with 
three alternatives. One, simply do not allow evaluators the 
ability to monitor the virtual teams they supervise. Another 
alternative  is  to  provide  much  less  detail  or  timely 
information about the actions of virtual team members. For 
example,  awareness  systems  could  provide  warning  alerts 
to  managers  once  the  team  has  missed  several  deadlines 
rather than providing real-time information on who failed to 
fulfill  a  commitment.  Another  alternative  is  to  have 
supervisors monitor virtual teams without the knowledge of 
the  members.  However,  this  is  problematic  on  a  couple 
levels. First, it might be considered unethical. Second, it is 
likely  that  as  soon  as  an  evaluator  took  action  based  on 
information  obtained  from  monitoring,  team  members 
would  immediately  become  aware  that  they  were  being 
monitored  anyway.  Either  way,  designers  might  have  to 
rethink the value associated with external monitoring.   
Implications for Theory 
This  paper  advances  research  on  the  relationship  between 
monitoring  and  trust  in  virtual  teams.  We  moved  beyond 
the topic of whether monitoring increases or decreases trust 
to examining how monitoring determines when trust leads 
to  better  performance  in  virtual  teams.  Research  on  the 
relationship between monitoring and trust has not explored 
such implications or even begun to explore how the source 
of  monitoring  or 
these 

type  of 

impacts 

trust 

the 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

that 

is 

trust 

relationships. This study demonstrates that both the source 
of  monitoring  and  the  type  of  trust  should  be  taken  into 
account  to  better  understand  how  monitoring  alters  the 
effects of trust in virtual teams. This, in turn, might begin to 
shift the discussion from whether monitoring facilitates or 
hinders  the  development  of  trust  to  how  monitoring 
influences the impact of trust.    
Monitoring and Cognitive Trust  
Many  scholars  studying  the  tradeoffs  between  control  and 
trust  in  teams  and  other  collaborative  activities  have 
proposed 
the  better  coordination  and 
cooperation mechanism [13,46,52]. This is, in part, because 
trust  does  not  require  the  additional  cost  in  terms  of  the 
attention and effort required by internal monitoring. Trust, 
as many scholars have asserted, can lead to comparable or 
better  team  performance  without  the  additional  attention 
and effort needed by teams to implement controls [8,14,15]. 
But  if  this  were  true,  we  would  expect  to  see  a  different 
moderation  effect  between 
internal  monitoring  and 
cognitive  trust  than  we  see  with  external  monitoring  and 
cognitive trust. External monitoring does not require teams 
to  exert  the  same  level  of  effort  or  attention  as  internal 
monitoring.  
However,  the  moderation  effects  between  both  types  of 
monitoring  and  cognitive  trust  were  very  similar.  This 
suggests that the negative effect of monitoring on cognitive 
trust is not related solely to the effort and attention needed 
to implement such controls. This calls for a revision of our 
understanding  of 
teams.  One 
explanation  is  that  when  monitoring  is  implemented, 
internally or externally, team members lose their initiative 
and  only  take  action  when  told  to  do  so.  This  lack  of 
initiative  may  explain  why  both  internal  and  external 
monitoring  seems  to  have  a  similar  moderation  effect  on 
cognitive  trust.  Future  studies  should  be  conducted  to 
examine this proposition.   
External Monitoring and Trust 
Unlike  the  relationship  between  internal  monitoring  and 
trust,  we  know  very  little  about  the  relationship  between 
external monitoring and trust in virtual teams. The literature 
on control and trust in virtual teams has focused exclusively 
on 
that 
organizations and supervisors exert some type of control on 
virtual  teams.  Results  of  this  study  demonstrate  the 
theoretical similarities (i.e. moderation with cognitive trust) 
and  differences  (i.e.  moderation  with  affective  trust) 
between  external  monitoring  and  internal  monitoring.  As 
such  this  study  contributes  to  theory  by  delineating  when 
and  how  the  source  of  monitoring  matters.  Therefore, 
considering  the  results  of  this  study,  more  research  is 
needed  to  fully  understand  how  the  source  of  control 
influences  its  impact  on  virtual  teams.  Studies  should  be 
conducted  to  further  explore  the  potential  role  of  external 
monitoring in virtual teams. 
 

internal  monitoring.  Yet, 

trust  and  control 

it 

is  very 

likely 

in 

CONCLUSION 
Monitoring and trust are two mechanisms used to promote 
cooperation  and  coordination  in  virtual  teams,  yet  their 
relationship is poorly understood. This study demonstrates 
that  in  certain  situations  monitoring  can  undermine  the 
positive impacts of trust on team performance. However, in 
other  situations  monitoring  complements  the  impact  of 
trust. Taken together, the results of this study highlight the 
nuanced  and  complex  relationship  between  trust  and 
monitoring in virtual teams.  
REFERENCES 
1.    Leona S. Aiken and Stephen G. West. 1991. Multiple 

Regression: Testing and Interpreting Interactions. 
Sage, Newbury Park, CA, 132–136. 

2.    Omar Alnuaimi, Lionel Robert and Likoebe Maruping. 
2009. Social loafing in brainstorming CMC teams: The 
role of moral disengagement. In Proceedings of the 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences 
(HICSS '09), 1‒9. 

3.  Benoit A. Aubert and Barbara L. Kelsey. 2003. Further 

understanding of trust and performance in virtual 
teams. Small Gr Res 34, 5: 575–618. 

4.  Francis Bidault and Alessio Castello. 2012. Why too 

much trust is death to innovation. Image. 
Jeremy Birnholtz and Steven Ibara. 2012. Tracking 
changes in collaborative writing: edits, visibility and 
group maintenance. In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 
conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 
ACM, 809–818. 

5. 

6.  Paul D. Bliese. 2000. Within-group agreement, non-
independence, and reliability: Implications for data 
aggregation and analysis. In Multilevel Theory, 
Research, and Methods in Organizations, Katherine J. 
Klein and Steve W. J. Kozlowski (eds.) Jossey-Bass, 
San Francisco, CA, 349‒381. 
Joseph M. Bonner, Robert W. Ruekert, and Orville C. 
Walker. 2002. Upper management control of new 
product development projects and project performance. 
J Prod Innovat Manag 19, 3: 233–245. 

7. 

8.  Philip Bromiley and Larry L. Cummings. 1995. 

Transactions costs in organizations with trust. Res 
Negot O 5, 219–250. 

9.  Lisanne Brons, Tjerk de Greef, and Rick van der Kleij. 

2010. The influence of an activity awareness display 
on distributed multi-team systems. Proceedings of the 
28th Annual European Conference on Cognitive 
Ergonomics, ACM, 335–336. 

10.  David F. Caldwell and Charles A. O’Reilly. 2003. The 

Determinants of team-based innovation in 
organizations the role of social influence. Small Gr Res 
34, 4: 497–517. 

11. Pilar Carbonell and A. I. Rodriguez-Escudero 2013. 

Management control, role expectations and job 

256

SESSION: DISTRIBUTED TEAMS

satisfaction of new product development teams: the 
moderating effect of participative decision making. Ind 
Market Manag 42, 2:  248–254. 

12.  Sanjib Chowdhury. 2005. The role of affect- and 

cognition-based trust in complex knowledge sharing. J 
Manage Issues 17, 3: 310–326. 

13.  Ana Cristina Costa and Katinka Bijlsma-Frankema. 

2007. Trust and control interrelations: New 
perspectives on the trust — control nexus. Group 
Organ Manage 32, 4: 392‒406. 

14.  Ana Cristina Costa, Katinka Bijlsma-Frankema, Bart 

de Jong. 2009. The role of social capital on trust 
development and dynamics: Implications for 
cooperation, monitoring and team performance. Soc 
Sci Inform 48, 2: 199–228. 

15.  W.E. Douglas Creed and Raymond E. Miles. 1996. 

Trust in organizations: A conceptual framework. Trust 
in Organizations: Frontiers of Theory and Research, 
Roderick M. Kramer and Tom R. Tyler (eds.). Sage, 
Thousand Oaks, CA, 16–38. 

16.  C. Brad Crisp and Sirkka L. Jarvenpaa. 2013. Swift 

trust in global virtual teams: Trusting beliefs and 
normative actions. J Pers Psychol 12, 1: 45. 

17.  Laura Dabbish and Robert Kraut. 2008. Research note-

awareness displays and social motivation for 
coordinating communication. Inform Syst Res 19, 2: 
221–238. 

18.  Bart A. De Jong and Kurt T. Dirks. 2012. Beyond 

shared perceptions of trust and monitoring in teams: 
Implications of asymmetry and dissensus. J Appl 
Psychol 97, 2, 391. 

19.  Bart A. De Jong and Tom Elfring. 2010. How does 
trust affect the performance of ongoing teams? The 
mediating role of reflexivity, monitoring, and effort. 
Acad Manag J 53, 3: 535–549. 

20.  Bart A. De Jong, Katinka M. Bijlsma-Frankema, Laura 
B. Cardinal. 2014. Stronger Than the sum of its parts? 
The performance implications of peer control 
combinations in teams. Organ Sci 25, 6: 1703–1721. 

21.  Alan R. Dennis, Lionel P. Robert Jr., Aaron M. Curtis, 
Stacy T. Kowalczyk, Bryan K. Hasty. 2012. Research 
note -- Trust is in the eye of the beholder: A vignette 
study of postevent behavioral controls’ effects on 
individual trust in virtual teams. Inform Syst Res 23, 2: 
546–558. 

22.  Kurt T. Dirks. 1999. The effects of interpersonal trust 

on work group performance. J Appl Psychol 84, 3: 
445. 

23.  Kurt T. Dirks and Donald L. Ferrin. 2002. Trust in 

leadership: Meta-analytic findings and implications for 
research and practice. J Appl Psychol 87, 4: 611. 

24.  Paul Dourish and Victoria Bellotti. 1992. Awareness 

and coordination in shared workspaces. Proceedings of 
the 1992 ACM conference on Computer-Supported 
Cooperative Work, ACM, 107–114. 

25.  Amy Edmondson. 1999. Psychological safety and 

learning behavior in work teams. Admin Sci Quart 44, 
2: 350–383. 

26.  Ferda Erdem and Janset Ozen. 2003. Cognitive and 

affective dimensions of trust in developing team 
performance. Team Perform Manag  Int J 9, 5/6: 131–
135. 

27.  Claes Fornell and David F. Larcker. 1981. Evaluating 
structural equation models with unobservable variables 
and measurement error. J Marketing Res 18, 1: 39–50. 

28.  Susan R. Fussell and Robert M. Krauss. 1992. 

Coordination of knowledge in communication: Effects 
of speakers’ assumptions about what others know. J 
Pers Soc Psychol 62, 3: 378.  

29.  Susan R. Fussell, Robert E. Kraut, F. Javier Lerch, 

William L. Scherlis, Matthew M. McNally, Jonathan J. 
Cadiz. 1998. Coordination, overload and team 
performance: Effects of team communication 
strategies. Proceedings of the 1998 ACM conference 
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work. ACM, 
275‒284.  

30.  Patrice Godefroid, James D. Herbsleb, Lalita 

Jategaonkar Jagadeesany, Du Li. 2000. Ensuring 
privacy in presence awareness: an automated 
verification approach. Proceedings of the 2000 ACM 
conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 
ACM, 59–68. 

31.  Paul S. Goodman, Elizabeth C. Ravlin, Marshall 

Schminke. 1987. Understanding groups in 
organizations. Res Organ Behav 9, 121‒173 

32.  Anandasivam Gopal and Sanjay Gosain. 2010. 

Research note -- The role of organizational controls 
and boundary spanning in software development 
outsourcing: Implications for project performance. 
Inform Syst Res 21, 4: 960–982. 

33.  John C. Henderson and Lee Soonchul. 1992. Managing 

I/S design teams: a control theories perspective. 
Manag Sci 38, 6: 757‒777. 

34.  Li-Tze Hu and Peter M. Bentler. 1999. Cutoff criteria 

for fit indexes in covariance structure analysis: 
Conventional criteria versus new alternatives. Struct 
Equ Model 6, 1: 1–55. 

35.  Chyng-Yang Jang, Charles Steinfield, Ben Pfaff. 2002. 

Virtual team awareness and groupware support: an 
evaluation of the TeamSCOPE system. Int J Hum-
Comput St 56, 1: 109–126. 

36.  Sirkka L. Jarvenpaa, Thomas R. Shaw, D. Sandy 

Staples. 2004. Toward contextualized theories of trust: 

257

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

The role of trust in global virtual teams. Inform Syst 
Res 15, 3: 250–267. 

37.  Devon Johnson and Kent Grayson. 2005. Cognitive 
and affective trust in service relationships. J Bus Res 
58, 4, 500–507. 

38.  Gareth R. Jones and Jennifer M. George. 1998. The 
experience and evolution of trust: Implications for 
cooperation and teamwork. Acad Manag Rev 23, 3: 
531–546. 

39.  Prasert Kanawattanachai and Youngjin Yoo. 2002. 
Dynamic nature of trust in virtual teams. J Strategic 
Inform Syst 11, 3: 187–213. 

40.  Prasert Kanawattanachai and Youngjin Yoo. 2007. The 

impact of knowledge coordination on virtual team 
performance over time. MIS Quart 31, 4: 783‒808. 

41.  Steven Kerr and John M. Jermier. 1978. Substitutes for 

leadership: Their meaning and measurement. Organ 
Behav Hum Perf 22, 3: 375–403. 

42.  Laurie J. Kirsch. 1996. The management of complex 

tasks in organizations: Controlling the systems 
development process. Organ Sci 7, 1: 1–21. 

43.  Laurie J. Kirsch, Dong-Gil Ko, Mark H. Haney. 2010. 

Investigating the antecedents of team-based clan 
control: Adding social capital as a predictor. Organ Sci 
21, 2: 469–489. 

44.  Ronald S. Landis, Daniel J. Beal, Paul E. Tesluk. 2000. 

A comparison of approaches to forming composite 
measures in structural equation models. Organ Res 
Methods 3, 2: 186–207. 

45.  Claus W. Langfred. 2004. Too much of a good thing? 
Negative effects of high trust and individual autonomy 
in self-managing teams. Acad Manage J 47, 3: 385–
399. 

46.  Roy J. Lewicki, Daniel J. McAllister, and Robert J. 

Bies. 1998. Trust and distrust: New relationships and 
realities. Acad Manage Rev 23, 3: 438–458. 
47.  Misty L. Loughry and Henry L. Tosi. 2008. 

Performance implications of peer monitoring. Organ 
Sci 19, 6: 876–890. 

48.  Michelle A. Marks and Frederick J. Panzer. 2004. The 

influence of team monitoring on team processes and 
performance. Hum Perform 17, 1: 25–41. 

49.  Likoebe M. Maruping, Viswanath Venkatesh, Ritu 

Agarwal. 2009. A control theory perspective on agile 
methodology use and changing user requirements. 
Inform Syst Res 20, 3: 377–399. 

50.  Roger C. Mayer, James H. Davis, F. David 
Schoorman. 1995. An integrative model of 
organizational trust. Acad Manage Rev 20, 3: 709–734. 

51.  Roger C. Mayer and Mark B. Gavin. 2005. Trust in 
management and performance: Who minds the shop 

258

while the employees watch the boss? Acad Manage J 
48, 5: 874–888. 

52.  Daniel J. McAllister. 1995. Affect-and cognition-based 

trust as foundations for interpersonal cooperation in 
organizations. Acad Manage Journal 38, 1: 24–59. 

53.  Gina J. Medsker, Larry J. Williams, Patricia J. 

Holahan. 1994. A review of current practices for 
evaluating causal models in organizational behavior 
and human resources management research. J Manage 
20, 2: 439–464. 

54.  F. Xavier Molina-Morales and M. Teresa Martínez-

Fernández. 2009. Too much love in the neighborhood 
can hurt: How an excess of intensity and trust in 
relationships may produce negative effects on firms. 
Strategic Manage J 30, 9: 1013–1023. 

55.  Sean A. Munson, Karina Kervin, Lionel P. Robert Jr. 

2014. Monitoring email to indicate project team 
performance and mutual attraction. Proceedings of the 
2014 conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work & Social Computing. ACM, 542‒549.  

56.  Gary M. Olson and Judith S. Olson. 2003. Human-
computer interaction: Psychological aspects of the 
human use of computing. Ann Rev Psychol 54, 1: 491–
516. 

57.  William G. Ouchi and Mary Ann Maguire. 1975. 
Organizational control: Two functions. Admin Sci 
Quart 20, 4: 559–569. 

58.  David L. Paul and Reuben R. McDaniel Jr. 2004. A 

field study of the effect of interpersonal trust on virtual 
collaborative relationship performance. MIS Quart 28, 
2: 183–227. 

59.  Gabriele Piccoli and Blake Ives. 2003. Trust and the 

unintended effects of behavior control in virtual teams. 
MIS Quart 27, 3: 365–395. 

60.  Gabriele Piccoli, Anne Powell, Blake Ives. 2004. 

Virtual teams: Team control structure, work processes, 
and team effectiveness. Inform Tech People 17, 4: 
359–379. 

61.  Jarno Poskela and Miia Martinsuo. 2009. Management 

control and strategic renewal in the front end of 
innovation. J Prod Innovat Manag 26, 6: 671‒684. 

62.  Ramón Rico, Miriam Sánchez-Manzanares, Francisco 

Gil, and Cristina Gibson. 2008. Team implicit 
coordination processes: A team knowledge-based 
approach. Acad Manag Rev 33, 1: 163–184. 

63.  Lionel P. Robert Jr. 2013. Trust and control in virtual 

teams: Unraveling the impact of team awareness 
systems in virtual teams. CSCW Workshop 2013 on 
Trust in Virtual Teams: Theory. 

64.  Lionel P. Robert. 2013. A multi-level analysis of the 
impact of shared leadership in diverse virtual teams. 
Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Computer 

72.  Kristy L. Towry. 2003. Control in a teamwork 
environment — The impact of social ties on the 
effectiveness of mutual monitoring contracts. Account 
Rev 78, 4: 1069–1095. 

73.  Paul W.L. Vlaar, Frans A.J. Van den Bosch, Henk W. 
Volberda. 2007. On the evolution of trust, distrust, and 
formal coordination and control in interorganizational 
relationships toward an integrative framework. Group 
Organ Manage 32, 4: 407–428. 

74.  Sheila Simsarian Webber. 2008. Development of 

cognitive and affective trust in teams a longitudinal 
study. Small Gr Res 39, 6: 746–769. 

75.  Michele Williams. 2001. In whom we trust: Group 

membership as an affective context for trust 
development. Acad Manage Rev 26, 3: 377–396. 
76.  Michele Williams. 2007. Building genuine trust 

through interpersonal emotion management: A threat 
regulation model of trust and collaboration across 
boundaries. Acad Manage Rev 32, 2:  595‒621. 

77.  Jaime. B. Windeler, Likoebe M. Maruping,  Lionel P. 
Robert & Cindy K. Riemenschneider. 2015. E-profiles, 
Conflict, and Shared Understanding in Distributed 
Teams. J of the Ass. for Inform Syst, 16,7: 608-645. 

78.  Gwen M. Wittenbaum, Andrea B. Hollingshead, Paul 
B. Paulus et al. 2004. The functional perspective as a 
lens for understanding groups. Small Gr Res 35, 1: 17–
43. 

79.   Koji Yatani, Darren Gergle, Khai Truong. 2012. 

Investigating effects of visual and tactile feedback on 
spatial coordination in collaborative handheld systems. 
Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work, ACM, 661–
670.

SESSION: DISTRIBUTED TEAMS

Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW). ACM, 363‒
374.  

65.  Lionel P. Robert, Alan R. Dennis, Yu-Ting Caisy 
Hung. 2009. Individual swift trust and knowledge-
based trust in face-to-face and virtual team members. J 
Manage Inform Syst 26, 2: 241–279. 

66.  Lionel P. Robert, Alan R. Dennis, Manju K. Ahuja. 

2008. Social capital and knowledge integration in 
digitally enabled teams. Inform Syst Res 19, 3: 314–
334.  

67.  Charles F. Sabel. 1993. Constitutional ordering in 

historical context. In Games in Hierarchies and 
Networks: Analytical and Empirical Approaches to the 
Study of Governance Institutions, Fritz W. Scharpf 
(ed.). Westview Press, 65–123. 

68.  John Schaubroeck, Simon S.K. Lam, Ann Chunyan 

Peng. 2011. Cognition-based and affect-based trust as 
mediators of leader behavior influences on team 
performance. J Appl Psychol 96, 4: 863. 

69.  F. David Schoorman, Roger C. Mayer, James H. 

Davis. 2007. An integrative model of organizational 
trust: Past, present, and future. Acad Manage Rev 32, 
2: 344–354. 

70.  Igor Steinmacher, Ana Paula Chaves, Marco Aurelio 
Gerosa. 2010. Awareness support in global software 
development: a systematic review based on the 3C 
collaboration model. In Collaboration and Technology, 
Gwendolyn Kolfschoten, Thomas Herrmann, Stephan 
Lukosch (eds.). Springer, Berlin, 185–201. 

71.  Igor Steinmacher, Ana Paula Chaves, Marco Aurélio 

Gerosa. 2013. Awareness support in distributed 
software development: A systematic review and 
mapping of the literature. Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work (CSCW) 22, 2-3: 113–158. 

 

259

