CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Supportive Responses to Social Sharing on Facebook 

Once More with Feeling:  

Moira Burke and Mike Develin 

Facebook, Menlo Park, CA 
{mburke, miked}@fb.com 

ABSTRACT 
Life  is  more  than  cat  pictures.  There  are  tough  days, 
heartbreak, and hugs. Under what contexts do people share 
these  feelings  online,  and  how  do  their  friends  respond? 
Using millions of de-identified Facebook status updates with 
poster-annotated  feelings  (e.g.,  feeling  thankful  or  feeling 
worried),  we  examine  the  magnitude  and  circumstances  in 
which  people  share  positive  or  negative  feelings  and 
characterize  the  nature  of  the  responses  they  receive.  We 
find  that  people  share  greater  proportions  of  both  positive 
and  negative  emotions  when  their  friend  networks  are 
smaller  and  denser.  Consistent  with  social  sharing  theory, 
hearing about a friend’s troubles on Facebook causes friends 
to  reply  with  more  emotional  and  supportive  comments. 
Friends’  comments  are  also  more  numerous  and  longer. 
Posts with positive feelings, on the other hand, receive more 
likes,  and  their  comments  have  more  positive  language. 
Feelings that relate to the poster’s self worth, such as feeling 
defeated,  feeling  unloved,  or  feeling  accomplished  amplify 
these effects.  
Author Keywords 
Emotional support; social network sites; social sharing 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.3 Group and Organization Interfaces: Web-based 
interfaces.  
INTRODUCTION 
Humans  have  a  fundamental  need  to  share  feelings  in 
response to emotional events and to receive feedback from 
others [44], a behavior known as social sharing. Celebrating 
our victories amplifies joy [33], and venting frustrations can 
help  us  cope  [40].  Though  much  of  the  research  on  social 
sharing  was 
face-to-face 
communication,  a  growing  body  of  research  is  examining 
emotional  expression  on  Twitter,  Facebook,  blogs,  text 
messaging,  and  other  computer-mediated  communication 
[1,12,28,29]. 

developed 

based 

on 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or  classroom  use  is  granted  without  fee  provided  that  copies  are  not  made  or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and 
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned 
by  others  than  ACM  must  be  honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To 
copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires 
prior 
from 
Permissions@acm.org.  
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA © 2016 
ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2835199 

fee.  Request  permissions 

specific  permission 

and/or 

a 

is 

not 

viewership 

information 

Understanding  emotional  expression  on  Facebook  and  how 
friends  respond  is  of  particular  importance  because  unlike 
Twitter  and  blogs,  where  the  audience  is  comprised  of  the 
general  public,  on  Facebook  people  typically  share  their 
thoughts with people they also know offline, and their friend 
networks  usually  include  their  closest  confidants  [24]. 
Though strangers and weak ties may provide informational 
support,  emotional  support  typically  comes  from  close 
friends  [49].  Therefore,  the  way  people  express  their 
emotions on Facebook and the way their audience responds 
may  be  qualitatively  different  from  patterns  on  public 
platforms  organized  around  fan/follower  models.  We  focus 
on network-visible sharing—status updates that are typically 
broadcast to the poster’s friend network, rather than private 
messages—because  much  of  the  previous  research  already 
covers  dyadic  communication 
[44]  but  one-to-many 
broadcasts are a common use of social media [20], and status 
updates  offer  an  opportunity  to  examine  how  multiple 
friends  respond  when  no  particular  person  is  obligated  to 
(because 
visible). 
Furthermore,  observing  our  friends  sharing  emotions  on 
Facebook  and  noting  how  others  respond  shapes  our 
perceptions  about  social  norms  on  the  site  [9].  With  1.4 
billion  active  users    [21],  the  site’s  size  makes  it  an 
important phenomenon to examine, as well. 
Previous  empirical  work  in  this  space  leaves  several  open 
questions.  The  first  is  the  relationship  between  audience 
composition  and  the  valence  (positivity  or  negativity)  of 
expressed  emotions.  Do  people  share  different  kinds  of 
emotions online depending on whom they think is listening? 
The  desire  to  make  a  good  impression  on  others  [22]  and 
social norms emphasizing positivity [18] may cause people 
to withhold more negative feelings in the presence of weaker 
ties.  Yet  empirical  research  examining  the  relationship 
between  emotional  valence  and  network  features  like  size 
and density (a proxy for how many close friends might be in 
the audience) has been mixed, with some research indicating 
negative emotions are expressed when the audience is larger 
and  sparser  [29]  and  other  studies  indicating  the  opposite 
[15,35]. 
The second open question relates to how audiences respond 
to  emotional  expression  on  Facebook.  Research  on  offline 
communication  indicates  that  social  sharing  induces  strong 
feelings  in  the  recipient,  as  well,  and  recipients  often 
respond with empathy and hugs [13]. Does social sharing of 

1462

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

especially  more 

interchangeably 

emotion online elicit emotion in viewers, and what form do 
their responses take? When someone posts a status update on 
Facebook, any number of friends may see it, but because the 
site does not reveal who has seen a post, no particular person 
is  obligated  to  reply.  Audiences  may  not  respond  at  all:  If 
people perceive social media as venues only appropriate for 
happy news, they might ignore negative posts in an attempt 
to  discourage  negativity, 
extreme 
expressions  such  as  low  self-worth.  This  has  occurred  on 
Twitter; tweets expressing enduring loneliness receive fewer 
responses  [30].  Furthermore,  responses  may  come  in  a 
variety  of  formats:  lightweight  likes,  comments  that  are 
visible to other friends, and private messages. What formats 
do friends choose when responding to emotional posts, what 
is the substance of their response, and how does it vary with 
post valence? 
The present research is the first very large-scale quantitative 
study  of  social  sharing  of  feelings  in  Facebook  status 
updates,  examining  (1)  how  network  properties  (size  and 
density) are associated with the valence of emotions shared, 
and (2) how characteristics of the emotions shared (valence 
and  self-relevance)  relate  to  how  the  audience  responds 
(quantity of responses, emotional and supportive content in 
comments,  and  whether  the  responses  come  in  network-
visible  or  private  channels).  Facebook  recently  launched  a 
feature allowing posters to annotate their status updates with 
feelings,  like  feeling  blessed  or  feeling  embarrassed  (see 
Figure  1),  so  we  use  these  annotations  as  gold  standard 
labels for the poster’s emotion. (As such, we use the terms 
“feeling”  and  “emotion” 
throughout.) 
Though  there  is  adoption  bias  in  the  annotation  tool  (far 
more  women  than  men  use  it,  consistent  with  previous 
research on online emotional expression [47], and users are 
slightly older than average), the scale of the dataset is much 
greater  than  previous  studies.  This  observational  analysis 
covers millions of episodes of emotional expression (all de-
identified and analyzed in aggregate, with no changes to any 
Facebook user’s experience).  
This  paper  complements  and  expands  upon  previous 
smaller-scale studies in several ways. We show that people 
with  larger  and  more  diverse  friend  networks—and  thus 
larger  potential  audiences  for  status  updates—share  fewer 
emotions. More than one third of emotions shared in status 
updates  with  the  feeling  annotation  widget  in  Figure  1  are 
feeling  embarrassed), 
negative  (e.g., 
indicating  that  when  people  share  emotions  via  network-
visible  updates,  they  don’t  just  limit  themselves  to  happy 
news,  at  least  among  this  large  sample  of  Facebook  users. 
We  document  properties  of  the  responses  to  these  positive 
and negative status updates, finding that posts with positive 
feelings  (e.g.,  feeling  excited  or  feeling  optimistic)  elicit 
more  likes  and  comments  than  posts  without  feeling 
annotations,  and  posts  with  negative  feelings  (e.g.,  feeling 
horrible or feeling disgusted) receive even more comments 
than positive posts. Consistent with offline research, viewers 
of negative emotional posts respond with increased emotion 

feeling  upset  or 

Figure 1. Adding feelings to a status update. 

 

and supportive language. Finally, we demonstrate that when 
people express negative self-worth (e.g., feeling worthless), 
their friends also respond via private channels.  
BACKGROUND 
We begin by reviewing literature on social sharing and how 
properties  of  one’s  audience  may  influence  the  valence  of 
emotions shared. We then identify open questions about how 
listeners should respond. 
Social Sharing and Emotional Valence 
Social  sharing  theory  asserts  that  we  need  to  communicate 
with  others  in  response  to  emotional  events  [44].  These 
events  elicit  ambiguity  and  challenge  our  beliefs  about 
ourselves  and  the  world,  and  so  articulating  our  feelings 
helps  us  clarify  and  resolve  those  emotions.  Beyond  the 
psychological  effects  attributed 
to  simply  expressing 
emotions,  there  is  a  social  component:  Sharing  emotions 
with others increases intimacy and allows others to provide 
empathy,  validation,  and  support  [34,44].  The  support  we 
receive, 
including  commiseration,  companionship,  and 
affirmation  helps  us 
and  produces  positive 
psychological  states  that  improve  the  immune  system  and 
buffer stress [14].  
While  a  variety  of  ties  may  provide  other  forms  of  social 
support  (such  as  information  or  advice),  emotional  support 
in  times  of  psychological  distress  typically  comes  from 
one’s  closest  friends  and  family  [49].  People  may  also 
expect their close friends not to judge them for sharing bad 
news,  while  a  stranger  might  [4].  Empirical  studies  of 
Facebook have borne this out: Participants in online weight-
loss communities reported seeing Facebook as a place only 
for sharing victories, because they wanted to “communicate 
the  impression  of  being  .  .  .  in  control,  positive,  and  not 
struggling” and would save their challenges and requests for 
help for more private support groups [39]. College students 
on  Facebook  were  more  likely  to  turn  to  private  messages 
than status updates to share more intense, negative emotions 
[1].  Both  online  and  offline,  people  tend  to  reserve 

cope 

 

1463

that  causes  us 

disclosing negative emotions with trusted, close friends who 
are most able to provide meaningful support [1,12,44]. 
Beyond  expectations  about  the  kinds  of  ties  that  provide 
emotional  support,  social  media  users  may  also  perceive  a 
proscriptive  norm  against  sharing  negative  emotions. 
Humans  are  generally  hesitant  to  share  bad  news  [4],  a 
phenomenon 
to  overestimate  others’ 
happiness  and  success  [27].  These  norms  occur  online,  as 
well; many empirical studies of Facebook and Twitter reveal 
positive emotions are more prevalently shared than negative 
ones  [1,36],  especially  among  people  with  higher  levels  of 
presentational concerns [2]. 
On  the  other  hand,  people  may  share  positive  emotions 
widely  in  order  to  amplify  the  joy;  they  seek  out  others  to 
help  them  “capitalize”  on  good  news  [33],  even  turning  to 
strangers when the news is especially good [43]. Survey and 
diary  studies  of  social  media  users  show  that  people  more 
often turn to channels with greater visibility, such as public 
tweets or status updates (as opposed to private messages) to 
share  positive  news,  and  that  visible  sharing  is  linked  to 
positive affect and satisfaction [1,12]. 
Taken together, this research suggests that on social media, 
people  may  share  positive  emotions  regardless  of  their 
audience  composition,  but  share  negative  news  in  contexts 
when they have a smaller audience with a greater proportion 
of  close  friends.  However,  as  discussed  below,  empirical 
results on this front are mixed. 
Network Properties Influencing Emotional Valence 
Social media audiences vary along several dimensions; two 
commonly  studied  properties  are  network  size  and  density 
[37].  Evolutionary  psychology  suggests  that  humans  can 
only maintain a small number of close confidants, and so as 
network  sizes  grow,  they  necessarily  are  comprised  of  a 
greater  number  of  weak  ties  [17].  Empirical  studies  of 
Facebook  demonstrate  that  most  ties  are  weak  [16],  so  it’s 
conceivable  that  people  with  large  networks  might  only 
share positive emotions appropriate for the “lowest common 
denominator” in their audience [26]. 
Network  density  measures  the  proportion  of  a  person’s 
friends  who  are  also  friends  with  each  other,  and  is 
commonly used as a representation of how “tightly-knit” or 
close  a  person’s  network  is  [37].  Dense  networks  have  a 
greater  proportion  of  ties  within  triads  (a  relationship 
between person A and B in which both are also friends with 
person  C);  these  ties  are  thought  to  be  stronger  than  ties 
without  a  mutual  friend  [45].  Presumably,  the  denser  a 
person’s network, the more comfortable he or she would be 
sharing negative emotions, because there would be relatively 
more strong ties available to provide emotional support [48], 
and fewer weak ties to elicit self-presentation concerns. 
Analyses of the relationship between network size, density, 
and emotional expression in social media have been mixed. 
One  study  of  Twitter  [29]  found  a  positive  relationship 
between network size and the number of both positive and 

 

1464

SESSION: UNPACKING SOCIAL NETWORKS

negative  emotional  tweets,  and  surprisingly,  found  that 
negative  tweets  were  greater  in  sparser,  rather  than  denser, 
networks.  Conversely,  more  recent  studies  suggest  that 
negative emotions and personally relevant content are shared 
more in smaller networks [15,38], positive emotions in large 
networks [35], and emotions of all kinds are more likely to 
be  shared  in  denser  networks  [35].  The  Twitter  studies 
[15,29]  are  somewhat  limited  by  a  lack  of  demographic 
information  such  as  age  and  gender  which  may  influence 
emotional  expression  [32].  The  one  Facebook  study  using 
network  data  [35] 
is  based  on  a  small  sample  of 
undergraduates;  their  similarity  in  age  and  life  stage  may 
cause them to have similar network structures and thus limit 
the  generalizability  of  results.  Based  on  the  literature  and 
some of the previous empirical work, we expect that people 
will be more comfortable sharing negative emotions among 
closer friends and positive emotions among wider audiences. 
Therefore, in Study 1, we test the following hypotheses: 
H1a: People with smaller, denser social networks will share 
a greater proportion of negative emotions. 
H1b: People with larger, more sparse networks will share a 
greater proportion of positive emotions. 
How Audiences Respond to Emotional Posts 
Rimé and colleagues [13] have demonstrated that hearing a 
friend share a negative experience elicits negative emotions 
in  the  listener,  as  well,  and  that  listeners  often  engage  in 
“secondary  sharing”  of  emotions  to  trusted  third  parties. 
Listeners engage in supportive behaviors, such as expressing 
empathy  and  offering  physical  gestures  (hugs).  How  do 
these responses by the listener manifest on social media?  
One  possibility  is  that  viewers  don’t  respond  at  all.  By 
design,  many  social  media  systems  do  not  reveal  which 
people have viewed a post, so no single audience member is 
obligated  to  respond.  If  people  perceive  social  media  as 
venues  only  appropriate  for  happy  news,  they  might  only 
respond to happy posts, ignoring negative ones in an attempt 
to discourage negativity (e.g. [30]).  
On  the  other  hand,  Facebook  networks  include  strong-tie 
relationships [7,24], and strong ties often provide emotional 
support [49].  Close friends may still want to offer support, 
and previous research suggests they may feel compelled  to 
do so, in order to process their own feelings [13]. We expect 
that friends are more likely to reply to than ignore emotional 
posts, given empirical evidence that Facebook users respond 
to requests for advice and favors [19] and feel increases in 
perceived social support through site use [8]. While existing 
research on the recipient’s response to social sharing focuses 
on negative emotions, we also expect that positive emotions 
will elicit feedback, in part because responding to good news 
can be as simple as a congratulations, and results in bonding 
and trust [43]. Taken together, we expect that:  
H2.  Emotional  status  updates  will  receive  more  feedback 
than posts without emotion.  

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

should 

emotions 

elicit  more 

Furthermore,  responses  to  posts  can  take  many  forms, 
including  likes,  comments,  private  messages,  phone  calls, 
and visits. Empirical studies of Facebook show that the post 
topic  influences  how  people  respond:  posts  about  medical 
issues  and  those  asking  explicitly  for  support  (e.g.,  with 
terms like worry about, help me, pray for) receive far more 
comments than posts about more mundane topics like sleep 
[47].  However,  medical  posts  and  other  bad  news  receive 
fewer likes, since likes may be interpreted as endorsement or 
congratulations, rather than signs of support.  
From a psychological perspective,  there  are  two  arguments 
why  “composed”  communication  such  as  comments  and 
messages might be perceived as more appropriate responses 
to negative emotion.  Research applying signaling theory to 
Facebook  communication  (e.g.,  [7,20])  argues  that  likes 
require  less  effort  to  produce  and  thus  may  signal  that  a 
relationship  is  less  valuable.  This  signal  may  degrade 
perceptions  of  social  support.  Furthermore,  by  virtue  of 
being  textless,  likes  necessarily  cannot  contain  supportive 
language.  Following  this  argument,  Burke  and  Kraut  [7] 
demonstrate  people  feel  greater  interpersonal  benefits  after 
receiving  Facebook  comments  rather  than  likes.  Therefore, 
negative 
“composed” 
communication—comments 
and  private  messages—in 
which friends commiserate or attempt to cheer up the poster 
[47]. Taken together, we propose: 
H3a:  Posts  with  positive  emotion  will  receive  more  likes 
than posts with negative emotion.  
H3b:  Posts  with  negative  emotion  will  receive  more 
comments  and  private  messages  than  posts  with  positive 
emotion. 
Since  recipients  of  social  sharing  experience  emotions 
themselves and offer social support, we expect that: 
H4:  Responses  to  posts  with  negative  emotion  will  contain 
more  emotional  and  supportive  content  than  responses  to 
posts without emotion. 
Beyond  valence,  the  nature  of  the  emotion  may  also  affect 
how viewers respond [13]. In particular, people may respond 
differently based on the degree to which it reflects how the 
poster  feels  about  herself.  Feeling  upset  is  very  different 
from feeling unloved. The former is a diffuse emotion that 
does not have the self as a point of reference (you could be 
upset  because  it’s  raining),  while  the  latter  expresses  self-
worth.  Self-relevant  emotions  (as  described  in  [6])  are 
closely linked to self-esteem and how we deal with failure. 
And our friends may respond differently to self-relevant and 
non-self-relevant emotions. On Twitter, people who express 
feelings  of  enduring  loneliness  are  less  likely  to  receive  a 
response [30]. Other empirical work finds that viewing past 
interactions  on  Facebook  may  boost  self-esteem  and  self-
affirmation [46]; it’s therefore conceivable that when people 
post  about  feeling  low  they  receive  empathetic  and  self-
affirming responses. Therefore, we also ask: 

respond, 

audiences 

RQ1. How do friends respond to positive and negative self-
relevant posts? 
We address these research questions and hypotheses with a 
pair  of  studies.  In  Study  1,  we  examine  the  relationship 
between  network  properties  (size  and  density)  and  the 
valence of emotions shared in status updates. In Study 2, we 
examine  how 
identifying  how 
characteristics of posts (emotional valence and whether the 
emotion  is  self-relevant)  are  associated  with  characteristics 
of  the  responses  (quantity,  the  amount  of  emotion  and 
supportive  language  in  comments,  and  the  channel  that 
replies take: likes, comments, or private messages). 
STUDY 1 
To  understand  the  relationship  between  network  properties 
and the valence of emotions expressed, we analyzed network 
properties and status updates by a random sample of people 
who used the feeling annotation tool.  
Sample 
A  sample  of  N=1,399,921  English  speakers  in  the  U.S. 
(Mean  age  =  32.2,  SD=10.9,  79%  female)  who  posted  at 
least  one  status  update  in  June  2015  that  included  an 
emotion (using the annotation widget in Figure 1), had been 
Facebook users for at least six months, and had at least 20 
friends, were randomly selected. Their status updates for one 
month (approximately 30 million) and friend networks were 
included  in  the  analysis.  Significant  steps  were  taken  to 
ensure  user  privacy:  All  data  were  de-identified  and 
analyzed  in  aggregate  such  that  no  individual’s  text  was 
viewed  by  researchers.  All  data  were  observational—no 
experiment  was  performed  and  no  one’s  experience  on  the 
site was any different than usual.  
We sample among people who used the emotion annotation 
tool  rather  than  classifying  emotion  in  all  users’  post  test 
(e.g., using LIWC [41]) because the annotation gives us an 
explicit  signal  of  how  the  poster  was  feeling,  rather  than  a 
potentially  noisier  signal  based  on  keywords  in  the  text. 
However,  people  who  use  the  annotation  may  differ  from 
those  who  don’t;  they  may  be  more  savvy  simply  for 
knowing of the tool’s existence, or may believe their friends 
will  be  supportive  to  expressions  of  emotion.  Posters  who 
used  the  feeling  annotation  tool  were  approximately  four 
years  younger,  20%  more  likely  to  be  women,  had 
approximately 50 more friends, logged in an average of 0.6 
more days in the past month, and had been using Facebook 
for  approximately  four  fewer  months  than  posters  who  did 
not use the annotation tool (all ps < 0.001). The gender bias 
in  the  data  reflects  the  underlying  population  using  the 
feeling  annotation  tool;  as  in  other  research  [47],  women 
were  more  likely  to  express  emotion  here.  Therefore  we 
control  for  age,  gender,  friend  count  (where  applicable), 
number  of  login  days,  and  tenure  in  all  subsequent 
regressions,  and  discuss  any  limitations  due  to  these 
differences in population in the discussion section.  

 

1465

included 

special,  accomplished, 

Feeling Valence and Self-Relevancy 
Approximately  15%  of  their  posts  included  a  feeling 
annotation.  Two  judges  independently  coded  the  top  200 
feelings  (which  comprised  90%  of  feelings  usage)  on  a  3-
point valence scale (positive, ambiguous, or negative). Inter-
rater  reliability  was  good  (Cohen’s  kappa  =  0.77),  and 
disagreements  were  resolved  by  consensus.  Positive  terms 
included refreshed, optimistic, ecstatic; ambiguous included 
normal,  drunk,  curious,  ready;  negative  included  grumpy, 
disappointed,  furious.  (See  Appendix  for  complete  list). 
Among  posts  with  any  feeling,  51%  were  positive,  38% 
were  negative,  and  11%  were  ambiguous.  Ambiguous 
feelings were omitted from analysis. 
The two judges also rated each feeling with a binary variable 
indicating  whether  the  feeling  was  self-relevant  using  the 
general description in [6]  (kappa = 0.74). Feelings that were 
strong, 
self-relevant 
unwanted, worthless, alone (see Appendix). 
Network properties 
For each participant, we calculated the number of Facebook 
friends (network size) at the beginning of the data collection 
window.  The  median  participant  had  372  friends  (Mean  = 
594, SD = 714.9). We also calculated network density using 
the standard formula, the ratio of the existing connections to 
the  total  number  of  possible  connections  in  the  one-step 
egocentric  network  for  the  user.  The  median  density  was 
0.07  (Mean  =  0.08,  SD=0.05).  Network  size  and  density 
were negatively correlated (r = -0.19). 
Model 
To  understand  the  relationship  between  emotional  valence 
and  network  properties,  we  performed 
linear 
regressions; one estimating the percentage of total posts with 
a  negative  emotion,  and  one  estimating  the  percentage  of 
posts with a positive emotion. (Self-relevant emotions were 
included in their respective valence category.) In both cases 
we control for the poster’s age, gender, number of login days 
in  the  past  month,  tenure,  and  number  of  posts  in  the  past 
month. Age and login days were centered; tenure, number of 
posts, network size, and density were standardized; network 
size  was  logged  (base  2)  to  account  for  skew  before 
standardization. All variance inflation factors were less than 
2 indicating multicollinearity was not an issue. 
Results 
Before  examining 
relationship  between  network 
properties and emotional valence, we begin with some basic 
descriptive  statistics.  Overall,  8.1%  of  posts  on  Facebook 
include  a  feeling  annotation  (calculated  across  all  English 
posts in the U.S., not just those in our sample). Of the posts 
that included a positive or negative feeling annotation, 57% 
were  positive  and  43%  were  negative.  Figure  2  shows  the 
ratio  of  positive  to  negative  feeling  annotations  used, 
grouped by poster age. Teens and young adults exhibited a 
greater  proportion  of    negativity  and  self-relevance  than 
older  posters  (Figure  2,  top),  consistent  with  previous 
research [11,47]. These numbers are conservative, since they 

two 

the 

 

1466

SESSION: UNPACKING SOCIAL NETWORKS

 

Figure 2.  Expressions of feelings by age bracket. Top: Teens
and  young  adults  use  relatively  more  negative  feelings  on
Facebook,  while  older  adults  share  a  greater  proportion  of
positive  feelings.  Bottom:  Teens  and  young  adults  share  a
greater  proportion  of  self-relevant  feelings  than  older  adults. 
Plot  points  are  larger  than  error  bars  (bootstrapped  95%
confidence intervals). 

that 

those 

only  include  posts  with  explicit  feeling  annotations,  and 
many posts may include emotion in the text itself, which we 
do not detect here. We address potential differences between 
posts  with  annotated  feelings  and 
include 
emotional text in the Discussion section. 
Table  1  shows  the  results  of  the  two  regressions  with 
coefficients  translated  to  percentages  for  readability.  The 
intercept  represents  a  woman  with  the  mean  value  for  all 
continuous variables (age 32, 594 friends, logged in 27 days 
and  made  19  posts  in  the  past  month,  and  had  been  using 
Facebook  for  5.3  years).  On  average  10.2%  of  her  posts 
included  a  negative  emotion  annotation,  and  17.4%,  a 
positive emotion. Age and gender had modest effects: Older 
users  and  women  were  somewhat  more  positive.  More 
engaged users (those who logged in more often and posted 
more)  and  those  who  had  had  Facebook  accounts  longer 
used fewer emotion annotations in their status updates. The 
final two rows confirm H1a and reject H1b: As network size 
increased, people shared a smaller proportion of emotions of 
either valence. One standard deviation in friend count (on a 
log  scale)  is  associated  with  an  0.7%  drop  in  negative  and 
0.8% drop in positive emotions (both p < 0.001). Controlling 
for network size, however, we see that in denser networks, 
people  share  more  of  each  kind  of  emotion.  One  standard 
deviation increase in density is associated with an additional 
0.3%  negative  and  1.0%  positive  posts  (both  p  <  0.001). 
These results are discussed after Study 2. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Positive 

% posts 
SE 
17.4%  
0.0% 
0.1% ***  0.0% 
0.1% ** 
0.0% 
-0.6% ***  0.0% 
-0.1% ***  0.0% 
-7.0% ***  0.0% 
-0.8% ***  0.0% 
1.0% ***  0.0% 

Negative 
% posts 
SE 
 10.2%  
0.0% 
-0.2% ***  0.0% 
-0.1% * 
0.0% 
-0.1% ***  0.0% 
-0.6% ***  0.0% 
-3.2% ***  0.0% 
-0.7% ***  0.0% 
0.3% ***  0.0% 

  
 
Intercept 
Age 
Is male 
Login days 
Tenure  
Number of posts 
Network size 
Network density 
N=1,399,921                  R2 = 0.05                          R2 = 0.12 
* p < 0.05    ** p < 0.01 *** p < 0.001     
Table  1.  Linear  regressions  estimating  the  percentages  of  a 
person’s  posts  in  a  month  that  include  a  negative  (left)  or 
positive (right) emotion annotation.  

STUDY 2 
Study 1 demonstrated that people share more emotions, both 
positive  and  negative,  when  they  have  smaller,  denser 
networks.  We  next  examine  how  characteristics  of  the 
emotions shared (valence and self-relevance) are associated 
with  characteristics  of  the  responses:  quantity,  supportive 
and emotional content, and channel (like, comment, private 
message).  
Sample 
A  sample  of  N=31.7  million  de-identified  text-based  status 
updates, comprised of a random sample of 14.2 million posts 
with  attached  feeling  annotations  and  a  random  sample  of 
17.5  million  without  feeling  annotations  (to  serve  as  a 
baseline), was analyzed on Facebook’s servers. As in Study 
1,  all  data  were  analyzed  in  aggregate  and  no  users’ 
experiences  were  affected.  Posts  were  drawn  from  English 
speakers in the United States in early 2014, excluding one-
week  windows  around  holidays  (e.g.  Valentine’s  Day, 
Mother’s Day) that might skew feelings and feedback. The 
sample  represented  19.3  million  unique  posters  aged  13-64 
(M=29.9).  The  two  populations  (those  who  used  feeling 
annotations  and  those  who  didn’t)  are  different,  but  we 
control  for  many  of  the  demographic  and  engagement 
differences in the following regressions. As in Study 1, the 
14.2 million posts with feeling annotations were categorized 
according to the valence and self-relevance of the emotion. 
The  posts  without  an  explicit  feeling  annotation  form  a 
baseline for comparison; since these posts may still express 
emotion in their text this is a conservative comparison point. 
Feedback Counts and Support in Comments 
For  each  post,  three  forms  of  feedback  within  a  24-hour 
period  were  counted:  (a)  likes,  (b)  comments  (excluding 
those  written  by  the  original  poster),  and  (c)  number  of 
incoming  messages,  defined  as  counts  of  private  chat 
sessions  initiated  by  someone  other  than  the  poster,  taking 
place at least three hours after any previous chat session. No 
text from private messages was analyzed, only counts. The 
majority of feedback occurred during the first 24 hours, and 

into 

results  are  qualitatively  the  same  when  considering  a  72-
hour period (not shown). 
In addition to studying counts of feedback, we analyzed the 
tone of comments received. Scripts automatically parsed all 
comments  (but  not  private  messages) 
lowercase, 
punctuation-free  unigrams  and  applied  three  dictionaries  to 
the  remaining  bags  of  words:  the  “positive  emotion”  and 
“negative emotion” dictionaries from the Linguistic Inquiry 
and Word Count (LIWC) package [41], and a dictionary of 
support  terms,  described  below.  This  dictionary  method 
counts the percentage of terms from a given list that occur in 
a piece of text (e.g., positive emotions include love, nice, and 
sweet and negative emotions include hurt, ugly, and nasty). 
Terms were stemmed (e.g, frustrat represents both frustrated 
and  frustrating).  Though  LIWC  mischaracterizes  negations 
(e.g., “That’s not good” would be coded as positive), these 
negations  wash  out  in  large  samples  and  the  tool  has  been 
shown  to  effectively  surface  many  socio-psychological 
phenomena [41]. We created a dictionary of “support” terms 
by  culling  words  from  Hallmark  cards  and  websites 
providing  examples  of  sympathy  or  condolences,  and 
extended  LIWC  with  this  “support”  dictionary:  affection, 
awful, better, bless, care, caring, comfort, condolence, feel, 
frustrat,  god,  grief,  hang,  heart,  help,  hope,  hopeful,  hug, 
loss, lov, luck, pain, pray, sad, shock, sorry, sorrow, special, 
strength,  strong,  suck,  support,  sympathy,  terrible,  think, 
thought,  warm.  This  dictionary  was  created  without  any 
knowledge  of  the  actual  comment  text.  Average  comment 
length, in words, was also included as a dependent measure. 
In  the  end,  we  had  seven  dependent  variables  at  the  post 
level:  separate  counts  of  likes,  comments,  and  messages 
received, average comment length, percent positive emotion 
in comments (averaged across pooled comment text for that 
post),  percent  negative  emotion  in  comments,  and  percent 
support in comments. 
Modeling Responses to Posts with Feelings  
To understand the nature of responses to posts with feelings, 
we performed a series of regressions. Dummy variables were 
created to represent the four combinations of feeling valence 
(positive,  negative)  and  self-relevance  (yes,  no).  Control 
variables  likely  to  affect  both  expression  of  emotion  and 
feedback volume included poster gender and age [32], how 
long  they  had  been  on  Facebook,  and  friend  count  bracket 
(potential audience size). 
We  performed  separate  regressions  for  each  of  the  seven 
dependent  variables  (likes,  comments,  messages,  average 
comment 
in 
comments,  percentage  of  negative  emotion  in  comments, 
and  percentage  of  supportive  text  in  comments).  Feedback 
counts—likes, comments, messages, and comment length—
were log-transformed after adding 1. For outcomes related to 
comment  text  (positive  emotion,  negative  emotion,  and 
supportive 
linear 
regressions on percentages. Because of the large volume of 

length,  percentage  of  positive  emotion 

text),  we  performed  untransformed 

 

1467

data (31.7 million observations), regressions were performed 
on aggregated data with robust standard errors. 
Results 
First,  we  examine  feedback  received  by  posts  with  and 
without feeling annotations. 
Comments.  Table  2  shows  a  regression  estimating  the 
number of comments received based on post characteristics. 
The omitted levels for categorical variables  were set to the 
most common categories, so the intercept represents a post 
without  a  feeling  annotation  written  by  an  18-24  year-old 
woman  with  201-500  friends  and  more  than  two  years  of 
Facebook  experience.  On  average,  her  post  received  0.77 
comments  (e0.57–1=  0.77).  A  similar  post  with  positive 
feelings  would  receive  5.2%  more  comments  (Mean=0.81, 
all  subsequent  p  <  10-16).  (For  simplicity,  we  refer  to  non-

Age 

SESSION: UNPACKING SOCIAL NETWORKS

feeling  excited)  as  simply 
self-relevant  feelings  (e.g., 
“feelings”  and  refer  to  self-relevant  feelings  (e.g.,  feeling 
unloved)  as  “self-relevant  feelings.”  These  two  categories 
are mutually exclusive, not nested.) Negative feelings elicit 
even more comments (36% more than a non-feeling post). A 
post-hoc  comparison  confirms  that  posts  with  negative 
emotion  receive  29%  more  comments  than  posts  with 
positive emotion (Beta=0.12, SE=0.01, p<0.001).  
However,  self-relevant  posts,  especially  negative  self-
relevant ones, receive far more comments, even compared to 
posts with other feelings: positive self-relevancy elicits 14% 
more  comments  and  negative  self-relevancy  garners  72% 
more comments. A post-hoc test confirms that the effect is 
greater for negative self-relevancy than other negative non-
self-relevant emotions (Beta=0.12, SE=0.01, p < 0.001). 
Figure 3 displays these response rates to posts with the four 
kinds  of  feelings,  relative  to  a  post  without  feelings.  Each 
panel  represents  one  of  the  seven  dependent  variables. 
Overall, with the exception of likes and positive comments, 
we  see  that  friends  respond  more  to  posts  with  negative 
emotions,  especially  negative  self-relevant  emotions.  We 
now discuss the other dependent variables in turn.  
Comment  length.  Friends  respond  with  much  longer 
comments  to  posts  with  negative  feelings,  especially  to 
negative  self-relevant  ones  (see  Figure  3d).  While  the 
average post without feelings elicits 5.4-word comments on 
average,  negative  feelings  get  21%  longer  comments,  and 
negative self-relevant posts get 51% longer comments. We’ll 
address the tone of these comments shortly.  
Likes.  Likes  follow  a  different  pattern  than  comments, 
consistent  with  the  idea  that  people  are  uncomfortable 
clicking  the  “like”  icon  for  negative  posts,  since  likes 
suggest endorsement or congratulations, rather than support. 
Instead,  we  see  that  positive  posts  garner  far  more  likes: 
positive feelings are associated with a 58% increase in likes, 
and  positive  self-relevancy  garners  71%  more 
likes, 
supporting  Hypothesis  3a.  On  the  other  hand,  negative 
feelings  elicit  32%  fewer  likes,  and  negative  self-relevant 
feelings, 34% fewer likes (see Figure 3a). 
Number of private messages. Both likes and comments are 
visible  to  other  friends,  but  we  see  support  being  enacted 
over private channels, as well. We included counts of private 
messages as a dependent variable (no text was analyzed) and 
found  that  negative  self-relevant  posts  result  in  24%  more 
chat sessions initiated by other friends (see Figure 3c). These 
results  suggest  that  friends  reach  out  to  privately  check-in 
with the poster and offer support. Hypothesis 3b is partially 
supported 
feelings  elicit  more 
comments,  but  only  negative  self-relevant  feelings  elicit 
more  private  messages).  In  general,  however,  posting  a 
feeling  results  in  a  very  slight  reduction  in  messaging, 
perhaps because viewers reply through comments and likes 
instead.  One  interpretation  is  that  social  chat  sessions  that 
would  have  occurred  (had  one  friend  not  posted  an 

(posts  with  negative 

1468

  

  

  

  

  

 
Controls 
Is male 
Site tenure 

Ln(comments +1) 
Intercept 
 
Feelings 

0-35 days 
36-90 days 
3-12 months 
1-2 years 
Friend count 

Comments
  
SE 
(Est.)
Coef. 
0.77 
0.57 ***  0.00 
 
 
0.02 ***  0.00 
0.81 
Positive (non self-relevant) 
0.88 
Positive self-relevant 
0.06 ***  0.00 
1.05 
Negative (non self-relevant)  0.15 ***  0.00 
Negative self-relevant 
0.27 ***  0.00 
1.33 
 
 
0.69 
-0.05 ***  0.00 
 
 
-0.06 ***  0.00 
0.68 
0.65 
-0.07 ***  0.00 
0.65 
-0.07 ***  0.00 
0.65 
-0.07 ***  0.00 
 
 
-0.02 
-0.59 ***  0.00 
0.14 
-0.44 ***  0.00 
0.22 
-0.38 ***  0.00 
-0.33 ***  0.00 
0.28 
0.33 
-0.29 ***  0.00 
0.44 
-0.21 ***  0.00 
0.61 
-0.10 ***  0.00 
0.01 ***  0.00 
0.79 
 
 
0.65 
-0.07 ***  0.00 
1.15 
0.19 ***  0.00 
0.29 ***  0.00 
1.37 
1.44 
0.32 ***  0.00 
0.34 ***  0.00 
1.50 
*** p < 10-16                                            N = 31.7 million posts 
Table 2. Model of comments received by posts with feelings. All 
standard errors are below 0.001. Posts with feelings elicit more 
comments  than  posts  without  feelings,  and  negative  feelings 
elicit  more comments than  positive feelings.  Feelings that are 
self-relevant amplify these effects. 
 

0-10 
11-20 
21-30 
31-40 
41-50 
51-100 
101-200 
501+ 

13-17 
25-34 
35-44 
45-54 
55-64 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

emotional  status  update)  were  replaced  by  other  social 
interactions (likes and comments).  
Positive  emotion  in  comments.  In  addition  to  feedback 
volume,  we  also  analyzed  the  emotional  content  of  post 
comments. As noted previously, all analyses were performed 
automatically  with  scripts;  researchers  did  not  read  any 
comments.  The  average  post  without  feelings  elicited 

Figure 3. Relative difference in responses based on use of feeling
annotations. Each row shows one outcome. Each point shows the
percentage difference in that outcome for a post that includes a
feeling,  relative  to  a  post  without  a  feeling.  Posts  with  positive
feelings  elicit  more  (a)  likes  and  (e)  positive  comments,  while
negative feelings elicit (b) more comments, (d) longer comments,
and  (e,f)  comments  with  more  emotional  and  (g)  supportive
language.  Posts  about  self-relevant  feelings,  especially  negative
ones, amplify these effects. Negative self-relevant posts also elicit
more private messages (c). Plot points are larger than error bars
(bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals). 

comments  that  contained  3.1%  positive  emotion  words, 
0.7%  negative  emotion,  and  0.9%  supportive  text.  Not 
surprisingly,  posts  with  positive  feelings,  such  as  feeling 
awesome, elicited far more positive emotion in comments (a 
24%  relative  increase).  Figure  3  (panels  e-g)  show  the 
relative  difference  in  positive  emotion,  negative  emotion, 
and supportive text found in comments to posts with various 
levels  of  feelings.  In  general,  however,  even  posts  with 
negative feelings elicited more positive comment text; given 
the context we might infer commenters are saying things like 
hope you’re feeling better or sending happiness your way.  
Negative  emotion  in  comments.  We  see  a  big  increase  in 
the  use  of  negative  emotion  words  (Fig  3f)  in  response  to 
posts  containing  negative  feelings,  while  the  use  of  these 
words  is  significantly  reduced  in  responses  to  positive 
feelings. Comments on posts with negative feelings contain 
78%  more  negative-emotion  words  than  comments  on 
ordinary  posts,  as  the  responder  commiserates  with  the 
poster  (presumably  phrases  like  that  sucks  or  i  feel  your 
pain). Negative self-relevant feelings show an even stronger 
effect,  as  these  contain  more  than  double  the  negative 
emotion compared to a typical comment (110% more). For 
positive feelings, we see an unsurprising significant drop-off 
in comment negativity (-29%). 
Supportive  language  in  comments.  Recipients  of  social 
sharing often respond by offering support [13], and the data 
show that this occurs on Facebook, as well.  Figure 3g shows 
a  large  effect  in  response  to  posts  with  negative  feelings, 
which  elicit  2.44  times  as  many  support  words  as  non-
feeling  posts.  Self-relevancy  again  amplifies  these  effects; 
negative self-relevant posts elicit 2.6 times as many support 
words as a non-feeling post. These multipliers are per word, 
so  given  that  there  are  more  comments  and  the  average 
comment is longer, the effect in terms of raw words is even 
larger. Hypothesis 4 is supported. 
In  summary,  positive  feelings  elicit  likes  and  positive 
comments, and negative feelings elicit more comments and 
messages, where friends have room to respond with emotion 
and  support.  RQ2  asked  how  friends  respond  to  negative 
self-relevant 
results 
demonstrate that friends respond in greater volume and with 
more emotion to negative, self-relevant feelings. 
Responses to Specific Feelings 
In the previous analyses feeling terms were grouped by their 
valence  and  whether  they  were  self-relevant,  but  the  effect 
size may vary with individual feelings. Figure 4 (top panel) 
presents  the  ten  feelings  with  the  highest  usage  rates; 
response  percentages  are  relative  to  a  post  with  no  feeling 
annotation.  We  can  see  that  the  most  sympathetic,  sad, 
produces  a  significant  positive  lift  in  comments,  and  those 
comments are longer, have more negative emotion, and are 
more  supportive.    Sad  also  elicits  a  bump  in  private 
messages, which few feelings do.  Many of the feelings that 
could  be  followed  with  an  “about  what”  question  receive 
more  comments:  sick,  annoyed,  and  excited.  Meanwhile, 

feelings,  and  collectively, 

these 

 

1469

SESSION: UNPACKING SOCIAL NETWORKS

Figure 4. Relative difference in responses based on use of specific feelings.  Top panel shows the most commonly used feelings; a post
with feeling tired receives less feedback than a post without feelings, while feeling sad receives far more comments, longer comments,
and comments with negative emotion and supportive language. The bottom panel shows the feelings that elicit the most comments. 
Note that the very personal feelings, devastated and heartbroken, elicit far more private messages, as well. 

in  addition 

in  private  messages 

generic  statuses  like  happy,  tired,  and  wonderful  induce 
fewer comments than the average post. 
Figure  4  (bottom  panel)  shows  the  feelings  that  elicit  the 
most  comments.  Consistent  with  the  regression  results,  the 
theme  is  clear:  other  than  old  (which  is  ambiguous)  all  of 
these  are  negative,  and  several  are  self-relevant.  The  most 
personal  ones,  devastated  and  heartbroken,  reveal  a  large 
bump 
to  comments, 
indicating  that  friends  may  be  providing  support  over 
backchannels when needed. 
DISCUSSION 
The present study extends previous dyadic research on social 
sharing  by  examining  contemporary  practices  of  one-to-
many broadcasts in social media. On the whole, the research 
demonstrates 
that  when  people  have  smaller,  denser 
networks,  they  share  more  positive  and  negative  emotions, 
and friends respond in greater volume to posts with emotion, 
especially  negative  emotion.  Responses  to  posts  with 
negative  emotion  are  more  emotional  themselves  and 
contain  more 
extreme 
expressions  of  negative  self-worth  (e.g.,  feeling  unloved) 
often  elicit  private  responses  from  friends.  Figure  5  (top) 

supportive 

language;  more 

shows the terms most disproportionately found in comments 
responding to negative feelings: phrases like sorry, hugs and 
references to prayer are common. The support shifts offline, 
as well (talk, call). 
A  key  distinction  between  this  research  and  previous 
analyses  of  social  sharing  is  the  focus  on  responses,  rather 
than  just  the  posters.  Rimé  and  colleagues  [13]  note  that 
hearing others share emotions elicits emotions in the listener, 
and those listeners often respond with empathy and support. 
Beyond  demonstrating  that  this  also  occurs  in  Facebook 
comments,  the  present  study  may  also  shed  light  on  how 
“secondary sharing” occurs in social media. Rimé’s research 
on  dyads  shows  that  when  people  hear  about  negative 
events, they often feel compelled to share the story again to 
a  third  party,  in  order  to  process  their  own  emotions.  This 
secondary sharing is more likely to occur the more intensely 
negative  the  original  emotion.  We  see  here  that  intensely 
negative  emotions  generally  evoke  longer,  more  emotional 
comment  threads  on  Facebook.  It’s  possible  that  these 
comment  threads  are  one  way  secondary  sharing  manifests 
on  social  media,  with  mutual  friends  of  the  original  poster 

 

1470

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

expect more of the differences to be explained by perceived 
audience:  People  have  difficulty  estimating  how  many 
people  will  see  their  Facebook  posts  [3]  and  thus  may  be 
more  directly  influenced  by  other  factors  that  contribute  to 
their  mental  image  of  audience,  such  as  which  ties  are 
visible  in  their  News  Feeds  or  have  responded  in  the  past, 
rather  than  their  actual  network  size.  Future  work  should 
take 
the  poster’s  expectations  of  audience  size  and 
supportiveness into account. 
The  current  study  opens  many  avenues  for  future  research, 
particularly for longer-term repercussions of expressions of 
emotion. After you vent to your friends online, do you feel 
better? Offline research suggests that the story is not simple: 
In  some  cases,  putting  upsetting  feelings  into  words  helps 
with recovery, but it depends on the nature of the emotional 
event, and may also reactivate negative feelings (see [23,42] 
for  reviews).  Do  sociotechnical  affordances  of  the  Internet 
like reduced time pressure and lack of nonverbal cues make 
it easier to express and recover from negative experiences? 
Additional  surveys  of  people  who  have  recently  expressed 
feelings  and  received  varying  kinds  of  responses  would 
illuminate  these  answers.  In  particular,  we  do  not  yet 
understand what happens if friends don’t respond. Previous 
research  demonstrates 
that  merely  broadcasting  status 
updates  out  to  a  circle  of  friends  is  not  directly  linked  to 
improvements  in  well-being;  in  fact,  it  is  linked  to  higher 
levels of loneliness [10]. Those broadcasts must be met with 
feedback  for  people  to  reap  the  benefits  of  their  networks. 
Are  people  who  receive  supportive  comments  to  negative 
feelings more likely to post positive feelings later, indicating 
that  they  are  feeling  better?  The  providers  of  support  may 
also  experience  improvements  in  psychological  well-being 
as a result of helping, or they might feel somewhat worse as 
a result of empathizing [25]. Finally, it would be valuable to 
investigate  whether  emotional  transactions  of  this  form 
increase tie strength between the poster and the responder. 
How  social  network  properties  such  as  size  and  density 
affect  the  nature  of  responses  is  an  additional  avenue  for 
future 
receive  more  emotional 
their  networks  are  denser,  or  more 
comments  when 
backchannel messages when their audiences are larger? The 
current study demonstrates that people share more emotions 
when their networks are smaller and denser, but we do not 
know  if  smaller,  denser  networks  provide  more  emotional 
support, or if larger networks are better in this regard, having 
more people to provide support. When audiences are larger, 
potential  responders  may  have  their  own  self-presentation 
concerns,  so  may  turn  to  private  messaging  rather  than 
network-visible channels like comments to offer support. 
How  does  the  identity  of  the  responder  matter?  Does 
feedback on personal feelings come disproportionately from 
close friends and family? While one’s closest confidants are 
typically the providers of emotional support [49], in times of 
psychological  distress,  strong  ties  may  actually  exacerbate 
feelings  of  stress  or  embarrassment  [8].  The  present  study 

research.  Do  people 

Figure 5. Comment terms that occur disproportionately in 
response to negative feelings (top), and positive feelings (bottom). 

 

related 

collectively  offering  support  to  each  other  and  trying  to 
reappraise the situation.  
Intensely  negative  emotions  also  evoked  more  private 
responses  in  the  present  study.  This  may  explain  why 
previous research found that intensely lonely tweets received 
fewer  public  Twitter  replies  [30];  friends  may  have 
responded  through  private  channels  unavailable  to  the 
researchers.  Though  we  do  not  analyze  the  text  of  any 
private  messages,  the  notion  that  people  turn  to  more 
intimate,  dyadic  channels  in  times  of  sadness  is  consistent 
with previous research on social media [1,12]. 
A  fundamental  assertion  of  this  and  previous  work  is  that 
audience  composition  matters  when  people  are  considering 
sharing  their  emotions  online.  Much  previous  research 
indicates that audience size and the proportion of closer ties 
is 
the  disclosure  of  negative  emotions 
[1,12,29,35],  but  results  have  varied.  Our  findings  are 
partially  consistent  with  previous  quantitative  Facebook 
research  [35],  in  that  people  shared  more  emotions  when 
their friend networks were denser. Whether this is for self-
presentation concerns (e.g., expecting that weak ties will be 
more  likely  to  judge)  or  an  expectation  of  support  from 
strong  ties  is  left  to  future  work.  However,  our  results 
diverge from previous studies [29,35] that found a positive 
correlation  between  network  size  and  the  expression  of 
positive emotions; we found that both positive and negative 
emotions  were  expressed  less  often  in  larger  networks. 
Differences between Twitter and Facebook may account for 
some of the results: Tweets are typically public, so posting 
good  news  to  Twitter  in  effect  posts  it  to  the  world,  so 
follower count may not matter as much there. Differences in 
adoption rates may also mean that Twitter audiences are less 
likely  to  contain  the  poster’s  closest  confidants  [24].  We 

to 

 

1471

type  moderate 

tie  strength  and  relationship 

treats all commenters as equal; future work should examine 
how 
the 
relationship between emotional support provided online and 
changes  in  the  poster’s  mood,  self-esteem,  and  perceived 
social  support.  Positive  news  might  be  more  exciting  and 
fulfilling  when  a  variety  of  acquaintances  share  in  the  joy 
with likes and congratulatory comments. On the other hand, 
weak  ties  may  be  less  comfortable  expressing  empathy  in 
response  to  negative  feelings,  or  the  poster  may  interpret 
comments from weak ties as unhelpful platitudes. 
We  make  no  claims  about  the  overall  percentages  of 
emotions  expressed  on  Facebook;  we  merely  treat  the 
number of posts using the feeling annotation tool as a high-
quality  lower  bound.  In  Study  2,  when  we  compare  posts 
with  emotion  annotations  to  those  without,  the  posts 
“without”  may  still  contain  emotion.  Therefore,  it  makes  a 
relatively  conservative  baseline.  And  the  present  study  is 
correlational;  we  cannot  determine  whether  revealing 
feelings  on  Facebook  causes  friends  to  respond  in  a  more 
supportive way, or if we are simply comparing differences in 
responsiveness  by  the  friends  of  two  kinds  of  people:  the 
kind of people who post feelings, and the kind who do not. 
There  are  many  unobserved  variables  that  likely  influence 
one’s  propensity  to  disclose  personal  thoughts  online,  and 
how supportive their social network is. Teens, in particular, 
may intentionally obscure their thoughts so that parents and 
other outsiders don’t understand [5]. We control for many of 
the major factors, including age, gender, number of friends, 
and tenure on the site, but cannot directly control for factors 
like  depression,  cohesiveness  among  friends,  or  exogenous 
events.  People  who  use  the  feeling  annotation  tool  may  be 
more technologically savvy or more emotionally open than 
people who do not. Sensitivity tests repeating the regressions 
on  each  age  bucket  separately  revealed  effects  were 
qualitatively  similar,  but  unmeasured  confounds  remain. 
While  the  results  generalize  well  to  women  and  the  highly 
engaged users who chose to use the feeling annotation tool, 
caution  should  be  used  when  applying  the  results  to  other 
populations. 
We  assume  that  when  people  share  feelings  on  Facebook, 
especially  negative  ones,  that  those  feelings  are  genuine. 
Studying feedback mitigates some of these concerns; friends 
would  not  respond  so  consistently  if  they  interpreted  the 
feelings  as  disingenuous.  In  some  cases,  a  person  might 
exaggerate the extent to which they feel blue to solicit more 
sympathy,  but  perhaps  that  is  legitimately  what  he  or  she 
needs.  Previous  research  also  indicates  that  emotional 
language  in  Facebook  posts  correlates  moderately  with 
external measures of happiness [31].  
CONCLUSION 
Millions of feelings are shared on Facebook every day. The 
present  study  demonstrates  that  posts  with  explicit  feeling 
annotations,  such  as  “feeling  wonderful”  or  “feeling 
heartbroken” receive far more responses than ordinary posts. 
Positive  feelings  elicit  more  feedback  than  text  without 

 

1472

SESSION: UNPACKING SOCIAL NETWORKS

feelings,  and  negative  feelings  elicit  even  more  responses 
than positive. The nature of those responses differs, as well, 
with positive feelings receiving more likes and emotionally 
positive  comments,  and  negative  feelings  getting  longer, 
more  empathetic  comments.  Feelings  related  to  low  self-
worth heighten these effects, and are also linked to an upturn 
in  private  messages,  where  friends  can  provide  emotional 
support.  The  results  mirror  face-to-face  support  provision, 
with friends lifting each other up in times of sadness and joy. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We’d  like  to  thank  Funda  Kivran-Swaine,  Adrien  Friggeri, 
Mor  Naaman,  Michael  Bernstein,  Jeremy  Birnholtz,  Annie 
Steele, and the reviewers of this paper for their feedback. 
REFERENCES 
1.  Natalya N Bazarova, Yoon Hyung Choi, Victoria 
Schwanda Sosik, Dan Cosley, and Janis Whitlock. 
2015. Social Sharing of Emotions on Facebook: 
Channel Differences, Satisfaction, and Replies. CSCW 
'15: Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social 
Computing, 154–164. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675297 

2.  Natalya N Bazarova, Jessie G Taft, Yoon Hyung Choi, 

and Dan Cosley. 2012. Managing Impressions and 
Relationships on Facebook: Self- Presentational and 
Relational Concerns Revealed Through the Analysis of 
Language Style. Journal of Language and Social 
Psychology 32, 2, 0261927X12456384–141. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/0261927X12456384 

3.  Michael S Bernstein, Eytan Bakshy, Moira Burke, and 
Brian Karrer. 2013. Quantifying the invisible audience 
in social networks. CHI '13: Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2470658 

4.  Charles F Bond Jr. and Evan L Anderson. 1987. The 

reluctance to transmit bad news: Private discomfort or 
public display? Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology 23, 2, 176–187. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/0022-1031(87)90030-8 
5.  danah boyd and Alice Marwick. 2011. Social 
steganography: Privacy in networked publics. 
International Communication Association. 
Jonathon D Brown and Margaret A Marshall. 2001. 
Self-Esteem and Emotion: Some Thoughts About 
Feelings. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 
27, 575–584. 

6. 

7.  Moira Burke and Robert E Kraut. 2014. Growing closer 

on Facebook: Changes in tie strength through social 
network site use. CHI 2014, 4187–4196. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557094 

8.  Moira Burke and Robert Kraut. 2013. Using Facebook 

after losing a job: Differential benefits of strong and 
weak ties. CHI 2013, 1419–1430. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

http://doi.org/10.1145/2441776.2441936 

Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication. 

9.  Moira Burke, Cameron Marlow, and Thomas Lento. 
2009. Feed me: motivating newcomer contribution in 
social network sites. CHI '09: Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems. http://doi.org/10.1145/1518701.1518847 

10.  Moira Burke, Cameron Marlow, and Thomas Lento. 
2010. Social network activity and social well-being. 
CHI '10: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1909–1912. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753613 

11.  Pamara F Chang, Yoon Hyung Choi, Natalya N 
Bazarova, and Corinna E Löckenhoff. 2015. Age 
Differences in Online Social Networking: Extending 
Socioemotional Selectivity Theory to Social Network 
Sites. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 59, 
2, 221–239. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/08838151.2015.1029126 

12.  Mina Choi and Catalina L Toma. 2014. Social sharing 

through interpersonal media: Patterns and effects on 
emotional well-being. Computers in Human Behavior 
36, 530–541. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2014.04.026 

13.  Veronique Christophe and Bernard Rimé. 1997. 

Exposure to the social sharing of emotion: Emotional 
impact, listener responses and secondary social sharing. 
European Journal of Social Psychology 27, 1, 37–54.  

14.  Sheldon Cohen, Benjamin Gottlieb, and Lynn 

Underwood. 2004. Social relationships and health. 
American Psychologist 59, 8, 676. 

15.  Munmun De Choudhury, Scott Counts, and Michael 
Gamon. 2012. Not all moods are created equal! 
Exploring human emotional states in social media. 
Sixth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and 
Social Media.  

16.  Pasquale De Meo, Emilio Ferrara, Giacomo Fiumara, 
and Alessandro Provetti. 2014. On Facebook, most ties 
are weak. Communications of the ACM 57, 11. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2684442.2629438 

17.  Robin Dunbar. 1992. Neocortex size as a constraint on 
group size in primates. Journal of Human Evolution 22, 
6, 469–493. 

18.  Paul Ekman, E Richard Sorenson, and Wallace V 

Friesen. 1969. Pan-Cultural Elements in Facial Displays 
of Emotion. Science 164, 3875, 86–88. 
http://doi.org/10.1126/science.164.3875.86 

19.  Nichole Ellison, Rebecca Gray, Jessica Vitak, Cliff 

Lampe, and Andrew T Fiore. 2013. Calling all 
Facebook friends: Exploring requests for help on 
Facebook. ICWSM. 

20.  Nicole B Ellison, Jessica Vitak, Rebecca Gray, and Cliff 

Lampe. 2014. Cultivating social resources on social 
network sites: Facebook relationship maintenance 
behaviors and their role in social capital processes. 

21.  Facebook. 2015. Facebook Statistics. Retrieved July 17, 

2015 from http://newsroom.fb.com/company-info/ 
22.  Erving Goffman. 2002. The presentation of self in 

everyday life. 1959. Garden City, NY. 

23.  James Gross. 2013. Handbook of Emotion Regulation, 

Second Edition.  

24.  Keith Hampton, Lauren Sessions Goulet, Lee Rainie, 
and Kristen Purcell. 2011. Social networking sites and 
our lives. Retrieved from 
http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2011/Technology-and-
social-networks.aspx 

25.  Keith Hampton, Lee Rainie, Weixu Lu, Inyoung Shin, 
and Kristen Purcell. 2015. Social Media and the Cost of 
Caring. Pew Research Center, Washington, D.C. 

26.  Bernie Hogan. 2010. The presentation of self in the age 

of social media: distinguishing performances and 
exhibitions online. Bulletin of Science. 

27.  Alexander Jordan, Benoit Monin, Carol Dweck, 

Benjamin Lovett, Oliver John, and James Gross. 2011. 
Misery Has More Company Than People Think: 
Underestimating the Prevalence of Others(cid:1) Negative 
Emotions. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 
37, 1, 120. 

28.  Sepandar D Kamvar and Jonathan Harris. 2011. We feel 

fine and searching the emotional web. ACM, New 
York, New York, USA. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1935826.1935854 

29.  Funda Kivran-Swaine and Mor Naaman. 2011. Network 

properties and social sharing of emotions in social 
awareness streams. Proceedings of the ACM 2011 
conference on Computer supported cooperative work, 
379–382. 

30.  Funda Kivran-Swaine, Jeremy Ting, Jed R Brubaker, 

and Rannie Teodoro. 2014. Understanding Loneliness in 
Social Awareness Streams: Expressions and Responses. 
ICSWM 2014. 

31.  Adam D I Kramer. 2010. An unobtrusive behavioral 

model of gross national happiness. CHI 2010, 287–290. 
32.  Marianne LaFrance and Mahzarin Banaji. 1992. Toward 

a reconsideration of the gender-emotion relationship. 
Emotion and social behavior. 

33.  Christopher A Langston. 1994. Capitalizing on and 

coping with daily-life events: Expressive responses to 
positive events. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology 67, 6, 1112–1125. 
http://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.67.6.1112 

34.  Jean-Philippe Laurenceau, Lisa Feldman Barrett, and 

Paula R Pietromonaco. 1998. Intimacy as an 
interpersonal process: The importance of self-
disclosure, partner disclosure, and perceived partner 
responsiveness in interpersonal exchanges. Journal of 

 

1473

SESSION: UNPACKING SOCIAL NETWORKS

47.  Yi-Chia C Wang, Moira Burke, and Robert E Kraut. 

2013. Gender, topic, and audience response: An analysis 
of user-generated content on Facebook. CHI 2013. 
48.  Barry Wellman and Kenneth Frank. 2001. Network 
capital in a multi-level world: Getting support from 
personal communities. Social capital: Theory and 
research, 233–273. 

49.  Barry Wellman and Scot Wortley. 1990. Different 
Strokes from Different Folks: Community Ties and 
Social Support. American Journal of Sociology 96, 3, 
558–588. 

feelings 

 
APPENDIX: FEELING TERMS 
Positive 
(not  self-relevant):  warm,  blessed, 
amazing,  wonderful,  determined,  hopeful,  relaxed,  excited, 
happy, great, inspired, refreshed, stoked, awesome, ecstatic, 
amused,  relieved,  grateful,  pumped,  lucky,  rested,  better, 
good,  mischievous,  safe,  motivated,  fantastic,  in  love, 
focused, free, silly, satisfied, fresh, stuffed, thankful, lovely, 
optimistic,  comfortable,  peaceful,  funny,  energized,  chill, 
positive,  super,  nice,  amazed,  content,  honored,  fabulous, 
fortunate, joyful, calm, well, giddy 

 

Positive  self-relevant  feelings:  special,  accomplished, 
confident,  loved,  pretty,  creative,  proud,  sexy,  appreciated, 
beautiful,  whole,  strong,  smart,  productive,  healthy, 
complete, empowered 

 

surprised, 

Neutral  feelings  (not  self-relevant):  nostalgic,  meh, 
hungry,  thirsty,  ready,  spoiled,  human,  confused,  curious, 
crazy, 
emotional,  busy, 
challenged,  entertained,  cool,  shocked,  hot,  hyper,  full, 
awake,  drunk,  unsure,  blah,  impatient,  OK,  alive,  tipsy, 
thoughtful, undecided, goofy, evil, fine, adventurous, some, 
type, of, way, perplexed, puzzled 

restless, 

rough, 

 

Neutral self-relevant feelings: weird, different, old, normal 

 

(not 

feelings 

Negative 
self-relevant):  overwhelmed, 
annoyed,  disappointed,  sad,  exhausted,  sick,  tired,  sleepy, 
lazy,  angry,  sore,  frustrated,  yucky,  irritated,  worried, 
heartbroken,  crappy,  down,  uncomfortable,  awful,  bored, 
conflicted, pissed, off, uneasy, disgusted, stressed, anxious, 
pained,  nervous,  pissed,  guilty,  cold,  ashamed,  nauseous, 
upset, aggravated, hungover, l ow, bummed, scared, furious, 
lost, drained, stuck, miserable, terrible, fed, up, dumb, blue, 
hurt,  jealous,  mad,  grumpy,  sorry,  horrible,  bad,  worse, 
betrayed, 
in,  pain,  discouraged, 
embarrassed, sarcastic, trapped, homesick 

concerned,  numb, 

 

Negative  self-relevant  feelings:  weak,  nerdy,  helpless, 
depressed, 
lonely,  broken,  defeated,  hopeless,  alone, 
unappreciated,  worthless,  unloved,  fat,  insecure,  stupid, 
devastated, unwanted, incomplete, awkward, unimportant 

Personality and Social Psychology 74, 5, 1238–1251. 
http://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.74.5.1238 

35.  Han Lin, William Tov, and Lin Qiu. 2014. Emotional 

disclosure on social networking sites: The role of 
network structure and psychological needs. Computers 
in Human Behavior 41, 342–350. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2014.09.045 

36.  Ruoyun Lin and Sonja Utz. 2015. The emotional 

responses of browsing Facebook: Happiness, envy, and 
the role of tie strength. Computers in Human Behavior 
52, 29–38. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2015.04.064 

37.  Peter V Marsden. 1990. Network data and 

measurement. Annual review of sociology 16, 435–463. 
38.  Mor Naaman, Jeffrey Boase, and Chih-Hui Lai. 2010. Is 
it really about me?: message content in social awareness 
streams. Proceedings of the 2010 ACM conference on 
Computer supported cooperative work, 189–192. 

39.  Mark W Newman, Debra Lauterbach, Sean A Munson, 
Paul Resnick, and Margaret Morris. 2011. It's not that I 
don‘t have problems, I’m just not putting them on 
Facebook: challenges and opportunities in using online 
social networks for health. CSCW 2011. 

40.  James Pennebaker and Cindy Chung. 2007. Expressive 
writing, emotional upheavals, and health. Handbook of 
health psychology, 263–284. 

41.  James Pennebaker, Martha Francis, and Roger Booth. 
2001. Linguistic inquiry and word count: LIWC 2001. 
Word Journal Of The International Linguistic 
Association. 

42.  James Pennebaker, Emmanuelle Zech, and Bernard 

Rimé. 2001. Disclosing and sharing emotion: 
Psychological, social, and health consequences. 
Handbook of bereavement …. 

43.  Harry T Reis, Shannon M Smith, Cheryl L Carmichael, 

et al. 2010. Are you happy for me? How sharing 
positive events with others provides personal and 
interpersonal benefits. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology 99, 2, 311–329. 
http://doi.org/10.1037/a0018344 

44.  Bernard Rimé. 2009. Emotion Elicits the Social Sharing 

of Emotion: Theory and Empirical Review. Emotion 
Review 1, 1, 60–85. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/1754073908097189 

45.  Georg Simmel. 1955. Conﬂict and the web of group 

afﬁliations. Trans. K. Wolff and R. Bendix. New York: 
Free Press. 

46.  Catalina Toma. 2013. Feeling Better But Doing Worse: 
Effects of Facebook Self-Presentation on Implicit Self-
Esteem and Cognitive Task Performance. Media 
Psychology. 

 
 

 

1474

