CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Jokebox: Coordinating Shared 
Encounters in Public Spaces 

Mara Balestrini1, Paul Marshall2, Raymundo Cornejo³, Monica Tentori³, Jon Bird4  

and Yvonne Rogers2

1 Intel ICRI Cities, University College London, UK, m.balestrini@cs.ucl.ac.uk  

2 UCL Interaction Centre, University College London, UK, {paul.marshall, y.rogers}@ucl.ac.uk  
³ Department of Computer Science, CICESE, Ensenada, Mexico,{rcornejo, mtentori}@cicese.mx 

4Department of Computer Science, City University London, UK, jon.bird@city.ac.uk  

ABSTRACT 
Eye contact is crucial to shared encounters in public spaces. 
However, most urban technologies that aim to foster social 
interaction  tend  to  rely  on  screens,  directing  a  significant 
proportion of the users’ attention towards the device rather 
than to those with whom the encounter is shared. We pre-
sent the design and evaluation of the Jokebox, a lightweight 
technology  that  requires  two  passers-by  to  coordinate  ac-
tions to hear a joke. In three in the wild studies at different 
locations  we  found  that  our  design  supported  micro-level 
coordination in a consistent manner: by encouraging people 
to make eye contact and by using audible jokes, users en-
gaged in interactions that often led to further conversation 
and  laughter.  We  describe  how  opportunities  for  macro-
level  coordination  were  key  to  the  success  of  the  installa-
tion, but varied by context. Finally, we present design im-
plications for considering both the micro and macro levels 
of social coordination.  
Author Keywords 
Public display; coordination; audio interface; in the wild 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous;  
INTRODUCTION 
Novel  interactive  devices  are  increasingly  populating  the 
urban landscape, typically with the aim of increasing  effi-
ciency  and  productivity  through  processes  automation  [5], 
but often reducing opportunities to interact with others. For 
example, in finding our way around the city using a naviga-
tion system we may not ask strangers for directions, or by 
using a flight check-in kiosk we are unlikely to engage in 
small  talk  with  the  counter  assistant.  When  focused  on 
screens and devices that deliver visual content, we also lose 
Permission to make digital or  hard copies  of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  the  author(s)  must  be 
honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or 
republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
from 
specific  permission 
Permissions@acm.org.  
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA  
Copyright  is  held  by  the  owner/author(s).  Publication  rights  licensed 
to ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00   
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2835203 

fee.  Request  permissions 

and/or 

a 

the opportunity to make  eye  contact with  others, a behav-
iour known to be crucial in the organisation of shared en-
counters [2, 11]. 

Figure 1. Two passers-by interacting with the Jokebox. 

Face-to-face social interaction is associated with the cohe-
sion of communities and the development of social capital 
[30]. At an individual level, interacting with others increas-
es  happiness  and  wellbeing  [15].  Encounters  that  include 
humour  and  conversation  can  support  psychological  and 
physiological  health  [32,  8,  18].  This  suggests  that  such 
social interactions should be encouraged. 
However,  facilitating  social  interaction  in  public  spaces  is 
hard to achieve [8, 22, 34, 11, 27, 18]. This is in part due to 
the fact that city dwellers often adopt a “blasé attitude” [34] 
or  civil  inattention  [11]  to  separate  themselves  from  the 
plethora  of  stimuli  available  in  cities  [22].  Strangers  typi-
cally glance at each other and then look away demonstrat-
ing that they are aware of each others’ presence, but do not 
wish to interact. These rules of non-interaction seem to be 
accentuated when we share constrained spaces [22, 11] or a 
routine with a stranger. Milgram [22] coined the term “fa-
miliar  stranger”,  which  had  previously  been  discussed  by 
Jacobs  [16]  to  refer  to  those  people  who  we  frequently 
encounter  (e.g.  at  the  bus  stop  every  morning)  but  never 
interact  with.  He  also  noted  that  there  are  exceptions  to 
these  rules  of  non-interaction:  if  we  come  across  familiar 
strangers outside the everyday routine (e.g. while away on 
holiday)  or  in  the  presence  of  a  highly  unexpected  event 
that serves as an “ice breaker”.  
A number of researchers have investigated how urban tech-
nology  can  act  as  an  “ice  breaker”  facilitating  shared  en-
counters  [37]  in  public  spaces  [9,  35,  19].  A  prevailing 
approach  has  been  to  deploy  interactive  displays  and 

38

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

screens [9] delivering a wide range of visual contents [1, 4, 
21, 33, 35, 36]. Many urban technologies require interaction 
by one person (or a group) to play a game (e.g. [19, 26]). 
They are often costly and hard to deploy (particularly in the 
case  of  media  facades  and  augmented  furniture),  needing 
power and connection to the internet, which makes it diffi-
cult to easily deploy them at different locations. Typically, 
their  content  offers  limited  ways  to  elicit  “synchronous 
social  interactivity”,  such  as  face-to-face  encounters  [36]. 
Moreover,  their  interfaces  tend  to  rely  on  interaction  with 
visual information, which means that a significant propor-
tion  of  the  users’  attention  must  be  directed  towards  the 
device  rather  than  to  those  with  whom  the  encounter  is 
shared. Some researchers have begun to explore how audio 
[19,  28]  may  promote  social  interactions  in  public  spaces, 
but  the  use  of  audio  to  mediate  synchronised  cooperation 
between pairs of people remains largely unexplored [17].  
Sharing a social encounter can often lead to a positive expe-
rience [8, 18], especially if it is brought about by an unex-
pected  [22]  or  wondrous  [28]  event.  However,  given  the 
sophisticated strategies that people use to not interact with 
others, it is important that interaction with any intervention 
is  discretional  [27].  How  can  urban  interfaces  enable  eye 
contact  and  lead  to  shared  encounters,  while  at  the  same 
time  protecting  people’s personal  space  and  therefore  eas-
ing social apprehension? To address this question we pro-
pose the Jokebox, a novel lightweight technology that can 
attract two passers-by to look at each other and coordinate a 
sequence of actions in order to hear a joke.  
We followed a qualitative approach to evaluate the Jokebox 
in  an  in-the-wild-study  [31]  at  three  different  locations  in 
Mexico:  a  bus  stop,  a  park,  and  a  shopping  centre.  Our 
results demonstrate that designing the Jokebox to encourage 
micro-level coordination facilitated a wide range of shared 
encounters that were quite consistent in their structure. By 
encouraging people to make eye contact and by using audio 
rather than having the content appear on a screen the system 
engaged  them  in  a  process  of  face-to-face  interaction  that 
often  led  to  further  conversation  and  laughter.  We  also 
found how opportunities for macro-level coordination were 
crucial to the success of the installation, but varied widely. 
Firstly, the context in which the Jokebox was situated sig-
nificantly  influenced  how  well  this  kind  of  sequencing 
worked; and secondly we observed how strangers champi-
oned  interactions  by  guiding  and  encouraging  others  to 
engage with the Jokebox, and how returning users and local 
characters appropriated it for their own purposes. Our con-
tributions inform the design and deployment of novel inter-
faces that aim to support shared encounters in public places. 
BACKGROUND 
One  of  the  main  characteristics  of  a  city  is  its  ability  to 
create  opportunities  for  encounters  among  strangers  [16]. 
This has long inspired researchers and artists to design and 
deploy urban interfaces aimed at encouraging such encoun-

ters  and  ultimately  facilitating  community  connectedness 
[9, 21, 28, 35].  
A  prevailing  approach  for  urban  technologies  has  been  to 
deploy  interactive  displays  and  media  facades  that  deliver 
visual  information.  These  studies  highlight  a  number  of 
contextual factors that influence how people organise their 
interactions  with  and  around  the  display.  We  characterise 
these  as  the  macro-level  coordination  of  behaviour  to  dis-
tinguish  them  from  the  micro-level  coordination  of  joint 
actions with the interface itself. For example, Brignull and 
Rogers  [4]  found  that  social  activity  around  the  device 
could create a ‘honeypot effect’, drawing attention to it and 
encouraging  others  to  engage.  Fischer  and  Hornecker  [9] 
suggested  that  physical  features  such  as  walls  and  pillars 
can  provide  ‘comfort  spaces’,  where  people  can  see  the 
display but are protected from having to join in the interac-
tion.  The  placement  of  a  technology  intervention  can  also 
have  an  impact  on  how  people  interact  with  it,  but  social 
context  can  be  more  important  that  physical  location  [1]. 
O’Hara et al. [26] observed that an unfamiliar audience can 
discourage interactions and create a sense of social inhibi-
tion for some people, although “comperes” [26] and “emer-
gent  champions”  [1]  may  help  legitimise  participation  by 
members  of  the  public.  In  contrast,  for  “local  characters” 
familiarity with the place and situation may promote inter-
actions  by  reducing  social  apprehension  [26].  Other  re-
searchers have found that people may be willing to engage 
with a novel device once they have learnt how to do it. This 
can  occur  either  by  cooperative  interaction  or  by  first  ob-
serving others and then attempting to interact, often leading 
to  “chains  of  interaction”  [29].  Furthermore,  it  has  been 
argued that passers-by tend to find technology that has been 
deployed in public spaces interesting, which sometimes can 
enable social interaction [21, 29]. 
Studies of micro-level coordination with screen-based tech-
nologies have highlighted some of the challenges of inter-
acting together. Peltonen et al. [29] report that most people 
who participated with their CityWall application worked in 
parallel rather than coordinating, and sometimes came into 
conflict because of a lack of awareness of others’ activity. 
However, users also playfully appropriated the application, 
for  example,  throwing  images  at  each  other,  creating  an 
impromptu game of Pong. Marshall et al. [20] describe how 
strangers  would  often  come  into  conflict  while  trying  to 
simultaneously use a tabletop interface designed to be used 
by  a  coherent  group.  Hinrichs  and  Carpendale  [13]  report 
how people learned how to use a public tabletop interface 
through mentoring and demonstration. 
A  different  approach  to  interactive  screens  has  been  to 
deploy augmented artefacts, from digitally enhanced furni-
ture  [25]  to  “objects  of  wonderment”  [28].  More  recently, 
researchers who deployed a playful intervention based on a 
network of bespoke trees and birds suggested that recruiting 
and  incentivising  people  to  “check  in”  together  in  public 

39

spaces encouraged shared encounters and community cohe-
sion [19]. 
The  potential  for  using  sound  as  an  interaction  output  to 
facilitate  social  interactions  in  public  has  rarely  been  ex-
plored.  In  contrast  to  a  visual  display,  people  cannot  turn 
away from a sound and are often drawn to its origin [17]. 
Furthermore,  while  most  urban  technologies  just  require 
one  person  to  trigger  an  interaction,  fewer  designs  have 
explored how to create shared encounters by requiring two 
people to act in tandem or by facilitating eye contact. How 
can  novel  interfaces,  which  are  broadly  accessible  to  any-
body, engage passers-by to do something together in public 
without  being  self-conscious?  In  the  next  section  we  de-
scribe  the  design  and  implementation  of  the  Jokebox,  a 
prototype aimed to encourage eye contact and foster shared 
encounters in public spaces. 
THE JOKEBOX 
The  Jokebox  is  a  simple  technology  prototype  aimed  to 
attract  passers-by  and  provide  an  opportunity  for  them  to 
engage with both the installation and each other. Based on 
Ellis  et  al.’s  [7]  CSCW  taxonomy,  the  Jokebox  enables  a 
synchronous face-to-face interaction, where both input and 
output are situated at the same place and time. The design 
rationale is informed by the literature review, which identi-
fies that: 

-  A  prevailing  approach  to  urban  technologies  has 
been  to  design  large  displays  for  individual  use  that 
deliver  visual  content,  which  often  prevents  people 
from making eye contact [1, 4, 9, 21, 26, 29, 33, 35, 
36]. We therefore chose to design (i) a tangible physi-
cal  affordance  that  does  not  include  a  screen,  (ii)  an 
audio instruction to draw in passers-by, which requires 
two people to coordinate their actions by pressing two 
buttons at the same time; and (iii) a blinking light to 
attract attention and help with the coordination.  
- The use of audio, which is a shared media and can 
easily attract people, has been largely unexplored [17]. 
Hence  we  included  (iv)  an  audio  instruction  and  a 
short  spoken  joke  to  encourage  people  to  listen  to-
gether,  look  at  each  other,  and  maybe  even  laugh  or 
talk.  
-  Public  displays  and  augmented  furniture  are  often 
costly and require Internet connection and/or electrici-
ty  [1,  4,  9].  We  instead  designed  a  lightweight  and 
portable installation that can be easily deployed at dif-
ferent outdoor locations. 
- While in public space, people employ sophisticated 
strategies  to  avoid  interacting  with  others  [8,  22,  34, 
11,  18,  25]  and  technology  should  not  cause  social 
awkwardness [27]. We therefore designed the Jokebox 
to be non intrusive and protect people’s personal spac-
es.  The  installation  comprises  two  wooden  boxes  (1 
meter high) with arcade buttons at the top and embed-
ded speakers. Both boxes can be paired within a dis-
tance of 2 to 5 meters. However, an unexpected event 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

may  encourage  people  to  overcome  the  rule  of  non-
interaction  [22].  Therefore  the  Jokebox  uses  unusual 
content such as jokes to foster social encounters. 

More  specifically,  the  Jokebox  was  designed  to  attract 
passers-by and incentivise them to coordinate actions. Each 
box can detect people nearby and invites them to interact by 
playing an audio file with the instructions: “If you want to 
hear a joke, press both buttons at the same time”. Once the 
boxes have played the instructions, they go into a playing 
mode. In this mode, two people have a three seconds win-
dow  of  time  to  press  both  buttons  at  the  same  time;  thus 
they  have  to  coordinate  explicitly.  Each  button  emits  a 
blinking light pattern to indicate that the play session is on 
going;  the  blinking  pattern  increases  its  speed  within  the 
last 10 seconds to indicate the time window is almost over. 
The boxes play a joke when being pressed synchronously. 
Otherwise  an  error  audio  file  is  triggered.  Moreover,  the 
device was designed to make it clear what users should do 
with it, but why they should use it, who had created it, and 
why it was installed in a particular context was ambiguous 
[10] and left to their own interpretation. 

XBee module 

RGB LED Strip 

PIR module 

Portable 
speaker 

Push button 

 

Figure 2. Technical implementation of the Jokebox. 

Implementation 
The  Jokebox  was  implemented  using  a  master-slave  com-
munication (see figure 2). The master box (boxM) sets the 
states of the game and sends the actions over the slave box 
(boxS). We used an Arduino Uno board integrated with an 
MP3 shield and a Jokebox shield. The Jokebox shield com-
prises  an  XBee  antenna  for  communication,  a  PIR  sensor 
for  motion  detection,  and  an  arcade  pushbutton  with  an 
RGB  LED  strip.  Each  box  shield  notifies  the  other  box 
when it detects movement and the boxM establishes the state 
of the game (i.e. detect people, play audio file instructions, 
on  going  game  session,  end  of  game,  play  audio  file  with 
result of game) and sends the action to perform to boxS. The 
MP3 shield decodes the MP3 files. For example, when the 
boxM establishes the state “play audio file instructions”, the 
MP3 shield plays the audio file with the instructions “If you 
want to hear the Joke, press both buttons at the same time”. 
Similarly, the MP3 shield decodes and plays the MP3 files 
for  error,  and  jokes  when  it  is  either  a  failure  or  success 
attempt.  The  decoded  MP3  files  are  stored  in  a  microSD 

40

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

card  connected  to  the  MP3  shield  and  played  through  a 
portable  speaker.  Each  box  weighed  less  than  three  kilo-
grams  and  was  powered  by  Li-Polymer  batteries  that  pro-
vided up to five hours of autonomy. This made the Jokebox 
particularly easy to deploy at diverse locations even if there 
was  no  electricity  available.  The  cost  of  the  device  was 
below US $250. 
Pilot study 
To test whether people could coordinate their actions with 
the  Jokebox,  we  built  a  working  prototype  and  informally 
evaluated it with eight participants (4 female, 4 male) who 
ranged in age (23 to 50). The device was deployed indoors 
at a university campus and pairs were invited to play with it 
for  about  10  minutes.  We  conducted  observations  and  in-
terviews, and analysed the data in a debriefing session. The 
results  were  classified  in  terms  of:  interaction  experience, 
and design and content issues.  
Interaction experience. All participants interacted with the 
Jokebox at least five times per session even when they had 
successfully  triggered  a  joke.  They  communicated  with 
each  other  to  coordinate  action,  discussed  the  jokes,  and 
laughed  when  the  interaction  was  successful.  They  under-
stood  that  they  needed  to  press  both  buttons  at  the  same 
time (as indicated in the instructions) but half of them didn't 
understand that the action had to take place while the but-
tons were blinking. 
Design and content issues. Half of the participants associat-
ed  the  red  buttons  with  terms  such  as  “danger”  or  “emer-
gency”  and  suggested  that  they  wouldn’t  press  them  in  a 
public space. But they thought that the blinking feature was 
attractive and invited them to interact. Although they con-
sidered  the  audio  volume  was  appropriate  for  the  setting, 
three of them suggested that the voice recording was “too 
fast”. All participants indicated that they liked the laughter 
at  the  end  of  the  jokes  (e.g.  “It  makes  you  laugh!”).  Six 
understood  that  the  error  noise  meant  that  they  had  done 
something wrong. Half of them suggested that it would be 
more comfortable if the boxes were higher. 
Content 
To ensure the content delivered by the Jokebox was locally 
meaningful, we used Facebook to crowdsource jokes (along 
with a rating from 1 to 5, from “not funny” to “very funny”) 
among members of the community. Three theatre students 
with local accents were recruited to record the 25 jokes with 
the highest ratings and the instructions in Spanish.  
IN THE WILD STUDY 
We conducted an in-the-wild deployment  [31] in a city in 
the  Northwest  of  Mexico.  The  findings  from  the  initial 
study were used to inform the design of the Jokebox. Aes-
thetic changes were made (e.g. blue push buttons) and the 
threshold  for  interaction  (pressing  both  buttons)  was  ex-
tended  from  one  to  three  seconds  to  allow  more  time  to 
succeed  in  triggering  a  joke.  The  shape  and  height  of  the 

boxes,  and  sensors  were  adjusted  to  provide  a  better  user 
experience.  
LOCATIONS 
We  followed  a  rapid  ethnography  [23]  approach  to  select 
where in the public spaces to deploy the Jokebox and eval-
uate it in situ. Over a two-week period, four observers con-
ducted  18  hours  of  direct  observation  at  six  of  the  most 
salient places in the city, on both weekdays and weekends 
and at different times of the day. We analysed the data at a 
debriefing  session  and  chose  three  places  based  on  their 
potential to attract different types of people, enable diverse 
activities  (playing,  waiting,  passing  by,  etc.),  and  social 
interactions.  The  locations  were  also  selected  for  their 
pathways  and  walking  areas  that  offer  the  potential  for  
“incidental interactions” [1]. The three settings were: 
(i)  A Park - a recreational area that attracts a wide range of 

individuals, including children, older people, sellers, 
families and couples that gather to eat, play or walk.  
(ii)  A shopping centre – a bustling place that attracts fami-
lies, individuals and teenagers who gather in groups. 

(iii) A bus stop - a quiet place in the entrance of a university 

campus where students and university staff wait for a bus 
to go to work or study.  

METHOD 
Rapid  ethnography  [23]  was  again  used  to  evaluate  how 
passers-by  interacted  with  the  Jokebox.  The  device  was 
installed five times at each location during two-hour slots, 
for  a  total  of  ten  hours  at  each  place.  We  recorded  each 
deployment, accounting for a total of 30 hours of footage. 
During each deployment two observers collected qualitative 
data in a covert manner, sometimes mixing among partici-
pants to hear their conversations and take a closer look as 
they  interacted  with  the  Jokebox.  They  also  made  field 
notes  and  sketches,  and  took  photos.  The  same  observers 
were  assigned  to  the  same  locations  throughout  the  de-
ployments to control for returning interactors. Where possi-
ble, observers took notes from informal interviews conduct-
ed in situ with participants. 
We analysed the video footage using an interaction analysis 
approach [12]. This method is appropriate to evaluate social 
interactions  in  natural  environments.  Researchers  focused 
on sequences of behaviours and on how other objects and 
actions  in  the  context  affected  the  interactions  [12].  Inter-
esting  sequences  were  transcribed  and  triangulated  using 
the data provided by the observers.  
Deployment 
(i)  The  Revolucion  park  is  a  large  public  green  space  of 
about one acre located near the city centre. The park is open 
to the public all the time but is significantly busier during 
weekends. It comprises three key areas: the eating area, the 
playing area, and the main kiosk. The eating area contains 
communal  tables  with  seating  and  four  food  kiosks.  The 
space is mainly occupied by groups and used as a pathway 
to other areas in the park. While families and groups engage 

41

in  conversation  as  they  enjoy  their  food,  individuals  who 
shared  a  table  with  strangers  often  focus  on  their  mobile 
phones  and  avoid  interacting  with  others.  The  playground 
includes  games  for  children  and  five  communal  tables.  It 
attracts  families  with  children  and  some  couples  and  is 
considerably  louder  than  the  eating  area.  The  kiosk  area 
comprises a large kiosk and a number of benches. This area 
of  the  park  is  often  frequented  by  ice-cream  sellers  and 
other  pedlars  (that  are  akin  to  local  characters,  cf.  [26]). 
Many already know each other, and frequently take breaks 
and talk to each other.  
We placed the Jokebox on a central pathway at the intersec-
tion  of  the  playing  area  and  a  green  area,  in  front  of  the 
kiosk – that would ensure a flow of people encountering it. 
We collected data (footage and observations) for a total of 
ten hours over three consecutive weekends both during the 
morning  and  the  afternoon.  We  indexed  85  sequences  of 
interactions of which 19 were chains of interactions and 15 
occurred as a result of championing provided by individuals 
and  groups.  Interactions  varied  from  five  seconds  to  play 
sessions extending for 20 minutes. Approximately 70% of 
the users were children, 25% were adults and older adults, 
and the remainder were teenagers.  
(ii) The Macroplaza is a large semi open-air shopping cen-
tre.  It  comprises  a  variety  of  shops,  a  cinema  and  a  food 
court.  While  families  and  individuals  walk  around  the 
shopping area and the food court, groups of teenagers and 
other  individuals  frequently  gather  in  front  of  the  cinema, 
an area that is mainly used as a meeting point. In front of 
the cinema are a large flowerbed, two benches and two mall 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

kiosks. People use the flowerbed to wait for others (a com-
fort space (cf. [9]). This area is particularly busy on Satur-
days and Sundays between 6 and 11pm, and average wait-
ing times range from 5 to 15 minutes. While waiting, those 
who  are  in  groups  tend  to  engage  in  conversation  while 
those who are by themselves look at their mobile phones. 
We deployed the Jokebox next to a lamppost between the 
entrance to the cinema and the flowerbed (as it was a focal 
point for groups passing by) for three consecutive weekends 
from 6 to 11pm. This location was visible to those waiting 
but  people  who  went  from  the  parking  site  into  the  shop-
ping  area  also  transited  it.  We  indexed  69  sequences  of 
interactions: 29 were frugal or incomplete (e.g. pressing one 
button and leaving), 25 occurred as a result of championing 
provided  by  others  who  had  already  played  or  followed 
from a chain of interactions, and 15 occurred among pairs 
and groups.  
(iii) The bus stop is located at the main entrance of a gradu-
ate research centre, which extends through hilly terrain. The 
space has a semi-circular shape with benches on each side. 
We  chose  this  bus  stop  as  it  provided  an  opportunity  to 
evaluate  the  Jokebox  in  a  physically  constrained  semi-
public  space  where  colleagues  and  strangers  wait  for  the 
bus  to  be  taken  to  the  on  campus.  There  is  only  one  bus 
service  that  comes  approximately  every  15  to  20  minutes 
but it is unreliable meaning many have to wait. 
We deployed the Jokebox at one of the entrances to the bus 
stop, and each box was located to one side of the pathway 
that  goes  through  the  semi-circle.  We  collected  data  from 

Study 
Location 

Affordances 

of space 

Type of 
visitors 

Activities 

Micro-level 
coordination 

Macro-level coordination 
Context 

Park 

 

Shopping 

centre 

 

Bus stop 

 

Outdoor, public 
space. Jokebox 
was placed on a 
pathway at the 
intersection of a 
playing area a 
green area, and 
a kiosk. 

Outdoor, semi-
public space. 
Jokebox was 
placed between 
the entrance to 
the cinema and 
a flowerbed. 
Semi-indoors, 
semi-public 
space. Benches 
on each side and 
pathway in the 
middle. 

Children, 
adults (par-
ents, local 
sellers, 
passers-by), 
and teenag-
ers. 

Groups of 
teenagers, 
families 
with chil-
dren, and 
adults. 

Graduate 
students, 
university 
staff. 

Playing, 
eating, 
talking, 
walking by, 
selling. 

Walking by, 
shopping, 
waiting. 

Waiting, 
walking by. 

Making eye con-
tact and counting 
to three or shout-
ing. Returning 
users established 
new forms of 
coordination. 

Making eye con-
tact and counting 
to three. 
 

Making eye con-
tact and counting 
to three. 
 
 

Playful environment. 
Children facilitated 
chains of interaction. 
Jokes attracted audienc-
es creating honey-pot 
effects. Incidental inter-
actions fostered curiosi-
ty and engagement. 

Competing stimuli 
caused display deafness 
(noise, signs and blink-
ing lights). People 
waiting at comfort 
places learnt to play 
through social learning. 
Quiet waiting space. 
Incidental interactions 
created anxiety. Social 
inhibition due to physi-
cal proximity. 

Table 1. Summary of findings from all three sites where the Jokebox was deployed. 

42

Championing 
Emergent champi-
oning by children 
and parents. Oppor-
tunistic champion-
ing by local charac-
ters: clown, man 
giving away pup-
pies, sweets seller. 

Emergent champi-
oning by groups of 
teenagers, parents 
and an adult. 

Opportunistic 
championing by 
local character: bus 
driver  

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

observations and footage during ten hours in three consecu-
tive  deployments  carried  out  in  weekdays  (between  9am 
and  2pm).  We  indexed  65  sequences  of  interactions  of 
which 42 were incidental and the remaining 23 were either 
encouraged  by  championing  or  by  groups  of  friends  who 
walked by the bus stop or were waiting for the bus. There 
were never more than eight people at the bus stop, and for 
long periods of time there were only one or two individuals 
waiting. 
FINDINGS 
The data from each of the three sites were analysed using 
two  broad  themes:  micro-level  and  macro-level  coordina-
tion.  This  provides  a  framing  for  how  different  aspects  of 
coordination  took  place.  Micro  includes  the  behaviours 
enacted by users in order to interact with the Jokebox while 
macro refers to factors associated with the broader context 
of interaction and the forms of championing carried out by 
individuals who drew others to play with the device. Table 
1 summarises the findings from each of the three locations 
categorized in terms of the space, types of visitors, activi-
ties and the forms of coordination used. 

Figure 3. Each thumbnail represents a paired interaction 

mediated by Jokebox (in yellow squares). 

 

Micro-level coordination 
There was a pattern in the fine-grained ways in which peo-
ple coordinated behaviours to play with the Jokebox in all 
three settings. To press both buttons at the same time and 
successfully trigger a joke, 80% of the users would stand by 
each box in the park, make eye contact and count to three. 
By  enabling  eye  contact  this  coordination  strategy  turned 
out to be a powerful “ice breaker”, allowing people to easi-
ly communicate even if they had never talked before. Con-
versations  that  began  with  this  coordination  often  led  to 
more  extended  ones.  The  remaining  20%,  who  were  typi-
cally  children,  would  either  look  at  the  buttons  and  press 
them as soon as they started blinking or shout at each other 

43

Figure 4. Chains of interaction enabled by parents and children. 

“now!”  to  press  them  at  the  same  time.  Similarly,  most 
people at the shopping centre and the bus stop coordinated 
their  behaviour  to  press  the  buttons  at  the  same  time  by 
making eye contact and counting to three. This “ice break-
ing social protocol” was used by some who had started to 
explain to others how to use the installation by acting like 
“champions”  (see  figure  4  and  5).  For  example,  Figure  8 
shows how a bus driver explained how the Jokebox worked 
to a lady waiting there. He convinced her to play with him 
and guided the interaction by making eye contact with her 
and counting from one to three.  
Macro-level coordination 
A more course grain level of analysis was also conducted to 
examine the effects of context, championing and appropria-
tion of the Jokebox. 
Context. In the park, we observed that the interactions with 
the  Jokebox  were  constant  and  cheerful.  Children  were 
easily  drawn  to  the  device  and  encouraged  others  to  play. 
Other  passers-by  approached  the  Jokebox  because  they 
were curious to find out what it was. People approached the 
interactive space and tried to understand what it was before 
attempting  to  use  it.  In  six  sequences,  these  interactions 
enabled  conversation  between  visitors  and  resulted  in  a 
honeypot effect that attracted others. When curiosity led to 
active  exploration,  a  chain  of  interactions  based  on  social 
learning would begin.  
We  also  observed  several  instances  of  ‘incidental  interac-
tions’ in the park. While not all led to direct engagement by 
those who triggered the sensors, they tended to draw atten-
tion from others in the vicinity (see Figure 3). In an average 
play  session,  we  observed  players  triggering  at  least  five 
jokes. This  created an opportunity for a small audience to 
gather around the JokeBox. In all cases people would react 
to  the  jokes  by  looking  at  each  other  and  laughing  when 
they  were  perceived  as  being  funny  or  by  mocking  those 
that were “too silly”. 
The shopping centre was a loud environment crowded with 
displays  and  luminous  signs  (cf.  [3])  where  the  Jokebox 
didn’t  stand  out  as  much  -  a  phenomenon  that  might  be 
characterised as display deafness (cf. [24]). A large number 
of  individuals  walked  past  and  barely  noticed  it.  People 
were more likely to look at the Jokebox when the buttons 
were  blinking  or  when  others  where  interacting  with  it  (a 
honeypot effect, cf. [4]). Although this attracted passers-by, 
in  80%  of  the  sequences  they  wouldn’t  interfere  with  the 

ongoing session, but rather waited for their turn or left. We 
observed that people behaved differently if they were wait-
ing  or  just  walking  by:  while  the  latter  were  less  keen  to 
explore and more likely to leave immediately if they failed 
to trigger a joke, those who had been waiting at the flower-
bed  were  more  likely  to  spend  time  watching  how  others 
interacted and behave as instructors later (emergent cham-
pions,  cf.  [1]).  Over  two  thirds  of  the  interactions  among 
strangers occurred when there were children involved. 
There were two main groups of people who interacted with 
the Jokebox in the shopping mall: children with their par-
ents who were walking by and teenagers who were waiting 
in front of the cinema. We observed that as families walked 
by,  children  were  attracted  to  the  Jokebox.  However,  par-
ents,  who  were  leading  the  way,  conversing  or  looking  at 
the  shops,  typically  ignored  the  installation  and  prevented 
the children from interacting by pulling them away as they 
walked.  The  second  group  comprised  those  who  were  sit-
ting at the bench looking at the installation and could hear 
the instructions being triggered by passers-by. However, as 
the  flowerbed  provided  a  comfort  space  [9]  they  did  not 
immediately  stand  up  to  play  with  it  or  only  engaged  in 
brief interactions (e.g. 50 seconds).  

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

At the bus stop, frequent incidental interactions [1] caused 
anxiety among those who were waiting for the bus. Because 
the two boxes were deployed at each side of the pathway, 
every time someone walked between the devices they trig-
gered the instructions. However, 60% of those walking by 
were using headsets, chatting with others or on the phone, 
which meant that they didn’t notice the instruction (display 
deafness,  cf.  [24]).  We  identified  a  few  individuals  who 
were sitting alone and stood up and left the bus stop, seem-
ingly annoyed by the constant noise. 
Furthermore,  the  number  of  people  available  at  this  site 
seemed to hinder the number of interactions. For example, 
in 14 sequences where there were only two people waiting 
at the bus stop, only one pair interacted with the Jokebox. 
Nevertheless,  we  identified  that  direct  interaction  with  the 
installation  wasn’t  always  necessary  to  foster  shared  en-
counters  among  strangers.  In  almost  all  cases,  although 
pairs did not play with the Jokebox they briefly talked about 
it. An exemplar sequence is illustrated in Figure 6: a lady 
was sitting at the bench (A, blue) and when a man stood by 
the installation an instruction was triggered. They looked at 
each other and smiled. Five seconds later, she stood up and 
walked towards the Jokebox. As they spoke, he discovered 
the other box and pointed it out to her but she was too shy 
to press it. One minute later she walked away smiling (E). 
The man sat at the bench and used his mobile phone (F). 

 

Figure 5. Emergent champions drawing others to interact with 

the Jokebox at the shopping centre. 

 

There  were  16  sequences  where  people  played  with  the 
Jokebox following chains of interactions. In such cases they 
would  observe  others  as  they  played,  learn  how  the  tech-
nology worked and give it a try. We identified that laughter, 
both  from  interactors  and  from  the  audio  content,  was  a 
driver for engagement and created a honey-pot effect [4]. In 
these situations people engaged in conversations about the 
jokes  and  discussed  how  they  thought  the  technology 
worked. 

44

by the Jokebox at the bus stop.  

Figure 6. An interaction between a lady and a man mediated 

 
 
Championing.  Chains  of  interactions  were  started  through 
different forms of emergent and opportunistic championing 
in all sites. In the park the children, parents and local char-
acters took on the role. Children were easily drawn to the 
Jokebox  and  attracted  others  to  play  with  it  by  providing 
instructions, starting game sessions or acting as demonstra-
tors.  For  example,  figure  3  illustrates  a  typical  sequence 
comprising a pair of children who initiate a chain of interac-
tions and a honey-pot effect. A more explicit type of emer-
gent  championing  occurred  when  a  boy,  who  after  having 
played repeatedly with the device, asked passers-by if they 
wanted  to  "hear  a  joke".  When  people  accepted  he  taught 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

ing  others  to  use  it.  The  clown  even  identified  one  of  the 
observers and offered to become a “compere” demonstrat-
ing how to use the device to passers-by. In three sequences 
children  and  families  approached  the  man  giving  away 
puppies  to  ask  about  the  Jokebox.  He  showed  them  the 
puppies as he explained how to use it, and they proceeded 
to  play.  In  other  three  sequences,  the  clown  and  the  man 
selling  ice  cream  also  provided  information  about  the  de-
vice and invited children to play. While informing passers-
by  was  an  effective  way  of  fostering  interactions,  inviting 
them  to  play  wasn’t  always  effective  (figure  7)  unless  an 
adult accompanied the children. 
At the shopping mall, there were nine chains of interactions 
fostered by three different emergent champions: a group of 
girls and a group of boys (aged ≈ 15), and a man. While the 
first  two  groups  became  champions  by  playing  and  then 
voluntarily helped others or instructed them on how to play, 
the man spent over 20 minutes observing how others inter-
acted  before  he  decided  to  teach  strangers  how  to  use  the 
device. Figure 5 presents a sequence of interactions where 
emergent championing [26] by a group of girls took place. 
This led to chains of interactions [29] and honey-pot effects 
[1] that included an adult, a clown, parents and their chil-
dren. 
The main champion at the bus stop was the bus driver. He 
was also a local character (cf. [26]) - familiar with the loca-
tion and who normally spent long periods of time waiting 
on the bus while people gathered at the station. After driv-
ing  them  through  to  the  different  stops  at  the  campus  we 
observed him returning to the main station where the Joke-
box was deployed. As a result he became very familiar with 
the Jokebox, and quickly found ways to integrate it into his 
routine for his own situated needs. By championing interac-
tions  with  the  Jokebox  he  had  the  opportunity  to  talk  and 
play with those who were waiting, possibly transforming a 
dull moment into a joyful one. Sometimes he warned peo-
ple about the jokes not being “always funny” and proposed 
that the Jokebox should deliver “romantic songs” to provide 
a more subtle form of entertainment during “waiting times”.  
Successful interactions tended to lead to chains of interac-
tions as they drew attention from passers-by. For example, 
as  the  bus  driver  interacted  with  a  lady  (see  figure  8)  a 
passer-by stopped to look at them. The bus driver addressed 
him  to  explain:  “This  is  something  to  entertain  people  as 
they  wait  for  the  bus”  and  explained  how  the  installation 
worked. The man then engaged in conversation with them. 

them how to play by positioning himself at one of the boxes 
and telling them when to press the button on the other box. 
Other  chains  of  interaction  led  to  group  re-assemblages. 
This  meant  that  new  players  mixed  with  others  who  were 
already  playing,  particularly  if  members  of  the  former 
group  had  left.  While  group  assemblages  among  children 
who  did  not  know  each  other  seemed  to  be  frequent,  this 
was  not  the  case  between  children  and  adults  who  were 
strangers.  

Figure 7. Opportunistic championing enacted by the ice-cream 

seller at the park. 

A form of opportunistic championing was also carried out 
by  three  local  characters  at  the  park  (cf.  [26]):  a  clown,  a 
man  selling  ice  cream  and  a  man  who  was  giving  away 
puppies  (not  unusual  in  Latin  America).  These  characters 
approached the area where the Jokebox was deployed and 
found a strategic space to display what they were offering, 
making them visible to those gathering around it. This ad-
hoc  appropriation  of  the  interaction  space  supported  their 
goal  of  attracting  potential  customers  but  also  validated 
their  interaction  with  passers-by.  For  example,  figure  3 
shows the ice cream seller standing by his trolley about 8 
meters away from the installation. The man looked around 
and saw children playing with the device. Ten minutes later 
(in  Figure  7)  he  relocated  to  the  vicinity  of  the  Jokebox, 
placing himself and his trolley in a salient position by the 
installation.  
These characters championed interactions with the Jokebox 
in two ways: by providing information about it and by invit-

45

Returning  users  and  appropriation.  The  Jokebox’s  design 
supported  appropriation,  typically  by  children  who  were 
returning  users.  We  observed  14  sequences  that  included 
returning  users.  While  most  of  them  played  several  times 
during  a  single  deployment,  we  recognised  three  children 
who returned on different days. An interesting aspect of this 
was that as they became more familiar with the installation 
they changed the way they interacted with it. For example, 
a group of girls who had previously used the device estab-
lished  new  rules  to  play,  where  instead  of  pressing  both 
buttons at the same time the girls had to take turns to indi-
vidually run from one box to the other to press both buttons 
within the three-second threshold. A third group comprising 
four  children  split  to  press  the  buttons  and  then  reunited 
around one of the boxes to listen to the joke and comment 
on it.  
The Jokebox design afforded diverse forms of championing 
and  appropriation  in  the  different  settings  but  in  each  set-
ting  the  same  kinds  of  micro-coordination  were  observed. 
Below, we discuss how the context and design of a public 
installation can facilitate social interactions that begin with 
eye contact between strangers and can end with champions 
appropriating them for their own purposes. 
DISCUSSION 
The  Jokebox  successfully  enabled  the  coordination  of 
shared  encounters  and  conversations  at  two  levels.  At  a 
micro-level, it was clear what to do with the system: pairs 
followed  a  sequence  of  behaviours  that  started  by  making 
eye contact and aimed at synchronising movements to trig-
ger  the  jokes.  This  often  led  to  further  conversation  and 
even laughter. At a macro-level, there was more flexibility 
in how the Jokebox was used, that related to different inter-
pretations of why the Jokebox was in the context in which it 
had been deployed: a number of social interactions emerged 
among audiences  that gathered  around the  installation fol-
lowing  a  honeypot  effect.  Social  interactions  with  local 
characters,  or  emergent  champions,  occurred  from  their 
deliberate guidance of first time players that gave meaning 
to the interactions.  
Our  results  suggest  that  both  the  micro  and  macro  levels 
have to be considered carefully in the process of designing 
urban technologies to foster shared encounters. Below, we 
propose  a  number  of  considerations  and  implications  that 
are intended to inform the design and deployment of novel 
interfaces for shared encounters in public places. 
Micro-coordination 
Eye contact and inter-subjectivity  
While most urban technologies have tended to deliver visu-
al content on a display, which responds to the actions of a 
single  user,  the  Jokebox  demanded  coordination,  enabled 
eye contact and delivered audio content. The affordances of 
such a design created a successful ice-breaker, even provid-
ing  opportunities  for  participants 
inter-
subjectivity through interaction when trying to figure out if 

to  establish 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Figure 8. Championing and micro-coordination enabled by 

the bus driver. 

the  other  person  had  found  the  joke  funny  or  not  before 
reacting to it, either laughing, making gestures of approval 
or disapproval, and commenting on it.  
To  support  micro-coordination,  the  technology  should  al-
low for interaction in tandem and include features that indi-
cate  that  coordinated  action  is  required,  for  example  by 
providing  instructions  (e.g.  increasing  the  frequency  that 
the  lights  blink),  and  using  simple,  tactile  controls  that 
allow people to make eye contact rather than focus on the 
interface.  Using  audio  rather  than  visual  content  can  pro-
vide opportunities for participants to continue to make eye 
contact  as  they  interpret  the  content,  which  increases  the 
likelihood that conversation will emerge between them [2, 
11]. 
Macro-coordination 
Coordination at the macro level was a result of the particu-
lar context where the Jokebox was deployed. The interven-
tion  enabled  a  diversity  of  group  interactions,  particularly 
among  the  audience  who  gathered  around  the  device  and 
through  chains  of  interactions.  As  shown  in  Table  1  the 
characteristics  of  the  context  of  the  deployment  have  a 
major  impact  on  the  type  of  interactions  that  can  emerge 
around  a  technology  intervention.  Researchers  seeking  to 
enable shared encounters at public spaces should consider:  
The  affordances  of  space:  open  and  public  spaces  where 
diverse  groups  of  people  congregate  [1]  seem  to  be  more 
effective at supporting interactions, particularly when there 
are places of comfort [9] such as benches, seats and flower-
beds. However, spaces that are more constrained and where 
small numbers of strangers share physical proximity [22] do 
not  seem  to  naturally  encourage  interactions  with  playful 
interventions. Moreover, the ambient noise in each site can 
have an impact on the acceptance of a technology that de-
livers  audio  content.  Although  counter-intuitive,  louder 
environments  such  as  the  park  and  the  shopping  centre 
could  be  augmented  through  the  use  of  playful  audible 
systems. In contrast, in quieter spaces such as the bus stop 

46

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

audio content (e.g. loud jokes, sound of laughter) could be 
disturbing and deter interaction. 
The type of visitors: it is important to survey optimal places 
in a location before deploying a technology to ensure visi-
tors are attracted to it. Diverse crowds visit different places 
at  distinct  times  and  deployments  can  opportunistically 
profit  from  this.  For  example,  while  teenagers  mostly  ig-
nored  the  Jokebox  in  the  park  (possibly  because  children 
and their parents were primarily using it) they engaged with 
it at the shopping centre. We had previously observed that 
teenagers  used  this  place  to  congregate  every  evening, 
which  might  have  contributed  to  them  feeling  ownership 
over the space and thus enabled engagement with the sys-
tem (cf. [26]). 
The activities: the activities that people carry out in a cer-
tain place can determine how successful a situated interven-
tion might be. In shopping centres visitors tend to focus on 
consumption  [3]  and  the  competing  stimuli  can  lead  to 
“display blindness” [24]. However, within the same venue, 
at  places  where  people  meet  and  sit  idle,  the  intervention 
can capture more attention. 
It is important to consider the context where urban playful 
technologies  should  be  deployed  to  successfully  facilitate 
shared  encounters  rather  than  foster  social  awkwardness. 
One strategy might be to use flexible lightweight prototypes 
that allow them to test features on-the-fly to identify which 
are more likely to foster pleasant social interactions in each 
context.  Moreover,  our  findings  suggest  that  micro  and 
macro coordination can be evaluated in the design process 
at  different  stages.  While  a  lab-based  usability  study  pro-
vides  an  appropriate  setting  to  investigate  how  well  an 
interactive  system  facilitates  micro  coordination,  in  situ 
deployments  can  reveal  whether  and  how the  details  of 
macro  coordination manifest  themselves  in  a  particular 
context. 
Championing and appropriation 
Although  the  Jokebox  was  carefully  designed  to  enable 
micro-coordination,  it  was  open-ended  and  ambiguous 
enough  to  enable  ad-hoc  appropriation  [10]  by  returning 
users and local characters. In all three locations, champion-
ing was a key driver, fostering further interactions with the 
Jokebox  where  the  lack  of  specificity  of  what  it  was  for 
enabled  people  to  make  their  own  meaning.  O'Hara  et  al. 
[26] and Akpan et al. [1] have described how local charac-
ters, comperes and emergent champions play a key role in 
encouraging others to interact with public displays but prior 
descriptions of how such characters appropriate an installa-
tion remain simplistic, and do not provide insight regarding 
the motivations of champions or how they used the display 
opportunistically for their own situated purposes. Our study 
has shown how the situated actions of emergent champions 
and  local  characters  can  also  encourage  different  ways  of 
appropriating  the  interactive  space  and  drawing  others  to 
the  interaction.  In  particular,  local  characters  tended  to 
opportunistically  champion  interactions  to  support  their 

47

own needs. The sellers and clowns (study 1 and 2) used the 
installation to display their products and engage with poten-
tial buyers; the man with the puppies found opportunities to 
show the puppies and try to give them away. The bus driver 
used the intervention to turn dull waiting into playful inter-
actions with passengers.  
Hence,  we  suggest  that  appropriation  by  local  characters 
and emergent champions can be supported by leaving cer-
tain aspects of the placement and purpose of the technology 
open  to  opportunistic  interpretations  [10].  Such  ambiguity 
encourages people to make their own explanations and use 
them  to  engage  others  in  conversation.  Moreover,  to  pro-
vide  opportunities  for  macro-coordination  to  emerge,  the 
system needs to grab attention (e.g. by using lights, sounds, 
or  enabling  curiosity)  and  deliver  rich  content  (i.e.  more 
than one joke) so people to return to the interactive space. 
Also, it needs to be deployed in places where people pass-
by [1], wait and congregate [4].  
CONCLUSION 
We have presented the design and evaluation of the Joke-
box, a novel lightweight technology that requires two pass-
ers-by to come together by coordinating a sequence of be-
haviours in order to hear a joke. Our findings indicate that 
the  Jokebox  is  a  successful  “ice  breaker”  enabling  a  wide 
range of social interactions and conversations among pass-
ers-by  while  respecting  their  personal  space  in  most  con-
texts.  We  found  that  drawing  people  together  through  en-
couraging eye contact, coordination of behaviours and lis-
tening  to  a  joke  can  create  shared  encounters  and  enable 
processes  of  inter-subjectivity.  Additionally,  strangers  fol-
lowed these coordination strategies to guide and encourage 
others to engage with the Jokebox, facilitating a diversity of 
social interactions. Our study offers new insights into how 
to design and deploy interactive technologies that can facili-
tate shared encounters in public places through encouraging 
strangers to look each other in the eye. 
FUTURE WORK 
With  the  goal  to  deepen  our  understanding  on  which  and 
how certain design features may affect social coordination 
at the micro and macro levels, we are currently conducting 
a  second  phase  of  the  Jokebox  study.  We  have  developed 
an  even  lighter-weight  version  of  the  system  based  on  a 
Wizard of Oz, which allows researchers to control the de-
vice’s interactive features on-the-fly. In the future we will 
evaluate  the  new  prototype  at  different  public  spaces  with 
the aim to test in situ as many design variables as possible 
both  at  the  micro  level  (e.g.  type  of  content  and  instruc-
tions,  volume  of  audio,  speed  of  blinking,  cooperation 
threshold) and macro (e.g. type of visitors, characteristics of 
the space, context, activities). We hope that these new stud-
ies will further contribute to the design of novel and engag-
ing  interactive  urban  technologies  aimed  to  foster  shared 
encounters, eye contact and conversation in public spaces.   

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Systems (CHI '11). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3023-
3032.  

13.  James S. House. 2001. Social isolation kills, but how 
and why? Psychosomatic Medicine, 63(2), 273-274. 
14.  Jane Jacobs. 1961. The death and life of great Ameri-
can cities. Modern Library Editions & Random House 
Inc. New York. 

15.  Antti Jylhä, Cumhur Erkut and Giulio Jacucci. (2013, 
April). I Can Hear You Private, Public, and Social Son-
ic Interactions in Public Spaces. In CHI'13 Workshop 
on Experiencing Interactivity in Public Spaces (EIPS). 
ACM. 

16.  Esther C. Kim. 2012. Nonsocial transient behavior: 

Social disengagement on the greyhound bus. Symbolic 
Interaction, 35(3), 267-283. 

17.  Thomas Laureyssens, Tanguy Coenen, Laurence 

Claeys, Peter Mechant, Johan Criel, and Andrew Van-
de Moere. 2014. ZWERM: a modular component net-
work approach for an urban participation game. 
In Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on 
Human factors in computing systems(CHI '14). ACM, 
New York, NY, USA, 3259-3268. 

18.  Paul Marshall, Richard Morris, Yvonne Rogers, Stefan 
Kreitmayer, and Matt Davies. 2011. Rethinking 'multi-
user': an in-the-wild study of how groups approach a 
walk-up-and-use tabletop interface. In Proceedings of 
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Compu-
ting Systems (CHI '11). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
3033-3042. 

19.  Nemanja Memarovic, Marc Langheinrich, Florian Alt, 

Ivan Elhart, Simo Hosio, and Elisa Rubegni. 2012. 
Using public displays to stimulate passive engagement, 
active engagement, and discovery in public spaces. 
In Proceedings of the 4th Media Architecture Biennale 
Conference: Participation(MAB '12). ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 55-64. 

20.  Stanley Milgram, John Ed Sabini, and Maury Ed Sil-

ver. 1992. The individual in a social world: Essays and 
experiments. Mcgraw-Hill Book Company. 

21.  David R. Millen. 2000. Rapid ethnography: time dee-
pening strategies for HCI field research. In Proceedi-
ngs of the 3rd conference on Designing interactive sys-
tems: processes, practices, methods, and techni-
ques (DIS '00), Daniel Boyarski and Wendy A. Ke-
llogg (Eds.). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 280-286. 

22.  Jörg Müller, Dennis Wilmsmann, Juliane Exe-

ler, Markus Buzeck, Albrecht Schmidt,Tim 
Jay, Antonio Krüger. 2009. Display Blindness: The Ef-
fect of Expectations on Attention Towards Digital 
Signage. In Proceedings of the 7th International Con-
ference on Pervasive Computing (Pervasive '09). 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1-8. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We  thank  Jesus  Favela,  Alejandro  Rangel,  Daniel  García 
Rosas and Rodrigo Juárez for their invaluable work helping 
run this study; and Karina, Rosa and Raul for recording the 
Jokebox’s  content.  Special  thanks  to  Jose  Molina,  Ed 
Maklouf, Odon and Sofia Brugada for their support during 
the intervention. This research was partially funded by Intel 
ICRI  Cities  and  EU-FP7  Marie  Curie  IRSES  UBI-
HEALTH: Exchange of Excellence in Ubiquitous Compu-
ting Technologies to Address Healthcare Challenges.  
REFERENCES 
1. 

Imeh Akpan, Paul Marshall, Jon Bird, and Daniel Ha-
rrison. 2013. Exploring the effects of space and place 
on engagement with an interactive installation. 
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '13). ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 2213-2222.  

2.  Michael Argyle and Janet Dean. 1965. Eye-contact, 

distance and affiliation. Sociometry, 289-304. 

3.  Marc Augé. 2008. Non-Places: An Introduction to 

Supermodernity. Verso. 

4.  Harry Brignull and Yvonne Rogers. 2003. Enticing 

People to Interact with Large Public Displays in Public 
Spaces. In Proceedings of INTERACT, Zurich, 17-24.  
5.  Mike Crang and Stephen Graham. 2007. Sentient cities 

ambient intelligence and the politics of urban spa-
ce. Information, Communication & Society, 10(6), 789-
817. 

6.  Clarence A. Ellis, Simon J. Gibbs, and Gail Rein. 1991. 

Groupware: some issues and experiences.Commun. 
ACM 34, 1 (January 1991), 39-58. 

7.  Nicholas Epley and Juliana Schroeder. 2014. Mistaken-
ly seeking solitude. Journal of Experimental Psycholo-
gy: General, 143(5), 1980. 

8.  Patrick Tobias Fischer and Eva Hornecker. 2012. Ur-

ban HCI: spatial aspects in the design of shared en-
counters for media facades. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI '12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 307-
316.  

9.  William W. Gaver, Jacob Beaver, and Steve Benford. 
2003. Ambiguity as a resource for design. InProceedi-
ngs of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI '03). ACM, New York, NY, 
USA, 233-240. 

10.  Erving Goffman. 1972. Relations in Public. Penguin. 
11.  Christian Heath, Jon Hindmarsh, and Paul Luff. 2010. 

Video in qualitative research. Sage. 

12.  Uta Hinrichs and Sheelagh Carpendale. 2011. Gestures 
in the wild: studying multi-touch gesture sequences on 
interactive tabletop exhibits. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 

48

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

23.  Løssing, Tobias, Thomas Fabian Delman, Sofie Kinch, 
Rune Nielsen, Kätte Bønløkke Andersen, and Jan Fugl. 
2013: Light Spots - Interactive Urban Furniture. In 
Proceedings of the 4th Global Lighting Design Confe-
rence (PLDC’13), Copenhagen, DK. 

24.  Kenton O'Hara, Maxine Glancy, and Simon Roberts-
haw. 2008. Understanding collective play in an urban 
screen game. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM confe-
rence on Computer supported cooperativ work (CSCW 
'08). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 67-76.  

25.  Eric Paulos and Elizabeth Goodman. 2004. The fami-
liar stranger: anxiety, comfort, and play in public pla-
ces. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Hu-
man Factors in Computing Systems(CHI '04). ACM, 
New York, NY, USA, 223-230. 

26.  Eric Paulos, Tom Jenkins, August Joki, and Parul Vora. 

2008. Objects of wonderment. In Proceedings of the 
7th ACM conference on Designing interactive sys-
tems (DIS '08). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 350-359. 
27.  Peter Peltonen, Esko Kurvinen, Antti Salovaara, Giulio 
Jacucci, Tommi Ilmonen, John Evans, Antti Oulasvirta, 
and Petri Saarikko. 2008. It's Mine, Don't Touch!: in-
teractions at a large multi-touch display in a city centre. 
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '08). ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 1285-1294. 

28.  Robert D. Putnam. 1993. The prosperous community: 
social capital and public life. The American Prospect, 
4(13), 35-42. 
 
 

 

29.  Yvonne Rogers. Interaction design gone wild: striving 

for wild theory. Interactions 18, 4 (2011), 58–62. 

30.  Willibald Ruch (Ed.). 1998. The sense of humor: Ex-

plorations of a personality characteristic (Vol. 3). 
Walter de Gruyter. 

31.  Ronald Schroeter. 2012. Engaging new digital locals 
with interactive urban screens to collaboratively im-
prove the city. In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 confe-
rence on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work (CSCW '12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 227-
236.  

32.  Georg Simmel. 1903. The metropolis and mental 

life. Individuality and Social forms. 

33.  Nick Taylor and Keith Cheverst. 2012. Supporting 

community awareness with interactive displays. IEEE 
Computer 45, 5, 26–32. 

34.  Nina Valkanova, Robert Walter, Andrew Vande Moe-
re, and Jörg Müller. 2014. MyPosition: sparking civic 
discourse by a public interactive poll visualization. 
In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Compu-
ter supported cooperative work & social compu-
ting (CSCW '14). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1323-
1332. 

35.  Katharine S. Willis, George Roussos, Konstantinos 

Chorianopoulos, and Mirjam Struppek, eds. 2010. Sha-
red Encounters. Springer.

49

