CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Mobile Media Matters: Media Use and Relationship 

Satisfaction among Geographically Close Dating Couples 

University of Wisconsin-Madison 

University of Wisconsin-Madison 

Catalina L. Toma 

Madison, USA 
ctoma@wisc.edu  

Mina Choi  

Madison, USA 

mchoi33@wisc.edu  

ABSTRACT 
Much research has investigated the uses and effects of new 
communication  technologies  in  long-distance  romantic 
relationships.  Comparatively,  however,  the  importance  of 
these  technologies  within  geographically  close  romantic 
relationships has been overlooked. The present study fills in 
this gap by examining the prevalence of media use in this 
context  and  its  association  with  relational  well-being.  A 
survey of heterosexual undergraduates involved in proximal 
dating relationships (N = 211) shows that they used mobile 
media  (phone  calls,  texting)  to  a  significant  extent  to 
connect  with  partners  on  a  daily  basis,  and  that  they 
reported  high  quality  of  communication  when  using  these 
media.  Further,  the  quality,  but  not  quantity,  of  mobile 
communication  was  associated  with  partner  idealization 
which,  in  turn,  was  associated  with  relational  satisfaction. 
The results support and extend the Hyperpersonal model of 
online  communication,  and  contribute  to  elucidating  user 
practices  and  media  effects  within  the  critical  domain  of 
romantic relationships.     
Author Keywords 
Partner  idealization;  Mobile  media;  Geographically  close 
romantic 
satisfaction; 
Hyperpersonal model 
ACM Classification Keywords 
J4 Social and behavioral systems: Psychology 
INTRODUCTION 
More  Americans  than  ever  are  now  involved  in  long-
distance romantic relationships [39], a situation which has 
been  facilitated  by  the  availability  of  interpersonal  media, 
such  as  the  telephone,  texting,  email,  instant  messaging 
(IM),  and,  more  recently,  social  media  [1,7,20].  These 
media  enable  partners  to  engage  in  frequent,  meaningful, 
and low-cost interaction, and therefore to sustain a sense of 
mutual  presence  and  intimacy  despite  physical  separation 

relationships; 

Relationship 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for 
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA  
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2835204 
 

394

role 

close 

in  geographically 

[19].  For  this  reason,  a  voluminous  body  of  research  has 
investigated  the  uses  and  effects  of  new  communication 
technologies  within  long-distance  romantic  relationships 
(e.g., [7,20,28]). 
While the literature’s focus on long-distance relationships is 
understandable  given  that  these  relationships  depend  on 
media use for their very existence, it is also narrow in that it 
neglects romantic relationships where partners use mediated 
communication  in  conjunction  with  regular  face-to-face 
contact. In this article, we argue that interpersonal media is  
likely  to  be  widely  used  and  to  play  a  psychologically 
meaningful 
romantic 
relationships as well. Individuals in these relationships can 
be expected to maintain interaction via new communication 
technologies  during  times  of  day  when  they  are  separated 
(e.g.,  by  being  at  work  or  school),  when  they  need  to 
coordinate  tasks,  whereabouts,  and  activities,  and  when 
they want to self-present as a couple via social media (see 
[47]). In turn, the opportunities for connection afforded by 
these  media  should  play  a  role  in  individuals’  subjective 
experience of their romantic relationship.  
The  present  paper  first  examines,  in  a  descriptive  fashion, 
the use of interpersonal media within geographically close 
romantic  relationships.  Which  media  do  these  couples  use 
and to what extent? To the best of our knowledge, only one 
study to date has directly examined this topic [10], which is 
why replication is important. Then, we investigate the link 
between 
relationship 
satisfaction.  In  long-distance  relationships,  media  use  has 
been  shown  to  affect  relationship  quality  through  a 
multitude of routes, such as promoting self-disclosure [51], 
enabling 
low-cost  relational  maintenance  [1,48],  and 
inducing  partner  idealization  [19,40].  In  this  study,  we 
focus on partner idealization because (1) it has been shown 
to be closely connected to the perceived quality of romantic 
relationships;  and  (2)  it  is  particularly  apt  to  stem  from 
communication in reduced-cue environments, such as those 
afforded by many everyday communication technologies. Is 
the  use  of  these  technologies  positively  associated  with 
relational  satisfaction  among  geographically  close  dating 
partners because it fosters partner idealization? 
Our examination is guided by the Hyperpersonal model of 
online  communication  [50],  a 
theoretical  framework 
designed 
explicate  partner  perceptions  during 
interactions in reduced-cue technological environments. We 

this  media  use  and  partners’ 

to 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

focus  on  dating  relationships  among  college  students 
because  dating  relationships  are  much  more  prone  to 
idealization  than  marital  relationships,  and  because  young 
adults  are  especially  likely  to  be  reliant  on  interpersonal 
media for their social interactions.  
Geographically Close Dating Relationships & Media Use 
Despite  the  proliferation  of  long-distance  relationships, 
geographically  close  romantic  relationships  (sometimes 
referred 
to  as  geographically  collocated  or  proximal 
relationships) are still the most prevalent type of romantic 
union [46]. Late adolescence and young adulthood is a time 
of  much  experimentation  in  this  domain,  with  individuals 
forming  and  breaking  off  numerous  romantic  attachments 
[45].  
A very limited body of research has analyzed the extent to 
which  interpersonal  media  is  used  within  geographically 
close  romantic  relationships.  Coyne  and  colleagues  [10] 
conducted  a  first  descriptive  study  of  media  use  within 
these relationships (including marital and pre-marital ones). 
A  survey  of  over  1,000  participants  showed  that  the  most 
frequently  used  medium  of  interaction  was  the  cell  phone 
(i.e.,  voice  calling),  followed  by  texting,  email,  social 
networking  sites,  IM,  blogs,  and  webcams.  The  last  four 
media  in  the  preceding  list  were  quite  infrequently  used, 
with  a  mean  of  1-2  on  a  scale  from  1  (never  used)  to  5 
(often  used).  Demographic  differences  also  emerged,  with 
younger  respondents  more  likely  to  use  each  type  of 
medium to communicate with their romantic partners, with 
the exception of email, which was more frequently used by 
older  respondents.  This  study  also  found  that  texting  had 
the  strongest 
relationship 
satisfaction,  although  an  earlier  study  [4]  found  no 
connection between media used (i.e., Internet or phone) and 
relationship  satisfaction.  Another  study  [30]  found  that 
some  geographically  close  romantic  couples  preferred  to 
use  computer-mediated  communication  when  discussing 
issues  on  which  they  and  their  partners  had  differing 
opinions, 
computer-mediated 
communication  was  a  productive  venue  for  offering 
clarifications 
to  prior  face-to-face  discussions  or  for 
addressing  sensitive  topics.  This  indicates  that,  at  least 
among  a  proportion  of  proximal  couples,  computer-
mediated communication is used as a strategic supplement 
to face-to-face interaction. 
The  present  paper  also  examines  how  much  proximal 
couples rely on interpersonal media. In light of the existing 
evidence, we expect mobile media (phone calling, texting) 
to  be  widely  used.  As  a  way  to  contribute  to  the  existing 
literature,  our  examination  differentiates  between 
the 
quantity  and  quality  of  couples’  communication  in  each 
medium. Indeed, research suggests that quantity and quality 
of  communication  are  two  distinct  parameters  of  social 
interaction 
communication 
straightforwardly  refers  to  the  amount  of  time  romantic 
partners  spend  in  social  interaction,  while  quality  of 

influence  on 

respondents’ 

Quantity 

some 

[13]. 

that 

of 

and 

felt 

to 

lacking 

to  which 

the  extent 

refers 
the 
communication 
is  perceived  as  positive,  supportive, 
communication 
agreeable, intimate, and easily controllable [25]. Hence, we 
ask: 
RQ1:  How  much  time  do  proximal  couples  spend  using 
each  medium  of  communication?  What  is  their  perceived 
quality of communication within each medium? 
Media Use and Hyperpersonal Idealization 
In addition to describing patterns of media use for proximal 
dating  couples,  we  also  seek  to  understand  some  of  its 
consequences,  using 
the  Hyperpersonal  model  as  a 
theoretical framework. The Hyperpersonal perspective [50] 
posits  that  mediated  interaction  is  different  from  face-to-
face interaction in both processes and outcomes. Mediated 
environments  reduce  (as  is  the  case  with  the  phone)  or 
completely  eliminate  nonverbal  cues  (as  is  the  case  with 
email and texting), and are often editable and asynchronous. 
This  constellation  of  technological  affordances  allows 
communicators  more  control  over  their  self-presentational 
claims, enabling them to construct messages that are closely 
aligned  with  their  self-presentational  goals  (a  process 
known  as  selective  self-presentation).  Receivers  of  these 
messages have greater latitude for overattribution, meaning 
that, 
information  about  partners’  nonverbal 
behaviors and physical environments, they mentally fill in 
the  blanks  for  missing  information  with  information  that 
they  believe  is  consistent  with  what  they  already  know. 
Thus, if the initial self-presentation is positive, it is likely to 
in  reduced-cue 
be  perceived  as  even  more  positive 
environments 
through  overattribution. 
(Negative  self-
presentations  similarly 
to  even  more  negative 
impressions  through  overattribution.)  As  the  interaction 
progresses, communication partners are likely to treat each 
other  in  ways  consistent  with  their  initial  impressions 
(either  positive  or  negative),  prompting  behaviors  that 
reinforce  this  initial  impression.  This  process  is  known  as 
behavioral  confirmation.  All 
in  all,  selective  self-
presentation,  overattribution,  and  behavioral  confirmation 
work together to engender an intensification loop, whereby 
initial impressions get exaggerated as a result of interaction 
in reduced-cue environments. 
While  it  is  possible  for  self-presentations  and  initial 
impressions  to  be  negative,  as  in  the  case  of  flaming  or 
trolling,  the  majority  of  online  interactants  wish  to  make 
positive  impressions  and  to  be  perceived  favorably.  This 
should certainly be the case with romantic couples, who by 
definition experience attraction towards one another. When 
self-presentation, 
behavioral 
confirmation are positive, the intensification loop is one of 
idealization. That is, interactants in mediated environments 
perceive  one  another  in  exaggeratedly  positive  ways, 
leaving  the  interaction  with  inflated  perceptions  of  the 
merits of their partner and of the quality of the bond they 
share. In fact, the hallmark of this idealization loop is that it 
makes  online  interactants  experience  greater  social  and/or 

overattribution, 

lead 

and 

395

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

in 

strangers 

romantic  attraction  towards  their  partners  than  they  would 
have  experienced  had  the  interaction  taken  place  face-to-
face.   
Empirical  support  for  these  assertions  is  robust.  Strangers 
communicating  with  one  another  over  instant  messenger 
rated  their  partners’  personalities  in  more  extreme  and 
positive ways, an indicator of idealization [16]. Members of 
long-term  virtual  teams  liked  each  other  more  when 
communicating  through  purely  textual  means  than  when 
they had access to their partners’ photographs, presumably 
because the lack of information about physical appearance 
offered  greater  latitude  for  idealization  [50].  Participants 
interacting  with 
computer-mediated 
environments  were  more  likely  to  interpret  their  partners’ 
self-disclosures  in  ideal  ways,  as  indicators  of  intimacy, 
which in turn intensified their liking towards these partners 
[18].  
An  important  theoretical  consideration  is  that  the  original 
intent  of  the  Hyperpersonal  model  was  to  explicate  self-
presentation  and  impression  formation  dynamics  among 
unacquainted online interactants – that is, individuals who 
had  no  prior  relationship  and  whose  communication 
occurred  exclusively  online  [49].  In  the  present  paper,  we 
argue  that  the  model  has  utility  in  predicting  relational 
dynamics  even  among  previously  acquainted  individuals 
who  have  both  online  and  offline  contact,  such  as  dating 
couples. Hyperpersonal dynamics are theorized to occur in 
reduced-cue  environments  where  partners  experience 
uncertainty  about  one  another.  We  argue  that  uncertainty 
does  exist  even  among  romantic  couples,  at  least  at  the 
interaction  level.  That  is,  partners  may  know  each  other 
well  generally,  but  may  not  know  what  each  is  thinking, 
feeling, or doing at a given point in time. In these uncertain 
situations,  the  use  of  interpersonal  media  can  produce 
hyperpersonal 
partner 
perceptions).  As  previously  detailed,  mediated  spaces, 
in  nonverbal  cues  and 
characterized  by  a  reduction 
sometimes  editability  and  asynchronicity,  allow 
for 
selective  self-presentation  and  overattribution.  Romantic 
couples  can  put  their  best  foot  forward  and  also  imagine 
their  partners  to  possess  desirable  characteristics,  such  as 
responsiveness,  kindness,  or  commitment  during  specific 
mediated interactions, whether by phone, texting, or email. 
Individuals  may  therefore  form  idealized  notions  of  their 
romantic partners during instances of mediated interaction. 
In  turn,  the  accumulation  of  such  satisfying  interactions 
over the media can enhance the overall satisfaction level of 
the relationship. 
A handful of recent studies have already begun to examine 
the  utility  of  the  Hyperpersonal  model  in  pre-existing 
relationships.  Brody  [7]  found 
long-distance 
relationships  (both  romantic  and  friendships)  a  high 
frequency of mediated communication (phone calls, email, 
IM,  and  social  media)  coupled  with  sporadic  face-to-face 
contact  resulted  in  greater  relational  satisfaction  and 

projections 

idealized 

(i.e., 

that, 

in 

396

their 

couples 

exaggerated 

commitment,  two  markers  of  hyperpersonal  idealization. 
Similarly, Jiang and Hancock [19] found that, among long-
distance  romantic  partners,  communication  through  media 
with  reduced  cues,  reduced  synchronicity,  or  increased 
mobility  produced  greater  perceptions  of  partner 
responsiveness,  which  in  turn  enhanced  intimacy.  In  fact, 
long-distance 
partners’ 
responsiveness to a greater extent than geographically close 
couples,  presumably  due  to  their  greater  reliance  on 
interpersonal  media.  Notably,  neither  of  these  studies 
measured  idealization  directly,  but  rather  assumed  that 
higher  scores  of  relational  satisfaction  and  commitment, 
and partner responsiveness and intimacy, respectively, were 
indicative of idealization. 
Partner Idealization and Relationship Satisfaction 
The  Hyperpersonal  model  specifically 
links  partner 
idealization  with  positive  relational  outcomes,  such  as 
increased  liking  and  attraction  [49,50].  Additionally,  the 
literature  on  romantic  relationships,  independent  of  media 
use, posits that partner idealization is a necessary ingredient 
in producing satisfying relationships. Contrary to what we 
might  expect,  perceiving  one’s  partner 
in  distorted, 
unrealistically  positive  ways  is  critical  for  relationship 
success  [27,37,39,40].  Idealization  enhances  love  and 
relational  satisfaction  because  it  ensures  that  the  partner’s 
flaws,  which  might  give  one  pause  and 
invite  a 
reconsideration  of  the  relationship,  are  overlooked,  while 
positive attributes are emphasized. 
Similarly 
romantic 
idealization  is  theorized  to  be  facilitated  by  uncertainty  – 
that is, a lack of complete knowledge about the partner. For 
this reason, romantic idealization tends to occur in the early 
stages of relationships and to dissipate over time, as couples 
get  to  know  each  other  intimately.  Idealistic  distortion  is 
higher in dating relationships than marriages [6].  
In  sum,  the  classic  literature  on  romantic  relationships 
posits  that  partner  idealization  generates  positive  romantic 
outcomes,  such  as 
increased  satisfaction.  The  newer 
literature  on  long-distance  romantic  relationships  [7,19] 
proposes  that  mediated  communication,  which  blocks 
certain  types  of  information,  such  as  nonverbal  cues,  fans 
the  flames  of  idealization.  We  extend  these  arguments  by 
in 
testing 
the  context  of 
geographically 
relationships.  We 
hypothesize  that  interpersonal  media  use  within  proximal 
romantic  relationships  is  positively  related  with  partner 
idealization, which in turn enhances relational satisfaction.  
However,  it  is  important  to  clarify  which  aspects  of 
interpersonal  media  use  should  be  related  to  relational 
satisfaction  via  hyperpersonal  idealization.  Prior  research 
conducted in face-to-face settings strongly suggests that the 
mere  quantity  of  interaction  does  not  affect  relational 
satisfaction and intimacy among dating couples; however, it 
is partners’ perceptions of the quality of this interaction that 
does [13]. By the same token, the Hyperpersonal model is 

time 
romantic 

hyperpersonal 

projections, 

them  for 

the  first 

to 

close 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

invited 

the  department’s 

concerned with the interpretation of messages in reduced-
cue  communication  channels.  The  model  argues  that  in 
these environments, messages are likely to be perceived as 
positively  valenced,  affirming,  and  emotionally  attuned, 
and it is these perceptions that lead receivers to engage in 
sender idealization [50]. 
Similarly,  we  predict  that  it  is  the  quality,  not  necessarily 
the quantity, of mediated communication that is associated 
with hyperpersonal idealization and, in turn, with relational 
satisfaction. We generally expect that the perceived quality 
of mediated communication should be high.  
METHOD 
Participants and Procedure 
Participants  were  undergraduate  students  at  a 
large 
Midwestern  university  who  were  compensated  with  extra-
credit  in  their  Communication  classes  (N  =  211,  79.6% 
women;  M  age  =  20.31,  SD  age  =  1.97;  79.15%  white, 
10.43% Asian, 2.37% African-American, 8.05% other). The 
study  was  advertised  on 
research 
participation  website  as  an  online  survey  about  media  use 
within  romantic  relationships.  Only  students  who  were 
currently  involved  in  a  geographically  close  romantic 
relationship  and  were  heterosexual  were 
to 
participate. Homosexual students were not included in this 
study  because  the  psychological  processes  undergirding 
their  romantic  relationships  are  likely  to  be  different 
[23,34]. However, we provided alternative options for them 
to earn extra-credit. 
The  study  was  set  up  as  an  entirely  online  survey  that 
participants  filled  out  at  a  time  and  location  of  their 
convenience.  
Measures 
Quantity of communication 
Participants were asked to indicate all the media they used 
to  communicate  with  their  romantic  partners  from  the 
following  list:  1)  phone  (i.e.,  voice)  calling1;  2)  texting, 
defined as SMS sent through smartphone applications such 
as IMessage, Whatsapp, and Blackberry message; 3) email; 
4) instant messaging (IM), defined as online conversations 
using applications such as G-Chat, Facebook chat and text-
only  Skype  chat;  5)  Facebook  posting,  excluding  private 
communication  (i.e.,  email,  IM);  6)  Twitter  posting;  7) 
video chatting (e.g., Facetime, Skype); and 8) video games. 
Participants  were  given  the  option  to  add  any  additional 
media not included in this list (e.g., Snapchat, Instagram).  
For  each  medium  selected,  participants  were  asked  to 
indicate  how  many  days  a  week  (“Approximately  how 
many days a week do you use this medium to communicate 
                                                             
1 Our  questionnaire  simply  asked  participants  to  think  of  the  phone, 
without specifying whether this referred to cell phones or landlines. Since 
recent research shows that 97% of young adults own a cell phone [31], we 
assume  that  the  majority  of  our  participants  reported  on  their  cell  phone 
use.  

397

this  medium 

the 

their  partner  using 

time  do  you  spend  using 

with your partner?”) and how much time a day they utilized 
the medium (“On the days that you use this medium, how 
much 
to 
communicate  with  your  partner,  in  minutes?”).  Responses 
on these two questions were multiplied and then divided by 
seven in order to estimate the average amount of time that 
participants  used  each  medium  every  day.  This  measure 
represented  our  operationalization  of  quantity  of 
communication.  
Quality of mediated communication 
For  each  medium,  participants  indicated  the  quality  of 
communication  with 
Iowa 
Communication  Record  (ICR)  scale  [11]  (8  items).  The 
ICR  is  made  up  of  semantic  differentials,  measured  on  a 
seven-point  scale  (e.g.,  “relaxed  -  tense,”  “personal  - 
impersonal,”  “satisfying  -  not  satisfying”).  The  scale 
achieved good reliability (α’s were calculated separately for 
each medium and ranged between .81 and .84). The ICR is 
widely  used  in  the  area  of  romantic  relationships  and  has 
been validated across multiple studies (e.g., [13,31, 52]). In 
order  to  reduce  participant  fatigue  and  ensure  valid 
responses, we asked participants to complete the ICR only 
for the three most frequently used media for communication 
with their romantic partner.  
Idealization 
Idealization  was  measured  using  the  Idealistic  Distortion 
Scale (IDS; [14]). The IDS consists of five items, including 
“My  partner  and  I  understand  each  other  completely”  and 
“My partner completely understands and sympathizes with 
my every mood.” Each item was measured on a seven-point 
scale (1 – strongly disagree to 7 – strongly agree). The scale 
achieved  good  reliability  (α  =  .77).  This  measure  is  also 
well-validated 
literature 
[40,41]. 
Relationship satisfaction 
Relationship 
the 
Relationship Assessment Scale (RAS; [19]) The RAS is one 
of  the  most  widely  used  measures  of  well-being  within 
romantic  relationships  [e.g.,  35,42]  and  consists  of  seven 
items,  including  “In  general,  my  partner  meets  my  needs 
well,” “My partner meets my needs for intimacy,” and “In 
general,  I  am  satisfied  with  our  relationship.”  Each  item 
was  measured  on  a  seven-point  Likert  scale  (1  –  strongly 
disagree  to  7  –  strongly  agree).  Good  reliability  was 
achieved (α = .88).  
Covariates 
The following covariates were included in the analyses: 1) 
age,  which  has  been  shown  to  be  negatively  related  to 
relationship satisfaction among a similar sample of college 
students [12]; 2) gender, because women have been shown 
to  be  more  selective  of  relationship  partners  and  therefore 
might be more prone to idealization [27]; 3) the length of 
the romantic relationship (M = 15.90 months, SD = 16.41), 
because  longer  relationships  are  apt  to  be  more  satisfying 
and less prone to idealistic distortion [43,44].  

satisfaction  was  measured  using 

romantic 

relationship 

in 

the 

the 

[8,15,26],  and  suggests 

RESULTS 
Patterns of Media Use: Descriptives 
On average, participants reported using 3.34 distinct media 
(SD  =  1.30)  to  communicate  with  their  romantic  partners. 
The most frequently used medium was texting, followed by 
phone  calling,  Facebook,  IM’ing,  Twitter,  email,  video 
chatting,  and  least  of  all  video  games.  The  percentage  of 
participants  using  each  medium  is  presented  in  Figure  1. 
This  pattern  is  consistent  with  recent  studies,  which  also 
show that texting and voice calling are the most frequently 
used media by college students engaging with one another 
that 
across  social  contexts 
interpersonal  media  use  within  proximal 
romantic 
relationships 
same  pattern  as  general 
follows 
interpersonal media use. 
Descriptive  analyses  show  that  texting  was  not  only  the 
most  frequently  used,  but  also  the  most  heavily  used 
medium, with participants spending an average of over two 
hours texting with their romantic partners on a daily basis. 
However,  this  high  average  was  due  to  the  presence  of  a 
few  outliers,  with  the  median  number  of  minutes  spent 
texting  being  60.  Participants  reported  spending  a  little 
under  half  an  hour  with  their  romantic  partners  over  the 
phone on a daily basis. Although video chatting and video 
games  were  used  only  by  a  small  subset  of  our  sample, 
those  who  did  use  these  media  reported  spending  a  fair 
amount of time on them (see Table 1).  
Participants  reported  high  quality  of  communication 
throughout the media (see Table 1). On a scale from 1 (low 
quality)  to  7  (high  quality),  the  media  were  highly  rated, 
with  most  means  above  5.  Facebook  was  rated  as  having 
the 
communication.  Pair-wise 
comparisons revealed that the quality of communication via 
texting was equal to that via the phone, t(177) = 1.52, ns. 
However, the quality of communication via phone and text 
were  significantly  higher  than  that  via  Facebook;  phone- 
Facebook, 
text-Facebook,  

t(98)  =  7.47,  p  < 

quality 

lowest 

.001, 

of 

 

Figure 1. Percentage of participants using each medium for 

communication with their romantic partners. 

 

398

Face-to-face 
Text  
Phone call 
Facebook  
IM  
Twitter  
Email  
Video chat  
Video game  

Quality of communication (1-7)* 

Text  
Phone call  
Facebook  
IM  
Twitter  
Email  
Video chat  
Video game  

M 
 
171.17 
129.49 
22.33 
9.03 
18.36 
9.98 
4.42 
22.92 
92.86 
 
5.47 
5.54 
4.79 
5.07 
4.88 
5.35 
6.10 
4.88 
4.72 
5.83 

 

SD  Mdn 
 
159.24  128.57 
60.0 
247.10 
35.19 
8.6 
2.9 
28.51 
6.1 
37.95 
5.0 
20.37 
7.39 
1.4 
8.6 
27.39 
25.7 
127.59 
 
 
 
.93 
 
.81 
 
1.00 
.95 
 
 
.69 
 
.75 
 
.90 
1.24 
 
 
1.15 
.91 
 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

t(75)  =  9.03,  p  <  001.  We  were  unable  to  run  pair-wise 
comparisons among the other media because of insufficient 
sample size (recall that participants only rated their quality 
of communication for their top three most used media). 
Media Use and Relationship Satisfaction 
A  main  goal  of  this  study  was  to  examine  whether  the 
quality  (but  not  necessarily  the  quantity)  of  media  use 
among geographically close romantic couples is associated 
with  an  increase  in  relationship  satisfaction  by  boosting 
partner idealization. To test the mediating role of idealistic 
distortion  in  the  relationship  between  media  use  and 
romantic  satisfaction,  we  employed  a  path  analysis 
procedure  using  the  Lavaan  package  in  R  [36].  Mediation 
was  examined  using  the  test  of  joint  significance,  a 
statistical test that has been shown to be more powerful and 
less susceptible to Type 1 errors than Baron and Kenny and 
joint 
other  mediation  procedures 
significance 
associations 
between  the  independent  and  mediating  variable,  and  the 
mediating  and  dependent  variable  respectively.  If  both 
relationships are significant, then mediation can be said to 
occur. Note that this test, unlike Baron and Kenny [2], does 
not require a significant predominant relationship between 
the independent and dependent variables.  
 
 
Quantity of communication (min) 

simultaneously  probes 

[9].  The 

test  of 

the 

Idealized distortion (1 – 7)* 
Relationship satisfaction (1 – 7)*  
Note: *Higher scores indicate higher quality of communication, 
more idealization, and higher relationship satisfaction. 

Table 1. Descriptive statistics for all key variables.

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Note: +p < .10, *p < .05, **p < .01, *** p < .001. 

Figure 2. Path model and coefficients for all the hypothesized relationships. 

 

respectively, 

While we intended to probe the association between all the 
media  used  and  relational  characteristics,  our  sample  only 
reported  using  texting  (98.1%  of  participants)  and  phone 
calling  (83.9%  of  participants)  on  a  consistent  basis.  The 
remaining media were used by about half of our sample or 
less. Including these latter media would have produced an 
untenable  reduction  in  sample  size,  which  is  why  we 
removed them from the analysis. 
As depicted in Figure 2, we generated a path model with the 
quantity and quality of communication in texting and phone 
calling, 
and  quantity  of 
face-to-face 
communication  as  exogenous  variables, 
relationship 
satisfaction as an endogenous variable, and idealization as a 
mediator  (N  =  150).  Given  the  high  correlation  between 
some  of  the  variables  (see  Table  2),  we  checked  whether 
multicollinearity would be a problem. Results show that it 
was  not,  with  all  VIF’s  less  than  5.  Gender,  age,  and 
relationship length were entered as covariates.  
To ascertain model fit, we used Kline’s [22] cutoff criteria, 
according  to  which  a  model  demonstrates  good  fit  if  it 
achieves  the  following  parameters:  X2  p-value  >  .05; 
RMSEA < .06; CFI > .95; GFI > .90; SRMR < .08. Based 
on  these  criteria,  our  model  showed  excellent  fit  with  the 
data: X2(5) = 4.26, p = .51; RMSEA = .00 (90% confidence 
interval = .00 to .11); CFI = 1.00; GFI = 1.00; SRMR = .01, 
and  explained  33.7%  of  the  variance  in  the  endogenous 
variable, relationship satisfaction.  
Path coefficients show that the quantity of communication 
through  texting,  phone  calling,  and  face-to-face  was  not 
significantly associated with partner idealization. However, 

399

the  quality  of  communication  through  both  texting  and 
phone  calling  were 
strongly  predictive  of  partner 
idealization.  Similarly,  partner  idealization  was  a  strong 
predictor of relationship satisfaction (see Figure 2 for path 
coefficients).  The  test  of  joint  significance  confirmed  that 

Variable 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

 

 

- 

.14 

 

 

- 

 

- 

.05 

-.01 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Quantity of    
Communication 
– Text 
2. Quantity of 
Communication 
– Phone call 
3. Quality of 
Communication 
– Text  
4. Quality of 
Communication 
– Phone call 
5. Quantity of 
Communication 
– Face-to-face 
6. Idealistic 
Distortion 
7. Relationship 
Satisfaction 
Note:  *p < .05, **p < .01. 
Table 2. Partial correlations for all the variables in the path 

.25** 

.23** 

.75** 

.27** 

.34** 

.33** 

.35** 

.23** 

.32** 

 

 

 

 

-.07 

.05 

-.06 

.08 

.05 

.09 

-.04 

-.01 

- 

.11 

- 

model, while controlling for the covariates. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

the  more  communication  contributes 

partner idealization acted as a mediator between media use 
and relationship satisfaction. 
Notably,  the  size  of  the  path  coefficient  for  quality  of 
communication through texting (.30, p < .001) was higher 
than  the  path  coefficient  for  quality  of  communication 
through phone calling (.24, p < .01). Both were higher than 
the  size  of  the  coefficient  for  quantity  of  communication 
through  face-to-face  (.04),  which  did  not  reach  statistical 
significance. Unfortunately, we did not collect data on the 
quality  of  communication  through  face-to-face,  which 
would have allowed for a more direct comparison. However, 
the observed pattern indicates that the more nonverbal cues 
get  reduced, 
to 
idealization,  consistent  with  the  Hyperpersonal  model. 
None of the covariates was significantly associated with the 
exogenous and endogenous variables of the model.  
DISUSSION 
New  communication  technologies  are  widely  used  and 
influential  in  a  variety  of  relational  contexts.  The  present 
study is one of the first to investigate their frequency of use 
and association with relationship functioning among young, 
geographically  close  dating  couples.  Results  show  that 
mobile media (phone, texting) are pervasively used within 
this  relational  context  and  that  they  are  associated  with 
meaningful  psychological  processes.  Specifically, 
they 
support partner idealization, a process whereby individuals 
perceive  their  romantic  partners  in  unrealistically  positive 
ways,  which  in  turn  amplifies  relational  satisfaction. 
Consistent  with  the  Hyperpersonal  model,  we  argue  that 
these media support idealization because they provide users 
with  technological  affordances,  such  as  a  reduction  or 
elimination  of  nonverbal  cues  and  editability,  that  enable 
them to foster positive, high-quality interactions. 
Mobile Maintenance 
Hall and Baym [16] coined the term “mobile maintenance” 
to  refer  to  young  adults’  use  of  mobile  devices  (phone, 
texting) to maintain close friendships. We find this to be a 
useful  construct  for  explaining  young  adults’  reliance  on 
mobile  communication  within  their  dating  relationships  as 
well. Indeed, results show that participants exhibited strong 
dependence  on  mobile  media  for  the  management  of  their 
dating  relationships,  despite  being  geographically  close. 
Texting  in  particular  was  extremely  widely  used,  with  the 
median use of texting in our sample registering about one 
hour per day. This is consistent with broader statistics about 
the  prevalence  of  texting,  which  show  that  American 
teenagers send around 110 texts every day [29]. The phone 
was similarly used by a majority of the respondents, and on 
a  consistent  basis  (almost  half  an  hour  daily).  These 
patterns  provide  credence  to  Turkle’s  conceptualization  of 
young adults as being “tethered” to their phones [48]. 
Both the phone and texting were seen as supporting high-
quality  communication,  with  participants  rating 
their 
interactions  with  their  partners  over  these  media  as 
satisfying,  rewarding,  and  positive.  However,  we  did  not 

400

that 

individuals 

in 

close 

information 

is  scarce  and 

there 

assess  in  this  study  the  content  of  what  participants 
discussed with their partners over mobile media. Based on 
existing research, we can surmise that this media was used 
for providing a feeling of constant connection [3], enacting 
relational  management  behaviors  such  as  openness  and 
assurances  [16],  and  for  coordinating  everyday  activities. 
Indeed,  Ling  and  Yttri  [24]  propose  that  mobile  phones 
allow  for  “nuanced  instrumental  coordination,”  which 
means 
interdependent 
relationships,  such  as  dating,  can  plan,  coordinate,  and 
execute  goals  effectively,  while  feeling  connected  and  in 
synch  with  each  other.  We  believe  that  this  ability  to 
engage  in  perpetual  contact,  reassurance,  and  mutual 
coordination  led  participants  in  our  study  to  rate  their 
mobile  interactions  as  high  in  quality,  and  as  leading  to 
partner idealization and relational satisfaction.  
Hyperpersonal Idealization Revisited 
Our main theoretical argument, based on the Hyperpersonal 
model of online communication, is that interpersonal media 
foster  partner  idealization  due  to  their  reduced-cue  and 
editable nature. In particular, a reduction in cues has been 
theorized  to  produce  opportunities  for  idealization  by 
heightening uncertainty and therefore allowing interactants 
to  mentally  construct 
their  partners’  characteristics, 
motives, and behavior. Indeed, idealization is only possible 
when 
is  room  for 
interpretation  and  imagination.  Our  data  were  consistent 
with these theoretical arguments: The medium providing no 
nonverbal  cues 
texting)  was  associated  with 
idealization  more  than  the  medium  providing  partial 
nonverbal  cues  (i.e.,  phone  calling),  whereas  face-to-face 
communication, which provides access to the full spectrum 
of  nonverbal  cues,  was  not  associated  with  idealization  at 
all.  That  is,  the  fewer  nonverbal  cues  were  available,  the 
more idealization took place. 
As  previously  discussed, 
the 
Hyperpersonal  model  have  been  tested  predominantly  in 
zero-acquaintance  contexts,  because  strangers  naturally 
experience  a  great  deal  of  uncertainty  about  one  another 
and  therefore  have  mental  space  for  idealization.  By 
investigating  hyperpersonal  projections  within  pre-existing 
dating 
the 
Hyperpersonal model to broader relational contexts. Results 
show that the use of reduced-cue environments, such as the 
phone  and  texting,  is  associated  with  idealization  even  in 
relationships  where  partners  are  well  acquainted  with  one 
another  and  maintain  consistent  face-to-face  contact.  Not 
only  does  this  strengthen  the  external  validity  of  the 
hyperpersonal  perspective,  but 
its 
technological 
robustness.  Specifically, 
affordances 
in 
is  not  particularly  deep. 
situations  when  uncertainty 
Romantic  partners  can  idealize  their  partners  despite  the 
fact  that  they  know  them  fairly  well.  Within  this  general 
environment  of  plentiful  information  about  one’s  partner 
provided  by  face-to-face  contact,  mobile  media  appear  to 

relationships,  we  attempted 

the  propositions  of 

is  associated  with 

it  also  highlights 

idealization  even 

(i.e., 

to  expand 

the  use  of 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

allow for “pockets” of idealization – that is, communication 
spaces  where  imagination  can  still  thrive.  We  may  then 
conclude that hyperpersonal projection in a subset of one’s 
interactions  (i.e.,  those  occurring  through  interpersonal 
media) is a powerful phenomenon that is not obliterated by 
unrestricted face-to-face contact. 
The  fact  that  phone  use  was  associated  with  partner 
idealization in this dataset provides an additional extension 
to  hyperpersonal  research.  Indeed,  extant  research  has 
predominantly investigated text-based communication (e.g., 
email,  IM)  as  purveyor  of  hyperpersonal  projections.  The 
fact  that  the  phone,  which  merely  reduces  rather  than 
eliminates  nonverbal  cues,  is  associated  with  partner 
idealization  further  strengthens  the  robustness  of  the 
hyperpersonal  perspective.  The  Hyperpersonal  model 
appears to have utility for explaining effects across a range 
of media, not simply purely textual ones. 
One final addition to hyperpersonal research lies in the use 
of  the  quality  of  communication  variable  to  ascertain 
participants’  interpretation  of  message  qualities  across 
media. Previous research has mostly used an experimental 
paradigm for testing hyperpersonal propositions, where the 
medium  of  communication  was  treated  as  a  categorical 
variable  manipulated  by  the  researchers  [17,18,51].  In 
survey  research,  such  as  ours,  it  is  useful  to  capture 
people’s  interpretation  of  messages  through  continuous 
variables  as  well.  The  quality  of  communication  variable, 
which  we  introduced  here,  may  serve  such  a  purpose  in 
future  tests  of  the  hyperpersonal  model  using  survey 
designs.  
Practical Implications 
Romantic relationships are essential to happiness and well-
being [34]. The present research, as well as a robust body of 
prior literature, demonstrates that perceiving one’s romantic 
partner 
in  unrealistically  positive  ways  contributes 
substantially  to  the  satisfaction  individuals  derive  from 
these  relationships.  As  an  innovation  adduced  to  extant 
research,  the  present  study  shows  that  this  idealistic 
distortion  is  related  to  the  use  of  mobile  media.  These 
media  may 
for 
contributing to satisfaction in dating relationships. Couples 
may  be  able  to  enhance  relational  satisfaction  through 
mobile media communication in their everyday lives.  
Limitations and Future Research 
Several  important  limitations  need  to  be  acknowledged. 
First, this study used a correlational design that forecloses 
conclusions  about  causality.  While 
the  hyperpersonal 
perspective  predicts  that  the  quality  of  communication  in 
mediated environments causes partner idealization, it is also 
possible that partner idealization causes communication in 
mediated  environments  to  be  perceived  as  high  in  quality 
and,  in  turn,  high  quality  of  communication  leads  to 
relationship  satisfaction.  We  investigated  this  alternative 
possibility  by  constructing  a  path  model  with  idealistic 
distortion 
relationship 

therefore  be  useful  practical 

exogenous  variable, 

tools 

the 

as 

401

from 

involved 

relatively  affluent  college  students 

satisfaction  as  the  endogenous  variable,  and  quality  of 
communication  as  the  mediator.  The  data  did  not  fit  this 
alternative model well, indicating that it is more likely that 
the  quality  of  mediated  communication  predicts  partner 
idealization,  rather  than  the  other  way  around:  X2(2)  = 
122.50,  p =  .00;  RMSEA  =  .59  (90%  confidence  interval 
=  .50  to  .68);  CFI  =  .51;  GFI  =  .88;  SRMR  =  .10. 
Nonetheless,  it  will  be  necessary  for  future  studies  to 
employ  experimental  designs  in  order  to  definitively 
establish these variables’ direction of causality. 
Second,  this  study  used  a  fairly  homogenous  sample  of 
white, 
the 
Midwestern  USA.  Variables  such  as  ethnicity,  cultural 
background, and socio-economic status have been shown to 
affect  satisfaction  in  romantic  relationships  [21,51].  We 
recommend  that  future  research  examine  more  diverse 
samples and consider the impact of these variables. 
Third  and  relatedly,  the  present  study  focused  exclusively 
on  heterosexual  young  adults 
in  dating 
relationships.  We  believe  it  will  be  important  for  future 
studies  to  apply  the  present  theoretical  framework  to  a 
broader  set  of  relationships  –  specifically,  same-sex 
relationships,  marriages,  and  dating  relationships  among 
older adults. These additional contexts are characterized by 
psychological  factors  that  may  significantly  affect  partner 
idealization,  and  may  moderate  the  effect  of  mediated 
communication  on  partner  idealization.  For  example,  we 
have  already  reviewed  evidence  that  idealization  tends  to 
naturally  decrease  in  longer-term  relationships,  such  as 
marriage  [6].  Does  mediated  communication  still  afford 
opportunities  for  idealization  in  this  situation?  Similarly, 
homosexual  individuals  comprise  only  around  4%  of  the 
population  [38]  and  therefore  may  have  smaller  pools  of 
potential  partners 
restricted 
availability of potential partners may enhance idealization, 
and may create a situation where mediated communication 
plays an even stronger role in boosting idealization.   
Fourth,  we  recommend  that  future  research  uses  more 
objective  measures  for  tracking  participants’  frequency  of 
media  use,  such  as  system  logs.  Research  shows  that, 
despite  being  prevalent 
literature,  self-report 
measures  of  mobile  phone  use  are  only  moderately 
correlated with server log data [5]. 
Finally,  our  sample  included  individuals  who  were  fairly 
satisfied in their relationships. On a scale from 1 (not at all 
satisfied)  to  7  (very  satisfied),  the  mean  satisfaction  was 
5.86  and  the  median  was  6.  We  recommend  that  future 
research uses samples with more variability in relationship 
satisfaction levels. 
Conclusion 
Interpersonal  media  has  become  an  inextricable  part  of 
relational  management,  whether  it  be  friendships,  kin,  or 
romantic  relationships.  The  present  study  shows  that 
geographically  close  dating  relationships  rely  on  mobile 

from.  This 

to  choose 

in 

the 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

media  to  a  significant  extent,  and  that  the  use  of  these 
media 
is  associated  with  meaningful  psychological 
experiences.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We are grateful to Amelia Gordon and Samantha Hersil for 
their  help  with  data  collection,  and  to  the  Hamel  Family 
Foundation for their financial assistance. 
 
REFERENCES 
1.  Almond P. N. Aguila. 2011. Living long-distance 

relationships through computer-mediated 
communication. Soc Sci Diliman 5, 1-2: 83-106. 

2.  Reuben M. Baron and David A. Kenny. 1986. The 
moderator–mediator variable distinction in social 
psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and 
statistical considerations. J Pers Soc Psychol 51, 6: 
1173-1182. 

3.  Naomi Baron. 2008. Always on: Language in an online 

and mobile world. Oxford University Press. 

4.  Nancy K. Baym, Yan Bing Zhang, Adrianne Kunkel, 

5. 

6. 

Andrew Ledbetter, and Mei-Chen Lin. 2007. Relational 
quality and media use in interpersonal relationships. 
New Media & Soc 9, 5: 735-752. 
Jeffrey Boase and Rich Ling. 2013. Measuring mobile 
phone use: Self-­‐‑report versus log data.  J Comput-
Mediat Comm 18, 4: 508-519. 
Jennifer M. Bonds-Raacke, Erica S. Bearden, Noelle J. 
Carriere, Ellen M. Anderson, and Sandra D. Nicks. 
2001. Engaging distortions: are we idealizing 
marriage?" J Psychol 135, 2: 179-184. 

7.  Nicholas Brody. 2013. Absence—and mediated 
communication—makes the heart grow fonder: 
Clarifying the predictors of satisfaction and 
commitment in long-distance friendships. Commun Res 
Rep 30, 4: 323-332. 

8.  Mina Choi and Catalina L. Toma. 2014. Social sharing 

9. 

through interpersonal media: Patterns and effects on 
emotional well-being. Comp Hum Behav 36, 53-541. 
Jacob Cohen, Patricia Cohen, Stephen G. West, and 
Leona S. Aiken. 2013. Applied multiple 
regression/correlation analysis for the behavioral 
sciences. Routledge. 

10.  Sarah M. Coyne, Laura Stockdale, Dean Busby, 

Bethany Iverson, and David M. Grant. 2011. “I luv u 
:)!”: A descriptive study of the media use of individuals 
in romantic relationships. Fam Rel 60, 2: 150-162. 

11.  Steve Duck, Deborah J. Rutt, Margaret Hoy, and Hurst 

H. Strejc. 1991. Some evident truths about 
conversations in everyday relationships all 
communications are not created equal. Hum Commun 
Res 18, 2: 228-267.  

12.  Rachel A. Elphinston and Patricia Noller. 2011. Time 
to face it! Facebook intrusion and the implications for 
romantic jealousy and relationship satisfaction. 
Cyberpsychol Behav Soc Netw 14, 11: 631-635. 

402

13.  Tara M. Emmers-Sommer. 2004. The effect of 

communication quality and quantity indicators on 
intimacy and relational satisfaction. J Soc Pers Relatsh 
21, 3: 399-411. 

14.  Blaine J. Fowers and David H. Olson. 1993. ENRICH 
marital satisfaction scale: A brief research and clinical 
tool. J Fam Psychol 7, 2: 176-185. 

15.  Amy L. Gonzales. 2014. Text-based communication 

influences self-esteem more than face-to-face or 
cellphone communication. Comp Hum Behav 39: 197-
203. 

16.  Jeffrey A. Hall and Nancy K. Baym. 2012. Calling and 
texting (too much): Mobile maintenance expectations, 
(over) dependence, entrapment, and friendship 
satisfaction. New Media & Soc 14, 2: 316-331. 
17.  Jeffrey T. Hancock and Philip J. Dunham. 2001. 

Impression formation in computer-mediated 
communication revisited: An analysis of the breadth 
and intensity of impressions. Comm Res 28, 3: 325-
347. 

18.  Crystal L. Jiang, Natalie N. Bazarova, and Jeffrey T. 

Hancock. 2011. The disclosure-intimacy link in 
computer-mediated communication: An attributional 
extension of the Hyperpersonal model. Hum Commun 
Res 37, 1: 58-77.   

19.  Crystal L. Jiang and Jeffrey T. Hancock. 2013. 

Absence makes the communication grow fonder: 
Geographic separation, interpersonal media, and 
intimacy in dating relationships. J Commun 63, 3: 556-
577.  

20.  Billedo C. Joy, Peter Kerkhof, and Catrin Finkenauer. 

2015. The use of social networking sites for 
relationship maintenance in long-distance and 
geographically close romantic relationships. 
Cyberpsychol Behav Soc Netw 18, 3: 152-157. 

21.  Sun-Mee Kang, Phillip R. Shaver, Stanley Sue, Kyung-
Hwan Mina, and Hauibin Jing. 2003. Culture-specific 
patterns in the prediction of life satisfaction: Roles of 
emotion, relationship quality, and self-esteem. Pers Soc 
Psychol B 29, 12: 1596-1608. 

http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1125451.1125530 

22.  Rex B. Kline. 2005. Principles and practice of 
structural equation modeling. Guilford Press. 

23.  Lawrence A. Kurdek. 2006. Differences between 

partners from heterosexual, gay, and lesbian cohabiting 
couples. J Marriage Fam 68, 2: 509-528. 

24.  Richard Ling and Birgitte Yttri. 2002. Hyper-
coordination via mobile phones in Norway. In 
Perpetual contact: Mobile communication, private talk, 
public performance, James E. Katz and Mark Aakhus 
(eds.). Cambridge University Press, New York, NY, 
139-169. 

25.  Barbara M. Montgomery. 1988. Quality 

communication in personal relationships. In Handbook 
of personal relationships: Theory, research and 
intervention, Steve Duck, Stevan E. Hobfoll, William 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Ickes, and Barbara M. Montgomery (eds.). John Wiley 
& Sons, Chichester, UK, 343-359. 

26.  Jennifer N. Morey, Amy L. Gentzler, Brian Creasy, 
Ann M. Oberhauser, and David Westerman. 2013. 
Young adults’ use of communication technology 
within their romantic relationships and associations 
with attachment style. Comp Hum Behav 29: 1771-
1778. 

27.  Sandra L. Murray, John G. Holmes, and Dale W. 
Griffin. 1996. The benefits of positive illusions: 
Idealization and the construction of satisfaction in close 
relationships. J Pers Soc Psychol 70, 1: 79-98. 
28.  Carman Neustaedter and Saul Greenberg. 2011. 

29.  Wire Nielsen. 2010. US teen mobile report: Calling 

Intimacy in long-distance relationships over video chat. 
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, 753-762. 

http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2207676.2207785 
http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/news/20
10/u-­‐s-­‐teen-­‐mobile-­‐report-­‐calling-­‐yesterday-­‐
texting-­‐today-­‐using-­‐apps-­‐tomorrow.html 

yesterday, texting today, using apps tomorrow. 
Retrieved May 21, 2015 from 

30.  Martha S. Perry and Ronald J. Werner-Wilson. 2011. 
Couples and computer-mediated communication: A 
closer look at the affordances and use of the channel. 
Fam Consum Sci Res J 40, 2: 120-134. 

31.  Lee Rainie. 2013. Cell phone ownership hits 91% of 

adults. Retrieved Sep 20, 2015 from 
http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2013/06/06/cell-
phone-ownership-hits-91-of-adults/ 

32.  Artemio Ramirez and Kathy Broneck. 2009. IM me’: 

Instant messaging as relational maintenance and 
everyday communication. J Soc Pers Relatsh 26, 2-3: 
291-314. 

33.  Corinne Reczek and Debra Umberson. 2012. Gender, 
health behavior, and intimate relationships: Lesbian, 
gay, and straight contexts. Soc Sci Med 74, 11: 1783-
1790. 

34.  Harry T. Reis. 1990. The role of intimacy in 

interpersonal relations. J Soc Clin Psychol 9, 1: 15-30. 

35.  Keith D. Renshaw, Patrick McKnight, Catherine M. 
Caska, and Rebecca K. Blais. 2011. The utility of the 
relationship assessment scale in multiple types of 
relationships. J Soc Pers Relatsh 28,4: 435-447. 
36.  Yves Rosseel. 2012. Lavaan: An R package for 

structural equation modeling. J Stat Softw 48, 2: 1-36. 

37.  Marion L. Schulman. 1974. Idealization in engaged 

couples. J Marriage Fam 36, 1: 139-147. 

38.  Sandhya Somashekhar. 2014. Health survey gives 

government its first large-scale data on gay, bisexual 
population. Retrieved May 20, 2015 from 

http://www.washingtonpost.com/national/health-­‐
science/health-­‐survey-­‐gives-­‐government-­‐its-­‐first-­‐
large-­‐scale-­‐data-­‐on-­‐gay-­‐bisexual	  

403

population/2014/07/14/2db9f4b0-­‐092f-­‐11e4-­‐
bbf1-­‐cc51275e7f8f_story.html 

39.  Laura Stafford. 2004. Maintaining long-distance and 

cross-residential relationships. Routledge. 

40.  Laura Stafford and Andy J. Merolla. 2007. Idealization, 

reunions, and stability in long-distance dating 
relationships. J Soc Pers Relatsh 24, 1: 37-54. 

41.  Laura Stafford and James R. Reske. 1990. Idealization 

and communication in long-distance premarital 
relationships. Fam Relat 39, 3: 274-279. 

42.  Joachim Stoeber. 2012. Dyadic perfectionism in 

romantic relationships: Predicting relationship 
satisfaction and longterm commitment. Pers Individ 
Dif 53, 3: 300-305. 

43.  William B. Swann Jr, Chris De La Ronde, and J. 
Gregory Hixon. 1994. Authenticity and positivity 
strivings in marriage and courtship. J Pers Soc psychol 
66, 5: 857-869. 

44.  William B. Swann, Gregory J. Hixon, and Chris De La 

Ronde. 1992. Embracing the bitter “truth”: Negative 
self-concepts and marital commitment. Psychol Sci 3, 
2: 118-121. 

45.  George M. Tarabulsy, Simon Larose, Annie Bernier, 

Karine Trottier-Sylvain, Doryna Girard, Maria Vargas, 
and Catherine Noël. 2012. Attachment states of mind 
in late adolescence and the quality and course of 
romantic relationships in adulthood. Attach Hum Dev 
14, 6: 621-643. 

46.  Robert S. Tokunaga. 2011. Social networking site or 

social surveillance site? Understanding the use of 
interpersonal electronic surveillance in romantic 
relationships. Comput Hum Behav 27, 2: 705-713. 

47.  Catalina L. Toma and Mina Choi. 2015. The couple 

who Facebook together, stays together: Facebook self-
presentation and relationship longevity among college-
aged dating couples. Cyberpsychol Behav Soc Net 18, 
7: 367-372. 

48.  Sherry Turkle. 2008. Always-on/always-on-you: The 
tethered self. In Handbook of mobile communication 
studies, James E. Katz (ed.). The MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA, 121-137. 

49.  Joseph B. Walther. 2007. Selective self-presentation in 

computer-mediated communication: Hyperpersonal 
dimensions of technology, language, and cognition. 
Comp Hum Behav 23, 5: 2538-2557.  

50.  Joseph B. Walther. 1996. Computer-mediated 
communication impersonal, interpersonal, and 
hyperpersonal interaction. Comm Res 23, 1: 3-43. 

51.  Joseph B. Walther, Celeste L. Slovacek, and Lisa C. 
Tidwell. 2001. Is a picture worth a thousand words? 
Photographic images in long-term and short-term 
computer mediated communication. Comm Res 29, 1: 
105-134. 

52.  Kandauda K. Wickrama and Catherine W. O’Neal. 

2015. The socioeconomic pathways leading to 
romantic relationship outcomes: A genetically 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

informed early life course investigation. J Res Adolesc 
DOI: 10.1111/jora.12207 

53.  Kevin B. Wright. 2004. On-line relational maintenance 

	  

strategies and perceptions of partners within 
 

exclusively internet-based and primarily internet-based 
relationships. Commun Stud 55, 2: 239-253.

404

