CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Embracing Cultural Diversity: Online Social Ties in 

Distributed Workgroups 
Kate Ehrlich 
IBM Research 

Michael M. Macy 
Cornell University 
Ithaca, NY, USA 
m.macy@cornell.edu

Cambridge, MA, USA 

katee@us.ibm.com 

Wei Dong 

Cornell University 
Ithaca, NY, USA 
wd96@cornell.edu 

Michael Muller 
IBM Research 

Cambridge, MA, USA 

michael_muller@us.ibm.com 

ABSTRACT 
Cross-cultural  network  ties  have  been  shown  to  improve 
decision-making,  creativity,  conflict-resolution  and  use  of 
collaborative  technologies.  Nevertheless,  cultural  barriers 
are  difficult  to  overcome.  We  used  data  from  an  internal 
Social Networking System (SNS) in a large global company 
to see if membership in the same company might reduce the 
effect of cultural homophily. We found no effect. However, 
when  we 
focused  on  members  of  87  distributed 
workgroups, we found that the effect of cultural differences 
actually  reversed,  indicating  greater  cultural  diversity  in 
online  friendship  ties  than  observed  in  the  company  at 
large.  We  discuss  alternative  explanations  for  this  finding 
and  the  implications  for  work  environments  in  global 
companies. 

Author Keywords 
SNA; Homophily; Social Networks; Culture; Geography; 
Distance; MNC; Social Media
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.3. Group & organizational interfaces: CSCW

INTRODUCTION 
People rely on their friends to provide reliable information 
needed  to  further  their  work  and  career  [3,  7,  17,  47]. 
Moreover, having a diverse set of friends may contribute to 
more  productive  collaborations  [5],  higher 
individual 
performance  in  work  settings  [6],  and  higher  economic 
development  of  communities  [11].  In  addition  to  network 
diversity,  cultural  diversity  has  been  shown  to  improve 
decision-making  [50],  creative  outcomes  [57],  conflict-
resolution  [44]  and  use  of  collaborative  technologies  [45]. 
Despite the value of diversity, research reveals widespread 
homophily: the tendency to interact with people of similar 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that  copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work 
owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is 
permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute 
to  lists,  requires  prior  specific  permission  and/or  a  fee.  Request  permissions 
from Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2835198 

background and interests [2, 26, 27, 37, 38]. Similarity can 
be  based  on  many  dimensions,  including  age,  gender, 
ethnicity, occupation, religion, politics, and lifestyle [38]. 
However,  the  early  research  on  homophily  only  examined 
offline  social  ties.  In  the  virtual  world  where  work  is 
frequently  mediated  through  communication  technologies, 
employees are exposed to a greater diversity of people than 
in  a  physical  environment  [30,  41,  60].  The  growth  of 
Social  Networking  Systems  (SNS)  within  corporations 
further  increases  visibility  and  awareness  of  people  in 
remote locations [1, 10, 23, 35]. These technologies may be 
beneficial  because  companies  have  a  shared  culture  and 
context  which  establishes  a  level  of  trust  [10,  39].  As  a 
consequence, corporations sometimes promote  diversity in 
collaborative partners by encouraging the use of external or 
internal SNS [10, 23, 53]. Despite easier access to diverse 
global populations, recent research indicates that homophily 
remains a dominant factor in online social networks [31, 32, 
54, 55]. The strong benefit of diversity, however, prompts 
us to re-examine homophily in two organizational settings.  
Of particular relevance to the present paper is a recent study 
by  State  and  colleagues  [52]  that  used  global  data  from 
online  interactions  to  see  if  "cultural  fault  lines"  in  the 
offline  world  were  attenuated  in  cyberspace.  These  fault 
lines were posited by Huntington [24, 25] in his provocative 
account  of  the  “clash  of  civilizations”,  which  was  written 
prior  to  the  widespread  use  of  social  media.  State  and 
colleagues  used  data  from  Twitter  as  well  as  email  since 
these platforms may have different network properties [18]. 
Email  lacks  mechanisms  to  enable  users  to  discover  one 
another  and  therefore  tends  to  reflect  existing  social  ties, 
while Twitter is better equipped to facilitate the formation 
of  new  social  relationships  [52].  They  also  adjusted  the 
between-country  social  densities  to  account  for  disparities 
in  population,  internet  access,  and  market  share.  Results 
showed  that  countries  were  clustered  in  culturally  distinct 
communities  corresponding  to  the  eight  “civilizations” 
posited by Huntington based on a combination of religious, 
secular, nationalist and political differences. The effects of 
cultural  homophily  remained  statistically  significant  even 
after  controlling  for  economic,  political,  geo-spatial,  and 
linguistic measures. 
Although  the  ability  to  interact  online  does  not  seem  to 
have  attenuated  cultural  homophily,  a  company-wide 

274

survey 

[54]  examined 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES
 
 
internal SNS may be more effective in promoting diversity 
compared  to  generic  platforms,  since  companies  have  a 
shared culture and context which establishes a level of trust 
[10, 39]. Company-based SNS communication has not been 
widely  investigated  but  the  results  from  one  study  found 
clustering  around  country-based  similarity.  Thom-Santelli 
and  colleagues 
respondents’ 
propensity  to  form  connections  with  people  in  other 
countries  using  an  internal  corporate  SNS,  and  found  that 
the majority of connections were within the same country. 
Kossinets  and  Watts  [32]  collected  email  communication 
within a large university setting to look at the evolution of 
network  ties  over  time  as  a  function  of  similarity  of 
demographics  (e.g.  status,  gender,  age),  organizational 
affiliation, courses and email variables (e.g. messages sent, 
messages received, in-degree, out-degree). They found that 
individuals who were similar were more likely to form ties 
and that this effect was even more pronounced when they 
had friends in common. 
A  more  complex  picture  emerges  when  we  consider  the 
pattern  of  social  ties  within  distributed  workgroups  where 
the motivation to connect to other people may be driven by 
the coordination needs of the project [13, 21] and the need 
to  get  rapid  access  to  expertise  within  the  group  [14,  59]. 
These instrumental motivations may reduce the significance 
and relevance of culture in the choice of collaborators. In a 
study on open source projects, Shen and Monge [51] found 
that  developers  were  more  likely  to  chose  projects  with 
people 
levels  of 
performance, experience, skill and reputation rather than on 
the  basis  of  demographic  similarity.  Yuan  and  Gay  [61] 
studied  the  frequency  of  task-related  and  non-task-related 
communication among 32 students from 2 universities who 
used email to communicate with each other on engineering 
projects in a distance learning class. They did not find any 
effect of similarity of gender or race on the social ties for 
either the task-related or non-task-related relationships after 
controlling for prior relationships.  
Other  studies  have  found  evidence  for  cultural  homophily 
in workgroups despite the potential performance gains from 
diversity.  Hinds  and  colleagues  [22]  found  a  consistent 
preference to select future workgroup partners of the same 
race  in  small  undergraduate  software  projects.  Ruef  and 
colleagues  [49]  studied  the  composition  of  entrepreneurial 
teams  and  found  a  strong  effect  of  ethnic  similarity.  In  a 
study  of  enterprise  crowdfunding 
in  which  people 
collaborated  online  to  propose  or  support  new  projects, 
Muller  and  colleagues  [40]  found  that  supporters  of  a 
project were more likely to come from the same country as 
the  proposer.  However,  they  also  found  that  there  were 
similar  effects  if  supporters  and  proposers  had  another 
attribute in common, such as same organizational division 
or same team. This outcome suggests a more flexible view 
of what factors drive homophilous associations. 

they  perceived  as  having  similar 

275

The differences in the findings may reflect the small size of 
the workgroups. The smaller the population, the greater the 
network density and therefore the lower the expected level 
of clustering. A more rigorous test of homophily requires a 
population  large  enough  to  accommodate  homophilous 
sorting.  We  therefore  examined  the  clustering  of  online 
social  ties  in  a  large  global  corporation.  The  study  was 
conducted  with  data  from  a  proprietary  SNS,  which  had 
been deployed for several years throughout the corporation 
with  widespread  adoption.  In  alignment  with  State  and 
colleagues, 
the  present  study  also  uses  Huntington’s 
classification, but extends the question scope from generic 
online platforms to work settings. Specifically, we want to 
examine whether working in the same company is sufficient 
to overcome a bias towards cultural homophily, or, whether 
smaller  organizational  units,  in  our  case  87  distributed 
workgroups,  may  attenuate  a  bias 
toward  cultural 
homophily in online friendship ties. 
BACKGROUND 
We chose to analyze cultural differences using Huntington's 
framework  in  order  to  align  our  study  with  State  and 
colleagues  [52].  Their  study  was  designed  to  test  whether 
the reduction of spatial constraints on social interaction in 
online  networks  was  sufficient  to  overcome  the  cultural 
divisions posited by Huntington. They found that it was not. 
We build on those results by testing whether organizational 
settings are sufficient, at the level of an entire company and 
at the workgroup level. 
Huntington’s  core  claim  is  that  “in  the  post-Cold  War 
world,  the  most  important  distinctions  among  peoples  are 
not  ideological,  political,  or  economic.  They  are  cultural.” 
(p.  21)  [25].  He  classified  the  world’s  national  states  into 
“eight civilizations”, the Western, Orthodox, Islamic, Latin 
American,  African,  Sinic,  Hindu,  and  Buddhist.  The 
countries in each of these eight civilizations are similar in 
religion, language, and regional location but his typology is 
not reducible to these dimensions. For example, Huntington 
emphasizes the deep religious divisions within the Islamic 
world,  and  multiple  languages  are  spoken  in  each.  While 
countries  may  be  culturally  similar  to  their  neighbors,  the 
vast  territorial  span  of  a  civilization  means  that  there  can 
also be culturally similar that are far apart. In addition, there 
are  religious  and  language  similarities  and  shared  borders 
between  countries  in  different  locations  in  Huntington’s 
typology.  Instead,  Huntington  claims  that  the  common 
denominator of each civilization is a deeply rooted cultural 
affinity and identity that has accumulated over centuries of 
economic 
imperial 
expansion,  population  migration,  and  regional  conflict. 
With  the  demise  of  the  former  Soviet  Union,  Huntington 
contends, these ancient cultural divisions have resurfaced as 
the “fault lines” in global conflicts and the “flash points for 
crisis  and  bloodshed.”  Despite  the  bitter  and  sometimes 
violent religious divisions between Sunni and Shia (and for 
that  matter 
and  Protestants), 

interaction,  political 

between  Catholics 

integration, 

implications 

that  Huntington  drew 

 
 
Huntington’s  poster  child  is  the  Middle  East:  “On  both 
sides the interaction between Islam and the West is seen as 
a clash of civilizations.” [24] 
While  Huntington’s  typology  is  a  useful  template  for 
measuring  cultural  homophily,  we  explicitly  reject  the 
policy 
from  his 
classification.  In  addition,  some  of  his  classifications  are 
contestable,  such  as  placing  Suriname  in  the  Africa 
category or Jamaica in the Western category (Appendix 1). 
Despite these concerns, we adopted Huntington’s typology 
in  order  to  align  our  analysis  with  the  results  reported  by 
State  and  colleagues  [52].  Their  study  differed  from 
Huntington’s  in  two  important  ways.  First,  Huntington 
constructed  his  typology  “top  down,"  based  on  cultural 
affinities  among  different  nations,  while  State  and 
colleagues  measured  the  “bottom  up”  between-country 
density  of  social  interaction  among  individuals.  Second, 
Huntington focused on conflict (the “clash of civilizations”) 
while  State  and  colleagues  focused  on  interaction  (the 
“mesh  of  civilizations”).  Nevertheless,  they  found  that 
communication  densities  corresponded  to  the  cultural 
divisions  posited  by  Huntington.  Alignment  with  their 
design  allows  us  to  address  the  central  question  that 
motivates our study: whether organizational ties can bridge 
the fault lines of civilization.  
METHODS 
Setting 
The  study  was  conducted  within  a  large  multinational 
corporation 
that  provided  a  proprietary  social  media 
platform  to  all  its  employees.  The  platform  includes 
discussion forums, blogs, wikis, shared bookmarks, shared 
files, feeds and activities as well as profile information and 
opportunities  for  “friending”  others.  Any  employee  can 
invite  any  other  employee  to  join  their  network.  The 
connection is made when the invitation is accepted.  
A  large  multinational  corporation  provides  an  exceptional 
opportunity 
the  effects  of  a  shared  social, 
professional,  organizational  and  technical  environment  on 
the  formation  and  persistence  of  social  ties  that  span 
cultural  divisions  [10,  39].  Most  importantly,  we  have  an 
opportunity  to  go  beyond  existing  studies  [32,  52,  54]  to 
examine  whether  cultural  homophily  is  attenuated  among 
members  of  workgroups.  We  had  access  to  a  large 
population  of  employees  across  97  countries,  providing 
sufficient coverage to evaluate cultural homophily.  
For  the  workgroup  analysis  we  selected  87  sales  account 
groups that provide technical products and services to large 
multinational  accounts  based  in  Europe,  Asia,  South 
America or North America. Each sales group was led by a 
senior executive, who was supported by a distributed group 
of  people  from  multiple  sales,  services  and  technical 
functions.  Sales  leads  were  dedicated  to  a  single  account 

to 

test 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

while technical and other specialists could support multiple 
accounts. 
Groups have a matrix structure such that members represent 
different  functional  divisions  and  report  to  a  division 
manager  rather  than  the  team  executive.  Team  members 
work out of multiple offices, including home-based offices. 
Face-to-face  meetings  that  include  all  team  members 
typically occur less than twice a year. More often, members 
communicate  via 
technology  or  during  unplanned 
encounters  at  company  or  client  sites.  Although  members 
can operate largely independently of each other, they need 
to coordinate and pool their information about the customer 
in  order  to  meet  sales  targets,  deadlines  and  their  own 
performance goals. 
At any given time there are multiple projects for planning, 
proposal  development,  product  or  service  delivery,  and 
support activities. Projects could be as short as a few weeks 
or  extend  over  many  months  and  involve  five  or  fewer 
people  or  a  team  of  30  or  more.  The  groups  were  loosely 
structured;  people  joined  the  group  if  they  were  needed 
even if the need was temporary. 
The  particular  groups  we  included  in  the  study  were 
selected  based  on  an  opportunistic  sampling  method  [42]. 
About  a  year  before  the  data  collection,  these  groups  had 
been  selected  to  participate  in  an  initiative  to  use  online 
communities to improve sharing within a sales account. The 
communities, which were set up within the SNS platform, 
were  designed  to  provide  a  place  where  each  sales  group 
could privately share data, files and information  about the 
account.  All  the  communities  used  the  same  design 
template, were all set up within a few months of each other 
and  had 
increase  sharing  and 
dissemination  of  account  knowledge.  While  members  of 
each  sales  group  were  encouraged  to  make  use  of  the 
community  by  adding  and  reading  content,  participation 
was not mandated and was not markedly different than the 
participation level in other active online communities in the 
company.  Namely,  some  groups  were  very  active  and 
engaged  in  their  community  while  other  groups  lagged 
behind.  The  design,  development  and  deployment  of  the 
online  communities  to  the  87  groups  provided  us  with  an 
opportunity  to  collect  data  from  a  set  of  workgroups  who 
had similar functions, were all part of the same organization 
and  were  exposed  to  a  similar  set  of  online  social 
experiences over the same period of time.  
It is important to note, however, that the workgroup data in 
the current study came from friendship ties, formed in the 
open SNS platform, scoped to one or more members of the 
sales groups. Membership in an online community offered a 
common experience for the members within each of the 87 
workgroups,  but  the  friendship-tie  data  in  the  study  came 
from the public platform. That is, all employees, including 
sales group members, can freely become friends with other 

the  same  goal 

to 

276

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES
 
 
employees  company-wide.  No  friendship  tie  was  imposed 
or required when the communities were introduced. 
Data Collection 
We obtained a snapshot of the entire social network on the 
platform,  involving  over  a  quarter  million  individuals  and 
over two million undirected ties across 97 countries. Aside 
from  country  of  employment,  we  did  not  have  individual-
level  measures  of  cultural  attributes  such  as  ethnicity, 
language,  or  religion,  and  therefore  followed  the  same 
procedure  used  by  State  and  colleagues  [52],  analyzing 
cultural  homophily  using  pairwise  between-country 
network  densities  adjusted  for  the  different  employee 
population  size  in  each  country.  We  did,  however,  have 
individual-level  measures  of  online  friendship  ties.  Thus, 
the pairwise densities are aggregate measures of individual-
level friendships between employees in two countries. 
We  downloaded  a  single  copy  of  the  entire  friendship 
network from the platform as it appeared in August 2014. 
Using  the  API  provided  by  the  platform,  we  iterated 
through  every  user  and  downloaded  all  his/her  friends. 
These  data  were  used  to  construct  the  global  company 
graph as well as the global sales group graph (see Table 1). 
In  addition  to  the  friendship  network,  we  also  collected 
each  employee’s  country  or  region  of  employment1 from 
the  company’s  HR  database.  Countries  were  coded 
according 
eight 
civilizations  (see  Appendix  1).  Following  [52],  we  also 
collected  each  country’s  language,  historical  international 
alignment,  religion  and  geographic  location  using  public 
sources  (see  Appendix  2).  These  country  level  variables 
will  be  used  as  control  variables  in  our  statistical  models. 
Since  Huntington's  cultural  classifications  do  not  map 
directly  onto  any  single  dimension  such  as  religion  or 
language,  by  controlling  for  the  above  variables,  any 
residual  effect  reflects  the  national  culture  after  language, 
religion and location have been excluded. 
Full Social Network 
At the time of data collection, the platform had more than 
half  a  million  users,  the  majority  of  whom  had  been 
actively using the platform. During the month prior to the 
data  collection,  over  330k  users  had  used  the  platform  at 

classification  of 

to  Huntington’s 

 

N(employees) 
N(employees) (degree > 0) 
N(friendship ties) 
N(countries) 

Full 

Network 
588,752 
262,806 
2,235,622 

97 

Sales 

Network 
22,746 
15,602 
58,449 

53 

Table 1: Descriptive statistics for the two networks 

                                                 
1Although a small number, a few regions, such as Hong Kong, are listed 
and  analyzed  separately.  For  simplicity,  we  use  the  term  “countries” 
instead of “countries and regions” for the rest of the paper. 

277

level  network.  Using 

least once, and over 200k users had been using the platform 
weekly.  After  removing  users  with  no  friends  and  non-
person  user  profiles  used  by  the  company  for  functional 
purposes,  the  friendship  network  consisted  of  2,235,622 
undirected  edges  among  262,806  unique  employees  with 
one or more friends located in 97 different countries. 
Work Group Network 
The  sales  groups  (work  groups)  ranged  from  2  to  1,797 
members, with a mean of 314.5 and median of 166. There 
were  22,746  unique  employees  who  were  members  of  at 
least one of the 87 sales groups. After removing nodes with 
no friendship edges, the sales network consisted of 58,449 
edges among 15,602 employees from 53 different countries 
and represented all major divisions within the company. 
DATA ANALYSES 
We  conducted  parallel  analyses  for  the  full  and  the 
workgroup  network.  Instead  of  testing  homophily  at  the 
individual level, we aggregated the friendship network into 
a measure of adjusted friendship density (explained in detail 
below)  between  each  pair  of  countries,  and  generated  a 
country 
the  between-country 
friendship density measure, we examined whether countries 
belonging  to  the  same  civilization  (homophily)  have 
stronger ties (aggregated from all employees) than countries 
belonging to different civilizations in three analyses: 
First,  we  created  visualizations  to  illustrate  the  distinct 
clustering patterns of countries in the two networks.  
Second,  we  used  two  community  detection  algorithms  to 
empirically 
level 
network, and examined their agreement with Huntington’s 
classification.  
Third,  we  used  multiple-regression  quadratic  assignment 
procedure  (MRQAP)  to  statistically  test  the  effect  of 
Huntington’s  classification  on  the  strength  of  between 
country  friendship  densities,  controlling  for  other  country 
level  variables.  MRQAP  is  a  multiple-regression  method 
designed  for  network  data,  where  the  assumption  of 
independent observations cannot be met. More details will 
be provided as we discuss the results of these models.  
Lastly, we show that similar result patterns can be observed 
by comparing within- and between-country friendship ties. 
Adjusted Friendship Density 
We  measured  network  densities  following  the  method  in 
State  and  colleagues  [52].  We  used  the  number  of 
friendship ties between employees in each pair of countries 
to represent the strength of between-country relations on the 
internal  SNS  online  platform.  To  account  for  the  fact  that 
the  company  has  different  numbers  of  employees  in 
different  countries,  we  compared  the  observed  number  of 

friendship  ties (𝑁!") between  country 𝑖 and  country j to  the 
expected number  𝐸𝑥𝑝  𝑁 !" if all employees in all countries 

were  to  form  friends  randomly  (within-country  friendship 

identify  clusters  from 

the  country 

 
 

density  is  calculated  when 𝑖=𝑗).  The  adjusted  friendship 
density D!" is then the log ratio of observed to expected ties: 

𝐷!"=log

!!"
!"#!!". 

The expected number of friendship ties was derived from a 
random  network  generated  by  Maslov-Snelling  edge 
randomization  [19].  This  procedure  iteratively  replaces  a 
random pair of edges (u-v, x-y) with new edges (u-x, v-y), 
until all of the original edges have been replaced (allowing 
some  of  the  originals  to  be  reinvented  by  chance).  The 
double-swap  procedure  randomizes  the  network  structure 
while preserving the degree of each node. 

The  adjusted  friendship  density 𝐷!"  can 
spanning  from  negative  to  positive. 𝐷!">0 indicates  that 
expected,  meaning  that  employees  in  countries  𝑖 and  𝑗 are 
randomly from all users in the corporation. When 𝐷!"≤0, 

more likely to be friends than if they were to choose friends 

the  observed  number  of  friendship  ties  is  greater  than 

take  values 

location 

the  observed  number  of  friendship  ties  is  no  greater  than 
chance. 
RESULTS 
Visualizing Between-Country Friendship Density 
Using  the  adjusted  between-country  friendship  densities, 
we visualized the network using the Fruchterman-Reingold 
algorithm  [16],  which  requires  that  edge  weights  be 
normalized to the unit interval using linear transformations. 
Figure  1  visualizes  the  country  level  friendship  density 
graph generated from the full population (1a) and the sales 
network (1b). Country nodes were color-coded according to 
the  country’s 
in  one  of  Huntington’s  eight 
civilizations. To minimize noise, only the 69 countries with 
20  or  more  employees  were  included  in  the  full  company 
visualization, which included the 53 countries used for the 
sales  group  visualization.  Although  node  location  was 
determined using all edge weights, we avoided a “hairball 
visualization” by only displaying the 600 densest edges. 
The  monochromatic  clusters  in  Figure  1(a)  are  consistent 
with  Huntington’s  cultural  fault  lines  and  with  the  results 
reported in State and colleagues [52] for global email and 
Twitter users. That is, we can see that countries in the same 
civilization category tend to cluster together. In contrast, the 
sales  network  shows  no  clustering  on  this  same  cultural 
dimension. That is, there do not appear to be clusters based 
on civilization categories. In other words, the results show 
effects  of  cultural  homophily  for  the  organization  as  a 
whole but not for the workgroups. 
Community Detection 
The monochromatic clusters in Figure 1(a) are not the only 
possible  pattern.  Imagine  all  the  nodes  were  uncolored 
circles  but  with  the  identical  location.  Would  you  still  be 
able to see the same clusters? Following the procedure used 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

by  State  and  colleagues  [52],  we  compared  Huntington’s 
theory-based classification with two atheoretic community2 
detection  algorithms  –  the  Spinglass  [4]  and  Fastgreedy 
[48] – using the igraph package in Python. Both atheoretic 
algorithms detected 6 to 8 communities in both the full and 
sales group networks. Figure 2 illustrates the communities 
detected by the Spinglass algorithm, visually demonstrating 
its high agreement with Huntington’s classification for the 
full  network  and  low  agreement  for  the  sales  group  in 
Figure 1.  
We  used  the  Rand  index  [46],  a  measure  similar  to  inter-
coder  agreement,  to  measure  the  pairwise  proportion  of 
nodes  that  are  classified  identically  by  each  of  the  three 
methods (i.e., the agreement on whether to put two nodes in 
the  same  cluster,  or  in  different  clusters).  Table  2  shows 
that  Huntington’s  classification  had  high  agreement  with 
the two community detection algorithms for the full sample. 
In fact, the agreement is slightly higher than the agreement 
between 
two  community  detection  algorithms, 
suggesting that although Huntington’s may not be the only 
division possible, this top-down culture-based classification 
is  at  least  as  plausible  as  the  clusters  derived  from 
algorithmic optimization. In contrast, the agreement among 
the three classification methods is much lower for the sales 
network.  Huntington’s  classification  performs  worse  than 
the  empirical  algorithms,  indicating  that  no  consistent 
clustering pattern can be detected from the sales network. In 
short,  cultural  barriers  to  social  interaction  persist  in  the 
company-wide full network, but not in the sales network. 

the 

 

Huntington - Spinglass 
Huntington - Fastgreedy 
Spinglass - Fastgreedy 

Full 

Network 

Sales 

Network 

.739 
.770 
.709 

.579 
.683 
.660 

Table 2: Rand index of pairwise agreement among three 

classifications 

MRQAP models 
The  results  for  the  full  network  in  Figure  1,  Figure  2  and 
Table  2  are  consistent  with  cultural  homophily  at  the 
company  level,  but  they  do  not  identify  which  cultural 
dimensions are responsible. Following State and colleagues 
[52],  we  used  multiple-regression  quadratic  assignment 
procedure  (MRQAP)  to  model  the  effects  of  common 
civilization  net  of  other  pairwise  cultural  similarities  that 
might  account  for  the  zero-order  correlation  between  co-
location in one of Huntington’s civilizations and friendship 
density.  MRQAP  uses  random  permutations  of  the  rows 
and columns of the adjacency matrix to locate the observed  
                                                 
2The term “community” refers to an empirical network cluster and should 
not be confused with the formal sales group communities that exist on the 
SNS platform. 

278

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

(a) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(b) 

!

 

 

 

 

 

 
Figure 1: Between-country friendship density graphs for the full company (a) and sales group (b). 

 

 

 

 

 

(a) 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

(b) 

Figure 2: Between-country friendship density graphs with nodes colored based on the Spinglass 

 community detection algorithm for the full company (a) and sales group (b). 

 

279

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

the  distribution  of 

 
 
coefficients  within 
randomized 
coefficients. If the observed coefficient is larger than 95% 
of those randomly generated, then the observed coefficient 
can  be  said  to  be  statistically  significant  at  the  .05  level. 
This method provides a robust alternative to the estimation 
of  standard  errors  using  OLS  for  network  data  where  the 
assumption of independent observations cannot be met [8, 
9,  33].  Despite  the  different  assumptions  used  to  estimate 
standard errors, model coefficients should be interpreted in 
the same way as regular multiple-regression models. 

(𝐷!")  matrix  as  the  outcome  measure.  In  addition  to  co-

We  used  the  adjusted  between-country  friendship  density 

location  in  one  of  Huntington’s  eight  civilizations,  we 
included  shared 
language,  shared religion,  geographic 
proximity,  and  common  historical  international  alignment 
as control variables (see Appendix 2 for how each variable 
was calculated). The units are country pairs and the model 
predicts  between-country  friendship  density  as  a  linear 
function of similarity on each of the above measures (e.g. it 
is not the religion that matters but the religious similarity). 

  Intercept 
  Common Civilization 

 
s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
V

 
l
o
r
t
n
o
C

  Cultural Alignment 
      Shared Language 
      Shared Religion 
      Ln Distance (km) 
      Shared Border 
  International Alignment 
      Both Western Bloc 
      Both Eastern Bloc 
      Both Non-Aligned Movement 
      Shared Colonial Ties 
      Shared Commonwealth Ties 

  Model Fit 
      Adjusted R2 
      F-statistics 
      DF 
***: p< .001, **: p< .01, *: p< .05, +: p< .10 

Model 0 
-1.30 *** 
.66 *** 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

.06 
82.05 
1, 1376 

 

 

Model 1 
-1.35 *** 
.58 *** 

.81 *** 

  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

.09 
67.65 
2, 1375 

Model 2 
-.71 * 
.63 *** 

.87 *** 
.11 ** 
-.11 ** 
.76 *** 

  

  
  
  
  
  
  

.16 
52.51 
5, 1372 

Model 3 
-.71 * 
.61 *** 

  

  

.77 *** 
.07 * 
-.10 *** 
.73 *** 

-.42 ** 
.25  
1.17 *** 
.18  
-.07  

.24 
45.55 
10, 1367 

Model 4 
-.55 * 
  
  

.89 *** 
.01  
-.10 *** 
.96 *** 

  
-.37 * 
.34  
1.22 *** 
.15  
-.25  

.21 
41.27 
9, 1368 

 

 

 

Table 3: Coefficients of MRQAP models predicting between country friendship density from similarity along multiple 

dimensions (Full Network, N = 53 countries, 1378 country pairs) 

 

 

  Intercept 
  Common Civilization 

 
s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
V

 
l
o
r
t
n
o
C

  Cultural Alignment 
      Shared Language 
      Shared Religion 
      Ln Distance (km) 
      Shared Border 
  International Alignment 
      Both Western Bloc 
      Both Eastern Bloc 
      Both Non-Aligned Movement 
      Shared Colonial Ties 
      Shared Commonwealth Ties 

  Model Fit 
      Adjusted R2 
      F-statistics 
      DF 
***: p< .001, **: p< .01, *: p< .05, +: p< .10 

Model 0 
-.19 + 
-.17 * 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

.01 
15.69 
1, 1376 

 

 

 
Model 1 
-.19 * 
-.17 * 
  
.04  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

.01 
8.02 
2, 1375 

Model 2 
.09  
-.16 * 
  
.07  
.03  
-.04 ** 
.15 + 
  
  
  
  
  
  

.03 
9.76 
5, 1372 

Model 3 
.08  
-.17 * 
  
.11  
.02 ** 
-.04 + 
.12  
  

-.13 ** 
.56 * 
.21  
.25  
-.15  

.05 
7.63 

10, 1367 

 

 

Model 4 
.04  
  
  
.08  
.04 + 
-.04 ** 
-.05  
  
-.15  
.53 ** 
.19 * 
.26  
.10  

.04 
6.98 
9, 1368 

 

Table 4: Coefficients of MRQAP models predicting between country friendship density from similarity along multiple 

dimensions (Sales network, N = 53 countries, 1378 country pairs) 

 
 
280
 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES
 
 
Model  0  reports  the  zero-order  coefficient  for  common 
civilization as a statistical test of the clustering illustrated in 
Figure  1.  The  results  are  reported  in  Table  3  for  the  full 
organizational  network  and  Table  4  for  the  sales  network. 
To  rule  out  selection  effects,  we  report  results  for  the  full 
company  based  on  the  same  53  countries  as  the  sales 
network. (We also estimated the full company model for all 
97 countries and found no noteworthy differences). 
Comparison of the Model 0 coefficients in Tables 3 and 4 
reveals  a  striking  difference.  In  both  networks,  common 
membership  in  one  of  Huntington's  civilizations  is  a 
significant predictor of between country friendship density. 
However,  the  sign  of  the  coefficients  reverses!  In  the  full 
network,  co-location  in  the  same  civilization  is  a  strong 
predictor  of  network  density  (i.e.,  belonging  in  the  same 
civilization is associated with stronger tie strength between 
two  countries,  as  illustrated  in  Figure  1(a)).  This  result  is 
consistent with the results reported by State and colleagues. 
and  the  cultural  homophily  observed  and  verified  in 
numerous previous studies.  
In  contrast,  among  the  sales  group  members,  the  effect  of 
common  culture  remains  strong  but  the  effect  is  reversed. 
Surprisingly,  employees  in  culturally  co-located  countries 
were  actually  less  likely  to  become  friends  compared  to 
those  located  in  different  civilizations.  This  is  consistent 
with the absence of monochromatic clusters in Figure 1(b). 
A possible interpretation is that workers in the sales group 
not  only  tolerate  diversity,  they  exhibit  a  preference  for 
cultural diversity. 
Models  1  to  3  use  a  stepwise  linear  model  to  search  for 
mediating  variables  that  might  explain  the  zero-order 
results.  The  models  test  the hypothesis  that  the  zero-order 
coefficient for common civilization in Model 0 will decline 
when  we  control  for  mediating  covariates. The  stepwise 
model  introduces  the  controls  one  set  at  a  time,  and  the 
decline in the effect of common civilization indicates which 
cultural  dimensions  might  underlie 
the  zero-order 
coefficient. 
Model 1 introduces common language by itself in order to 
rule  out 
that  social  media 
communication is not otherwise possible. The results show 
little  change  in  the  zero-order  coefficient  for  common 
civilization  between  Models  0  and  1  for  the  full  network 
and no change in the sales network. Common language is at 
most a partial explanation, which is not surprising given the 
widespread  use  of  lingua  franca  in  global  social  media 
communication. 
Model  2  introduces  the  remaining  cultural  covariates  – 
shared religion, shared borders, and physical proximity. All 
three measures have significant effects in the full network 
but  only  distance  is  significant  in  the  sales  network.  This 
shows that the full company network exhibits homophily in 
language,  religion  and  geographical  proximity,  while  the 

trivial  explanation 

the 

281

language, 

to 

the 

in 

In  other  words, 

sales  group  employees  ignored  language  and  religion,  and 
the  effect  of  geographical  proximity  was  substantially 
religion,  and 
weakened. 
geographical  homophily  are  also  attenuated 
the 
full  network. 
workgroup  network  compared 
Moreover, the coefficient for common civilization actually 
increases slightly in the full network and hardly changes in 
the sales network, which means that language, religion and 
location  have  some  explanatory  power  as  main  effects 
(especially in the full network) but not as mediators of the 
effects  of  common  civilization.  Simply  put,  common 
civilization is not the only source of cultural homophily, but 
it is also not reducible to language, religion and location. 
Model 3 shows that Cold War alignments remain relevant 
for  friendship  densities  in  both  the  full  network  and  the 
sales network, while colonial alignments do not. However, 
these  alignments  do  not  explain  the  effect  of  common 
civilization for which the coefficient hardly changes. 
Model 4 removes common civilization to address concerns 
that the covariance with the cultural controls might lead to 
multicollinearity.  The  results  show  no  important  changes. 
The absence of multicollinearity is further confirmed by the 
zero-order  correlations  between  common  civilization  and 
religion  (r=.048),  common 
language  (r=.276),  shared 
border  (r=.332),  and  spatial  proximity  (r=.487)  (See 
Appendix  3  for  the  complete  correlation  matrix).  Using 
MRQAP,  the  nine  control  variables  explain  23.7%  of  the 
variance in Huntington’s measure. In short, these analyses 
support  Huntington’s  assertion  that  his  typology  captures 
salient  cultural  differences  that  are  not  reducible  to 
language, religion, or location. However, the available data 
do  not  allow  us  to  identify  the  precise  content  of  these 
differences  or 
these 
differences  are  deeply  rooted  in  historical  experiences 
whose  cumulative  effects  have  shaped  regional  cultural 
identities, affinities, and hostilities. 
While we are unable to pin down the meaning of common 
civilization,  the  results  do  allow  us  to  address  the  central 
question that motivates this study – the relative salience of 
common  civilization  for  friendship  densities  in  the  full 
network and the sales network. To that end, it is useful to 
consider not only the valence of the coefficients but also the 
effect  sizes.  Taken  together,  all  the  similarity  measures  in 
Model 3 accounted for a much larger proportion of variance 
in friendship density for the full network (adjusted R2=.24), 
compared  to  the  sales  network  (adjusted  R2=.05).  The 
difference  in  the  model  fit  suggests  that  homophily, 
whether  cultural  or  with  respect  to  all  control  variables 
included  in  the  model,  becomes  less  important  in  the 
distributed sales network. 
Additional Analyses 
As  an  additional  test  of  the  differences  between  the  full-
company  and  sales  group  networks,  we  compared  the 

to  confirm 

the  hypothesis 

that 

 
 
within-country  and  between-country  densities.  The  results 
are reported in Table 5. 
In  both  networks,  the  adjusted  within-country  friendship 
densities are universally positive, indicating that employees 
are  more  likely  than  chance  to  friend  others  in  the  same 
country.  The  within-country  densities  are  also  higher  than 
between-country  for  both  the  full  company  and  the  sales 
network.  However,  the  full  network  has  higher  within-
country densities and lower between-country densities than 
the sales group network, whether the full company network 
includes  all  97  countries  or  is  limited  to  the  same  53 
countries  as  the  sales  group  network.  The  difference 
between  the  average  within-country  and  between-country 
friendship densities is much larger in the full network (4.75) 
than the sales network (3.40). The difference is even larger 
when  we  compare  the  same  53  countries  in  the  two 
networks (5.72 vs. 3.40), indicating that the strong tendency 
for  employees  to  friend  others  in  the  same  country  is 
alleviated in the sales network. 
Range 

Median  Mean  SD 

Table 5: Descriptive statistics of adjusted within- and 

between-country friendship density 

DISCUSSION 
Homophily  has  been  widely  observed  in  both  offline  and 
online networks [31, 32, 40, 54, 55]. Recent work by State 
and  colleagues  [52]  found  that  cultural  homophily  is  also 
evident  in  online  networks.  Although  online  interaction 
facilitates  awareness  and  access  to  people  with  highly 
diverse backgrounds, the results from [52] indicate that the 
reduction  of  spatial  constraints  in  online  networks  is  not 
sufficient  to  minimize  effects  of  cultural  differences  as 
measured by location in Huntington's eight civilizations. 
We  extended 
there  are 
organizational settings in which online friendship ties might 
be  immune  to  cultural  differences.  Using  data  from  an 
internal,  proprietary  social  networking  system  for  a  large 
multinational corporation, we systematically tested whether 
common  membership  in  an  organization  as  an  employee 
was  sufficient.  The  results  show  clearly  that  this  is  not 
enough.  Huntington’s  cultural  differences  were  just  as 
prominent within a single company as they were overall in 
[52]. However, when we focused on workgroups, there was 
no effect of cultural homophily. Not only did membership 

test  whether 

their  study 

to 

 
Within-country 
  Full network 
    97 countries 
    53 countries 
  Sales network 
Between-country 
  Full network 
    97 countries 
    53 countries 
  Sales network 

 

     0 – 7.01 
0.76 – 7.01 
     0 – 5.05 

 

-4.55 – 4.71 
-4.55 – 4.22 
-4.08 – 2.57 

 

4.06 
4.38 
2.92 

 

-1.20 
-1.38 
-0.69 

 

 

 

 

3.71  1.86 
4.48  1.20 
2.65  1.43 

-1.04  1.33 
-1.24  1.24 
-0.75  1.09 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

its 

impact 

research  on  homophily  and 

in  workgroups  increase  tolerance  of  cultural  diversity  in 
social  ties,  it  appears  to  promote  a  surprising  increase  in 
diverse  ties.  Our  results  suggest  that  people  who  work 
together will form ties with each other – not just in spite of 
cultural  differences  [40]  –  but  perhaps  even  because  of 
these  differences.  This  surprising  result  contributes  to  on-
going 
for 
relationships formed online [31, 40, 43, 50, 54, 57, 60, 61]. 
The  present  study  differs  from  previous  research  [22,  49, 
51,  61]  by  studying  a  population  that  is  large  enough  to 
overcome  statistical  limitations,  and  is  one  of  the  few 
studies  to  demonstrate  that  homophily  is  not  a  foregone 
conclusion. 
Note  that  positive  cross-cultural  friendships  were  formed 
within  the  same  underlying  corporate  culture  in  which  we 
found  homophily.  However,  there  are  three  differences 
between the workgroup and the larger enterprise that might 
account  for  the  differences  in  tie  formation,  although  we 
emphasize that these hypotheses are highly speculative and 
are  enumerated  as  directions  for  future  research,  not  as 
explanations. 
First,  the  sales  groups  worked  on  global  accounts,  hence 
their  friendship  ties  could  be  expected  to  include  more 
people from other cultures. This might explain the tolerance 
of cultural differences in workgroups but it is harder to see 
how  it  can  account  for  a  preference  for  different  cultures, 
unless  working  together  with  people  from  a  different 
culture  is  sufficient  to  attenuate  cultural  boundaries,  a 
possibility that we hope to test in future research. 
Second, workgroup members have a shared interest in team 
productivity. Corporations have been shown to foster social 
ties that improve productivity [27, 61]. When people work 
together  on  a  common  project  they  may  be  motivated  to 
improve their communication and collaboration [13, 14, 21] 
toward their shared productivity goal. This might lead them 
to  form  ties  based  on  common  work  interests  despite 
cultural differences. 
A third possible explanation is suggested by social identity 
theory  [56],  which  posits  that  people  form  their  identity 
based  on  their  perception  of  commonality  with  others, 
leading them to prefer to interact with people perceived as 
having  a  shared  identity.  Membership  in  the  same  large 
multinational company is a relatively weak source of social 
identity, due to the size and heterogeneity of the population 
of  employees.  In  contrast,  workgroups  with  (on  average) 
several  hundred  members  with  a  shared  stake  in  group 
performance, may identify with the group and thus seek to 
unify the group despite differences in cultural background. 
Interaction  with  culturally  different  in-group  members 
affirms the primacy of the shared identity, while interaction 
only with those who are culturally similar has the potential 
to  weaken  the  salience  of  group  membership  as  a  shared 
identity. 

282

that 

found 

cultural 

crowdfunding 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES
 
 
There  is  some  evidence  from  prior  research  that  supports 
identity-theoretic  explanation.  A  recent  study  of 
the 
enterprise 
and 
organizational  similarity  and  membership  in  the  same 
workgroup  were  equally  important  in  the  choice  of 
collaborative  partners  [40].  Muller  and  colleagues  argue 
that  if  decisions  about  collaborative  partners  are  based  on 
physical  proximity,  distance  and  not  organizational 
similarity should have predicted the result. 
LIMITATIONS, IMPLICATIONS, AND FUTURE 
RESEARCH 
An  important  strength  of  our  study  is  that  we  measured 
friendship ties at the individual level yet on a global scale. 
In contrast, the most serious limitation is that we measured 
cultural differences between countries, not individuals. We 
did this because we do not have individual level measures 
of  cultural  background,  language,  or  demographics.  Also, 
we  wanted  to  align  our  study  with  State  and  colleagues 
[52]. Hopefully individual level cultural data for a company 
SNS will become available at some point in the future. 
We also had no information on the strength of ties between 
SNS  users.  We  cannot  rule  out  the  possibility  that  the 
preference for cultural diversity in the workgroup does not 
hold  for  close  friends.  Moreover,  we  only  measured 
friendship  ties  and  so  cannot  predict  the  effect  for  other 
relationships  such  as  choice  of  work  partner  [22,  40,  49]. 
Finally, these results come from a single, albeit very large, 
company. As such, results could be different for companies 
that are smaller or engaged in a different line of work. 
Although these limitations are serious, it is also important 
to  keep  in  mind  that  we  used  the  same  measures  for  both 
the full company and the workgroups. Thus, the differences 
we observed between the two organizational levels cannot 
be  attributed  entirely  to  the  limitations  in  the  measures. 
Differences of this magnitude seem unlikely to disappear if 
and when better measures become available. 
Nevertheless,  before  generalizing  from  these  results,  more 
studies  are  needed  using SNS  data  from  other  global 
companies.  With  that  caveat  in  mind,  we  call  attention  to 
the implications for the relative importance of physical and 
cultural constraints on social interaction may be one way of 
increasing cross-cultural interaction in social networks. 
The  present  findings  have  implications  for  the  relative 
importance  of  physical  and  cultural  constraints  on  social 
interaction.  Just  as  religious  and  cultural  divisions  can  be 
spatially  differentiated,  so  too  difficulties  in  collaboration 
previously attributed to physical distance [41] may actually 
reflect religious or cultural differences. The same data and 
technology,  contributed  to  findings  of  homophily  for 
corporate-wide social networks and lack of homophily for 
workgroup networks. 
Diversity  and  heterogeneity  have  many  benefits  for 
individuals  and  for  groups  [5,  6,  44,  45,  50,  57],  but 

283

overcoming homophily has proven to present a formidable 
challenge.  The  dramatic  change  we  observed  between 
organizational  levels  points  to  possible  strategies  for 
promoting  diversity.  We  studied 
loosely  structured 
workgroups  that  came  together  to  support  a  single  sales 
account.  Each  workgroup  also  had  access  to  an  online 
community,  which  was  carefully  designed  to  support 
members  who  were  distributed  across  many  countries  and 
who may spend only a small portion of their time with the 
group.  While  we  cannot  evaluate  the  specific  contribution 
of  the  online  community  to  the  heterogeneity  of  ties,  it  is 
reasonable to speculate that the communities helped people 
appreciate their shared goals [39] which could reinforce the 
importance  of  the  group  and  its  projects  over  cultural  
differences  [12,  58].  Given  current  research  into  online 
communities  [34,  36],  we  suggest  that  bringing  groups 
together online may be one way of increasing cross-cultural 
interaction in social networks. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We would like to thank Mike Martin for his help with data 
collection from the teams.  
This  research  was  partially  sponsored  by  the  Army 
Research Laboratory 
under 
Cooperative Agreement  Number  W911NF-09-2-0053.  The 
views and conclusions contained in this document are those 
of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing 
the official  policies,  either  expressed  or  implied,  of  the 
Army Research  Laboratory  or  the  U.S.  Government.  The 
U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute 
reprints for  Government  purposes  notwithstanding  any 
copyright notation here on. 
 
REFERENCES 
1.  Anne Archambault and Jonathan Grudin. 2012. A 

accomplished 

and  was 

longitudinal study of facebook, linkedin, & twitter use. 
in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems: ACM. 

2.  Daniel J Brass. 1985. Men's and women's networks: A 

study of interaction patterns and influence in an 
organization. Academy of management journal, 28(2): 
p. 327-343. 

3.  Ronald S Burt. 2005, Brokerage and closure: An 

introduction to social capital: Oxford University Press. 

4.  Aaron Clauset, Mark EJ Newman, and Cristopher 
Moore. 2004. Finding community structure in very 
large networks. Physical review E, 70(6): p. 066111. 
5.  Rob Cross and Jonathon N Cummings. 2004. Tie and 

network correlates of individual performance in 
knowledge-intensive work. Academy of management 
journal, 47(6): p. 928-937. 

6.  Rob Cross, Thomas H Davenport, and Susan Cantrell. 

2003. The social side of performance. MIT Sloan 
Management Review, 45(1): p. 20-22. 

 
 
7.  Rob Cross and Lee Sproull. 2004. More Than an 

Answer: Information Relationships for Actionable 
Knowledge. Organization Science, 15(4): p. 446-462. 

8.  David Dekker, David Krackhardt, and Tom AB 
Snijders. 2003. Mulicollinearity Robust QAP for 
Multiple Regression. in CASOS Working Paper. 
Carneige Mellon University. 

9.  David Dekker, David Krackhardt, and Tom AB 
Snijders. 2007. Sensitivity of MRQAP tests to 
collinearity and autocorrelation conditions. 
Psychometrika, 72(4): p. 563-581. 

10.  Joan DiMicco, David R Millen, Werner Geyer, et al. 
2008. Motivations for social networking at work. in 
Proceedings of the 2008 ACM conference on Computer 
supported cooperative work: ACM. 

11.  Nathan Eagle, Michael Macy, and Rob Claxton. 2010. 
Network diversity and economic development. Science, 
328(5981): p. 1029-1031. 

12.  Kate Ehrlich, Michael Muller, Tara Matthews, et al. 

2014. What motivates members to contribute to 
enterprise online communities? in Proceedings of the 
companion publication of the 17th ACM conference on 
Computer supported cooperative work & social 
computing: ACM. 

13.  J Alberto Espinosa, Sandra A Slaughter, Robert E 

Kraut, et al. 2007. Team knowledge and coordination 
in geographically distributed software development. 
Journal of Management Information Systems, 24(1): p. 
135-169. 

14.  Samer Faraj and Lee Sproull. 2000. Coordinating 

expertise in software development teams. Management 
science, 46(12): p. 1554-1568. 

15.  Shelly D Farnham and Elizabeth F Churchill. 2011. 
Faceted identity, faceted lives: social and technical 
issues with being yourself online. in Proceedings of the 
ACM 2011 conference on Computer supported 
cooperative work: ACM. 

1991. Graph drawing by force-­‐directed placement. 

16.  Thomas MJ Fruchterman and Edward M Reingold. 

Software: Practice and experience, 21(11): p. 1129-
1164. 

17.  Mark S Granovetter. 1973. The strength of weak ties. 

American Journal of Sociology: p. 1360-1380. 

18.  Ido Guy, Michal Jacovi, Noga Meshulam, et al. 2008. 

Public vs. private: Comparing public social network 
information with email. in Proceedings of the 2008 
ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative 
work: ACM. 

2008. Exploring network structure, dynamics, and 
function using NetworkX. in Proceedings of the 7th 
Python in Science Conference (SciPy2008). Pasadena, 
CA, USA. 

20.  Esther Hauk and Hannes Mueller. 2013. Cultural 
leaders and the clash of civilizations. Journal of 
Conflict Resolution: p. 0022002713503793. 

284

19.  Aric A. Hagberg, Daniel A. Schult, and Pieter J. Swart. 

36.  Tara Matthews, Jilin Chen, Steve Whittaker, et al. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

21.  James D Herbsleb and Deependra Moitra. 2001. Global 

software development. Software, IEEE, 18(2): p. 16-
20. 

22.  Pamela J Hinds, Kathleen M Carley, David 

Krackhardt, et al. 2000. Choosing work group 
members: Balancing similarity, competence, and 
familiarity. Organizational behavior and human 
decision processes, 81(2): p. 226-251. 

23.  Lester Holtzblatt, Jill L Drury, Daniel Weiss, et al. 

2013. Evaluating the uses and benefits of an enterprise 
social media platform. J. of Social Media for 
Organizations, 1(1). 

24.  Samuel P Huntington. 1993. The clash of civilizations? 

Foreign affairs: p. 22-49. 

25.  Samuel P Huntington. 1996, The clash of civilizations 

and the remaking of world order: Penguin Books India. 

26.  Herminia Ibarra. 1992. Homophily and differential 

returns: Sex differences in network structure and access 
in an advertising firm. Administrative science 
quarterly: p. 422-447. 

27.  Herminia Ibarra. 1995. Race, opportunity, and diversity 

of social circles in managerial networks. Academy of 
management journal, 38(3): p. 673-703. 

28.  Ronald Inglehart and Pippa Norris. 2003. The true 

clash of civilizations. Foreign policy: p. 63-70. 

29.  Todd M Johnson and Brian J Grim. 2008. World 

Religion Database. Leiden/Boston: Brill. 

30.  Sara Kiesler and Jonathon N Cummings. 2002. What 

do we know about proximity and distance in work 
groups? A legacy of research. Distributed work, 1: p. 
57. 

31.  Adam M Kleinbaum, Toby E Stuart, and Michael L 

Tushman. 2013. Discretion within constraint: 
Homophily and structure in a formal organization. 
Organization Science, 24(5): p. 1316-1336. 

32.  Gueorgi Kossinets and Duncan J Watts. 2009. Origins 

of homophily in an evolving social network1. 
American Journal of Sociology, 115(2): p. 405-450. 
33.  David Krackhardt. 1988. Predicting with networks: 

Nonparametric multiple regression analysis of dyadic 
data. Social Networks, 10(4): p. 359-381. 

34.  Robert E Kraut, Paul Resnick, Sara Kiesler, et al. 2012, 

Building successful online communities: Evidence-
based social design: Mit Press. 

35.  Paul M Leonardi. 2014. Social media, knowledge 

sharing, and innovation: Toward a theory of 
communication visibility. Information Systems 
Research, 25(4): p. 796-816. 

2014. Goals and perceived success of online enterprise 
communities: what is important to leaders & members? 
in Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on 
Human factors in computing systems: ACM. 

37.  J Miller McPherson and Lynn Smith-Lovin. 1987. 

Homophily in voluntary organizations: Status distance 

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES
 
 

and the composition of face-to-face groups. American 
sociological review: p. 370-379. 

38.  Miller McPherson, Lynn Smith-Lovin, and James M. 
Cook. 2001. Birds of a Feather: Homophily in Social 
Networks. Annual Review of Sociology, 27: p. 415-444. 

39.  Michael Muller, Kate Ehrlich, Tara Matthews, et al. 

2012. Diversity among enterprise online communities: 
collaborating, teaming, and innovating through social 
media. in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems: ACM. 

40.  Michael Muller, Werner Geyer, Todd Soule, et al. 
2014. Geographical and organizational distances in 
enterprise crowdfunding. in Proceedings of the 17th 
ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative 
work & social computing: ACM. 

41.  Gary M Olson and Judith S Olson. 2000. Distance 

matters. Human-Computer Interaction, 15(2): p. 139-
178. 

42.  Michael Quinn Patton. 2002, Qualitative Research & 

Evaluation Methods. 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
SAGE. 

43.  Souren Paul and Priya Seetharaman. 2004. Cultural 
Diversity, Conflict and Team Facilitation in Global 
Virtual Teams-a Research Model. AMCIS 2004 
Proceedings: p. 65. 

44.  Souren Paul, Priya Seetharaman, Imad Samarah, et al. 

2004. Impact of heterogeneity and collaborative 
conflict management style on the performance of 
synchronous global virtual teams. Information & 
Management, 41(3): p. 303-321. 

45.  Praveen Pinjani and Prashant Palvia. 2013. Trust and 

knowledge sharing in diverse global virtual teams. 
Information & Management, 50(4): p. 144-153. 
46.  William M Rand. 1971. Objective criteria for the 
evaluation of clustering methods. Journal of the 
American Statistical association, 66(336): p. 846-850. 

47.  Ray Reagans and Bill McEvily. 2003. Network 
structure and knowledge transfer: The effects of 
cohesion and range. Administrative science quarterly, 
48(2): p. 240-267. 

48.  Jörg Reichardt and Stefan Bornholdt. 2006. Statistical 
mechanics of community detection. Physical review E, 
74(1): p. 016110. 

49.  Martin Ruef, Howard E Aldrich, and Nancy M Carter. 

2003. The structure of founding teams: Homophily, 
strong ties, and isolation among US entrepreneurs. 
American sociological review: p. 195-222. 
50.  Pnina Shachaf. 2008. Cultural diversity and 

information and communication technology impacts on 

 

 

285

global virtual teams: An exploratory study. Information 
& Management, 45(2): p. 131-142. 

51.  Cuihua Shen and Peter Monge. 2011. Who connects 
with whom? A social network analysis of an online 
open source software community. First Monday, 16(6). 
52.  Bogdan State, Patrick Park, Ingmar Weber, et al. 2015. 

The Mesh of Civilizations in the Global Network of 
Digital Communication. PLoS One, 10(5): p. 
e0122543. 

53.  Charles Steinfield, Joan M DiMicco, Nicole B Ellison, 

et al. 2009. Bowling online: social networking and 
social capital within the organization. in Proceedings 
of the fourth international conference on Communities 
and technologies: ACM. 

54.  Jennifer Thom-Santelli, David R Millen, and Joan M 
DiMicco. 2010. Characterizing global participation in 
an enterprise SNS. in Proceedings of the 3rd 
international conference on Intercultural 
collaboration: ACM. 

55.  Jennifer Thom-Santelli, David R Millen, and Darren 
Gergle. 2011. Organizational acculturation and social 
networking. in Proceedings of the ACM 2011 
conference on Computer supported cooperative work: 
ACM. 

56.  John C Turner and Katherine J Reynolds. 2001. The 

social identity perspective in intergroup relations: 
Theories, themes, and controversies. Blackwell 
handbook of social psychology: Intergroup processes, 
4: p. 133-152. 

57.  Hao-Chuan Wang, Susan R Fussell, and Dan Cosley. 
2011. From diversity to creativity: Stimulating group 
brainstorming with cultural differences and 
conversationally-retrieved pictures. in Proceedings of 
the ACM 2011 conference on Computer supported 
cooperative work: ACM. 

58.  M McLure Wasko and Samer Faraj. 2000. “It is what 
one does”: why people participate and help others in 
electronic communities of practice. The Journal of 
Strategic Information Systems, 9(2): p. 155-173. 
59.  Daniel M Wegner. 1987. Transactive memory: A 

contemporary analysis of the group mind, in Theories 
of group behavior. Springer. p. 185-208. 

61.  Y Connie Yuan and Geri Gay. 2006. Homophily of 

60.  Jiang Yang, Zhen Wen, Lada Adamic, et al. 2011. 
Collaborating globally: culture and organizational 
computer-mediated communications. 

in Computer-­‐Mediated Distributed Teams. Journal of 
Computer-­‐Mediated Communication, 11(4): p. 1062-

Network Ties and Bonding and Bridging Social Capital 

1084. 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

 
 
APPENDIX 1 
Huntington’s classification of all the countries and regions involved in the current study 
African 
AO 
BF 
CD 

Bangladesh 
Algeria 
Egypt 
Indonesia 

Japan 

Angola 
Burkina Faso 
Democratic 
Republic of Congo 
Congo - Brazzaville 

Saudi Arabia 
Senegal 
Chad 
Tunisia 
Turkey 

Pakistan 

BD 
DZ 
EG 
ID 
KW  Kuwait 
MA  Morocco 
MY  Malaysia 
Niger 
NE 
OM  Oman 
PK 
QA  Qatar 
SA 
SN 
TD 
TN 
TR 
 
Latin American 
Argentina 
AR 
Brazil 
BR 
Bahamas 
BS 
Chile 
CL 
Colombia 
CO 
Costa Rica 
CR 
Ecuador 
EC 
MX  Mexico 
PE 
UY  Uruguay 
Venezuela 
VE 
 

Peru 

Lone 
JP 
 
Sinic 
CN 
HK  Hong Kong SAR 

China 

China 
South Korea 
Singapore 
Taiwan 
Vietnam 

KR 
SG 
TW 
VN 
 
Slavic Orthodox 
Bulgaria 
BG 
Cyprus 
CY 
Greece 
GR 
Croatia 
HR 
Romania 
RO 
Serbia 
RS 
Russian Federation 
RU 
Slovenia 
SI 
UA  Ukraine 
 
Western 
AT 
AU 
BB 
BE 
BM 
CA 

Austria 
Australia 
Barbados 
Belgium 
Bermuda 
Canada 

Estonia 
Spain 
Finland 
France 

Switzerland 
CH 
Czech Republic 
CZ 
Germany 
DE 
DK  Denmark 
EE 
ES 
FI 
FR 
GB  Great Britain 
HU  Hungary 
Ireland 
IE 
Israel 
IL 
Italy 
IT 
Jamaica 
JM 
Lithuania 
LT 
Latvia 
LV 
Netherlands 
NL 
Norway 
NO 
New Zealand 
NZ 
Philippines 
PH 
Poland 
PL 
Portugal 
PT 
Sweden 
SE 
Slovak Republic 
SK 
Trinidad and 
TT 
Tobago 
United States 

US 

CG 
GA  Gabon 
GH  Ghana 
Kenya 
KE 
MG  Madagascar 
MU  Mauritius 
MW  Malawi 
Nigeria 
NG 
Sierra Leone 
SL 
Suriname 
SR 
Tanzania 
TZ 
UG  Uganda 
S. Africa 
ZA 
Zambia 
ZM 
 
Buddhist 
LK 
TH 
 
Hindu 
IN 
 
Islamic 
AE 

Sri Lanka 
Thailand 

India 

United Arab 
Emirates 

 
APPENDIX 2 
Variable definitions for MRQAP models 
 

1.  Shared Language: a dummy variable coded as 1 when two countries share the same official language, and 0 when 

not. When a country has multiple official languages, all of the languages were included in the coding process. 
 

2.  Shared Border: a dummy variable coded as 1 if two countries share a land border, and 0 when not. 

3.  Ln Distance: the natural log of the distance between the geometric centroids of two countries. 
4.  Shared  Religion:  Data  on  the  religious  composition  of  world  countries  (for  Atheism,  Buddhism,  Christianity, 

Hinduism and Islam) was obtained from the  World  Religion  Database  [29]. For every pair of countries (𝑖,𝑗) we 
log𝑝!!+12
Here 𝑟 indexes the world religion and 𝑖 and 𝑗 index the country pair. 

defined religious divergence as the Jensen-Shannon divergence of their religious composition:  

𝑑𝑖𝑣𝑖,𝑗 =12

log𝑝!!𝑝!!

log𝑝!!𝑝!!

log𝑝!! 

!

!

5.  Shared Colonial Ties: dummy variable based on whether two countries share a common colonial past 
6.  Shared Commonwealth Ties: dummy variable based on whether countries are members of the Commonwealth 

 

 

 

 

 
 

286

SESSION: MUSEUMS AND PUBLIC SPACES
 
 

7. 

 

 

 
Czech Republic 
Hungary 
 
Chile 
Colombia 
Denmark 
Ecuador 
France 
 

International Alignment Coding 
Eastern Bloc 
Bulgaria 
China 
Western Bloc 
Argentina 
Australia 
Belgium 
Brazil 
Canada 
Non-Aligned Movement 
Algeria 
Angola 
Argentina 
Bangladesh 
Burkina Faso 
Chile 

Colombia 
Ecuador 
Egypt 
Ghana 
India 
Indonesia 

 

 

 

 

 
Poland 
Romania 
 
Great Britain 
Italy 
Japan 
Mexico 
Pakistan 

 

 

Kenya 
Madagascar 
Malawi 
Malaysia 
Morocco 
Nigeria 

 

 
Russia 
Slovakia 
 
Philippines 
Portugal 
Thailand 
Turkey 
United Sates 

 

Pakistan 
Peru 
Saudi Arabia 
Senegal 
Singapore 
Sri Lanka 

 

 

 
Ukraine 
Vietnam 
 
Venezuela 
 
 
 
 

 

Tunisia 
U.A.E 
Zambia 
 
 
 

 
 
 
APPENDIX 3 
Pairwise Zero-order correlations (estimated using QAP method) among independent variables in MRQAP models 
 

1 

  

 
1.  Common Civilization 
2.  Shared Language 
3.  Both Western Bloc 
4.  Both Eastern Bloc 
5.  Both Non-Aligned Movement 
6.  Shared Colonial Ties 
7.  Shared Commonwealth Ties 
8.  Shared Religion 
9.  Ln Distance (km) 
10. Shared Border 
   ***: p< .001, **: p< .01, *: p< .05, +: p< .10 

.276 *** 
.294 *** 
.099 *** 
.166 *** 
.026  
.070 ** 
.048 + 
.487 *** 
.332 *** 

2 

  
  

.209 *** 
.000  
.218 *** 
.046 + 
.556 *** 
.098 *** 
.303 *** 
.181 *** 

3 

  
  
  
.000  
.038  
.034  
.093 *** 
.199 *** 
.415 *** 
.128 *** 

4 

  
  
  
  
.000  
.000  
.000  
.024  
.073 ** 
.147 *** 

5 

  
  
  
  
  
.000  
.185 *** 
.283 *** 
.312 *** 
.096 *** 

6 

  
  
  
  
  
  
.000  
.033  
.058 * 
.000  

.111 *** 
.214 *** 
.031  

.649 *** 
.066 * 

.193 *** 

7 

8 

9 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

287

