CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Avalanche Beacon Parks: Skill Development and Team 

Coordination in a Technological Training Ground 

Audrey Desjardins1, Saul Greenberg2, Ron Wakkary1,3 and Jeff Hambelton4 

1School of Interactive Arts + Technology, Simon Fraser University, Surrey, British Columbia, Canada 

2Department of Computer Science, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada 

3Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands 

4Mountain Education Center at Mt. Baker, Bellingham, Washington, United States 

adesjard@sfu.ca, saul.greenberg@ucalgary.ca, rwakkary@sfu.ca, jhambelton@gmail.com 

 

technological 

ABSTRACT 
High-risk outdoor recreation allows its enthusiasts to reach 
unprecedented  levels  of  adrenaline;  it  also  contains  risks 
and  requires  specific  training  (in  part  technological).  In 
particular, its participants must be ready to react efficiently 
during  an  emergency  or  in  response  to  an  accident. 
Technological  training  grounds  can  simulate  particular 
contexts  and  emergency  situations  as  a  place 
for 
recreationists to train and practice. In this paper, we use the 
practice of avalanche companion rescue as a case study to 
explore  how 
training  grounds  support 
recreationist  training.  Our  results  offer  insights  into  how 
avalanche beacon training parks support skill development 
and  team  coordination  training.  We  also  present  strategies 
to  orient  the  design  of  technological  training  grounds 
beyond avalanche companion rescue.  
Author Keywords 
Avalanche rescue; avalanche beacons; training in context; 
simulation; communities of practice; team cognition. 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.3 [Group and Organization Interfaces]:  Computer 
supported cooperative work; H.1.2 [User/Machine 
Systems]: Human factors.  
INTRODUCTION 
In  the  past  years,  there  has  been  an  increase  in  high-risk 
outdoor recreation activities, sometimes labeled as extreme 
sports, 
‘skilled 
adventures’  [6]  or  risky  forms  of  recreation  [4].  Those 
sports  have  been  characterized  as  “specialised,  highly 
technological and demanding a high degree of preparation, 
and  are  associated  with  individual  endeavour,  risk,  speed, 
and  excitement”  [37:36].  Examples  include  climbing, 
skydiving,  mountain  biking,  big  wave  surfing,  BASE 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  the  author(s)  must  be 
honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or 
republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific  permission 
from 
Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
Copyright  is  held  by  the  owner/author(s).  Publication  rights  licensed  to 
ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2835200 
 

‘modern  outdoor 

fee.  Request  permissions 

activities’ 

[37], 

and/or 

a 

872

jumping,  white  water  kayaking,  kite  boarding,  heli-skiing, 
and backcountry skiing. Such sports are also characterized 
by ‘communities of interest’ [4:12], comprising people who 
participate  in  those  activities,  use  specific  areas  in  the 
outdoors, and use particular equipment.  Members of  these 
communities demonstrate a desire for risk-taking, while at 
the  same  time  cultivating  a  high  knowledge  for  the  sport 
they practice, including its risks and dangers [6].  
As sports and recreation continue to develop into the more 
extreme and risky spheres, there is also a growing need for 
ongoing  simulated  practice  and  training  for  recreationists 
and outdoor enthusiasts. That need is even more important 
for situations within the practice that happen rarely but that 
can  be  life  threatening.  Examples  include  rappel  rescue 
techniques  for  rock-climbing  accidents,  canyon  extraction 
for  canyoneers,  swiftwater  rescue  for  paddlers  in  danger, 
and  avalanche  rescue  for  backcountry  skiers.  Yet  unlike 
professional guides, the typical recreationist training relies 
on  a  few  short  (and  possibly  superficial)  courses. 
Furthermore,  they  are  rarely  exposed  to  real  situations 
requiring that training. Thus even ‘trained’ enthusiasts can 
become  quite  rusty  over  time.  At  the  same  time,  digital 
technology  is  becoming  increasingly  incorporated  into 
many  of  these  activities,  particularly  through  the  use  of 
portable devices running specialized apps. As these devices 
are integrated into those activities, they need to be included 
as part of the training program. For example, GPS devices 
are  critical  both 
the 
backcountry,  and  for  deciding  on  alternative  routes  when 
problems occur (e.g. [14]). Personal satellite trackers (e.g., 
the  SPOT  GPS  Messenger,  www.findmespot.ca)  allow 
people  to  check  in  periodically  to  inform  others  not  only 
about  their  location  and  well-being,  but  to  send  out  a 
distress  and  location  signal  when  they  require  rescue. 
Various  apps  and  devices  let  people  monitor  specialized 
environmental forecasts and bulletins in order to help their 
decision  making,  such  as  extreme  changes  in  weather 
during backcountry travel, winds when skydiving, potential 
for  flash  floods  when  canyoneering,  and  local  avalanche 
conditions 
(e.g., 
www.avalanche.ca).  Some  devices  are  solely  dedicated  to 
handling particular emergency situation, such as avalanche 
transceivers  (beacons)  that  help  people  locate  victims 
buried in an avalanche [13]. 

backcountry 

finding 

routine 

skiing 

when 

route 

for 

in 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

For these devices to be used effectively, recreationists need 
to understand how to use them within the context of their 
real-world  activity.  This  goes  beyond  reading  the  user 
manual. While one can read about the functions of (say) a 
GPS  unit  or  an  avalanche  transceiver,  their  actual  use 
during the high-risk activity demands far more knowledge 
and  expertise.  The  consequences  of  misuse  or  inefficient 
use  can  be  extremely  serious.  Misreading  a  GPS  while 
skiing on a glacier during a whiteout can lead the group to 
extremely hazardous terrain. Inefficient use of an avalanche 
transceiver  can  lead  to  delays  during  rescue,  resulting  in 
suffocation of the buried victims before they are found [12]. 
The challenge is that people need to learn how to use these 
devices  and  the  best  practices  around  them  within  their 
recreational context. Yet learning while actually doing the 
activity is often impractical due to the inherent danger and 
time  constraints  of  the  activity,  and  the  relative  rarity  of 
critical  events.  Hence,  training  often  occurs  in  specially 
crafted physical settings - technological training grounds - 
that simulate particular contexts and emergency situations.  
Our  goal  in  this  paper  is  to  understand  the  use  of  these 
technological  training  grounds  and  how  to  better  design 
them. We chose to study the case of backcountry skiing and 
the  specific  practice  of  the  avalanche  companion  rescue 
protocol within avalanche training beacon parks (both will 
be described shortly). Avalanche companion rescue training 
is particularly interesting to both HCI and CSCW because 
its  success  relies  on  several  aspects:  how  each  rescuer 
masters the skills of using his or her tools during particular 
emergency  scenarios  (including  technology  such  as  an 
avalanche transceiver), how the rescuers as a team are able 
to  collaborate  and  coordinate  on  scene  while  using  that 
technology, and how people support the training of others 
through facilitation and mentorship.  
In  this  paper,  we  take  on  the  dual  roles  of  being  CSCW 
researchers  as  well  as  backcountry  skiing  recreationists. 
One  of  the  authors  and  observers  is  a  professional 
is  a 
avalanche  education  specialist.  Another  author 
recreationist  with 
running 
avalanche simulations: he was once completely buried in an 
avalanche,  and  had  to  be  found  and  rescued  by  his  team 
(see account in Part I, [7]). The third is a recent convert to 
the  activity  and  who  has  run  through  training  sessions 
herself.  While  we  use  the  observations  we  made  of  our 
participants  to  ground  our  analysis,  we  also  interpret  and 
extend  what  we  saw  to  our  own  in-depth  experiences  of 
similar situations done 'in the wild'.  
After describing related work, we present the two parts of 
our  research:  1)  an  observational  study  of  recreationists 
training  in  the  avalanche  beacon  training  park  with 
subsequent 
interviews,  and  2)  our 
reflections  on  maintaining  a  beacon  park.  We  report  our 
results  under  the  themes  of  skill  development,  team 
coordination  training,  and  designing  beacon  parks  as  a 
technological  training  ground.  To  foreshadow,  our  main 

semi-structured 

considerable 

experience 

findings articulate the value of a progressive difficulty scale 
of scenarios, the importance of levels of fidelity, finding a 
balance  between  skill  development  vs.  team  coordination 
training,  and  the  challenges  in  supporting  communities  of 
practice in simulations for recreationists. 

RELATED WORK 
Team cognition and team training 
Training,  and  specifically  training  of  non-professionals  to 
work  as  an  ad-hoc  team  in  critical  situations,  is  central  to 
our work. Previous research has articulated in great details 
team cognition, cross training, and the importance of shared 
mental  models.  We  present  a  very  brief  summary  of  this 
more  general  work  and  will  come  back  to  concepts 
mentioned here in the presentation of our results.  
Team training 
Teams  are  understood  to  be  “social  entities  composed  of 
members  with  high  task  interdependency  and  shared  and 
valued  common  goals”  [36:541].  Moreover,  teamwork 
requires  the  ability  to  adapt  coordination  strategies  by 
communicating  and  orienting  the  team  towards  reaching 
their  goal 
[38].  Achieving  successful  and  efficient 
teamwork is not easy and requires team training. In addition 
to  mastering  one’s  role  and  tasks,  it  has  been  argued  that 
each team member should also gain a shared mental model 
of the team goals, tasks, and needs. Shared mental models 
are particularly useful for people working in teams because 
it  allows  individuals  to  predict  and  explain  what  is 
happening  around  them  and  further  allows  them  to  make 
decisions about what to do [32].  
In  avalanche  companion  rescue,  a  group  of  recreationists 
must quickly become a team when they have the shared and 
valued goal of rescuing one of their companions. However, 
unlike  most  teams  discussed  in  the  literature,  the  group  is 
ad hoc. Some may not have met before, they may not have 
trained  together,  and  the  level  of  training  and  practice 
between  team  members  can  vary  considerably.  As  well, 
individuals may not be familiar with each other’s skill level, 
which can affect how roles within the team are assigned and 
how well they are carried out.  
Thus  we  find  particular  value  in  the  concept  of  cross 
training (specifically, positional rotation [8]): a strategy in 
which each team member learns about and is trained on the 
other  roles  and  tasks  within  the  team  [30,42].  This  allows 
each  team  member  to  gain  a  better  mental  model  of  the 
team’s work and can lead to enhanced implicit coordination 
in the team (by reducing the need for overt communication 
and explanations) [29] and to more seamlessly exchanging 
roles ad hoc within the team.  
Team training through simulations  
CSCW has focused on the collaborative aspect of training 
in  emergency  situations.  Examples  include  observational 
studies  of  air 
traffic  control  [11],  health  care  [3], 
firefighting  [21,39,40],  avalanche  rescue  [13]  and  real-
world emergencies [27]. Researchers have also created new 

873

in 

studied 

fidelity 

three  dimensions  of 

in  CSCW  are  oriented 

systems  to  better  support  training,  often  focusing  on 
collaborative practices. Proposed solutions include tabletop 
systems [11], wearables [9,22], games [27,40], and virtual 
environments [28].  
The  literature  on  simulations  and  training  discusses  the 
different dimensions and types of simulation. For example, 
Beaubien  and  Baker  [3]  offer  three  types  of  simulation 
(case studies/role plays, part task trainers, and full mission) 
and 
simulations 
(environment,  equipment,  and  psychological).  The  authors 
articulate  how  each  training  exercise  or  facility  can  offer 
more or less fidelity on each dimension, which can reflect 
particular sub-areas of a more complex practice. However, 
they also state: “although the three fidelity components are 
inter-related, psychological fidelity [the degree to which the 
trainee perceives the simulation to be a believable surrogate 
for the trained task] is generally considered to be the most 
essential  requirement  for  team  training”  [3:i52].  Literature 
on simulations also proposes that some aspects of practices 
can be learned without a complete simulation [40] and that 
in fact a full simulation can be unnecessary [35].  
However, it is important to note here how our work differs 
from the above. As mentioned, the training and simulations 
typically 
towards 
professionals  and  experts  in  emergency  management  and 
rescue. That audience is distinctly different from high-risk 
recreationists (such as the companion rescuers in the case of 
an  avalanche  [13]).  Unlike  professionals,  they  do  not 
necessarily commit or have the time to commit to extensive 
formal  training.  Unlike  professionals,  recreationists  often 
form  ad  hoc  groups  for  each  outing  vs.  stable  teams  that 
work together over time. Thus no single group learns how 
to work together as a team during emergencies. As well, a 
particular  group  may  include  strangers  and/or  people  of 
quite  different  (and  perhaps  unknown)  levels  of  expertise. 
These distinctions are at the center of the motivation for this 
paper: how are technological training grounds used by these 
recreational groups, and how can they be designed to best 
train  people  to  respond  to  the  life  or  death  situations 
inherent in their practices? 
Ad hoc and volunteer teams 
CSCW  has  an  established  tradition  in  studying  and 
designing for disaster communities and emergency response 
groups,  with  a  particular  focus  on  ad  hoc  and  improvised 
collaborative  volunteer  work.  Past  research  has  addressed 
the  important  role  of  social  media  (e.g.  [19,20,33])  and 
virtual  communities  (e.g.  [31,38])  in  disasters  and  mass 
emergency  events.  Improvisation  and  ad  hoc  teaming 
resonate  very  strongly  with  the  practice  of  avalanche 
companion rescue since it is impossible to know who will 
be part of the rescue team and what role everyone will need 
to  play  (as  we  will  describe  in  the  Our  Study  section). 
However, avalanche companion rescue has its own unique 
characteristics  that  differ  from  this  past  work,  mostly 
because of the immediacy of the event. Expertise cannot be 

SESSION: EDUCATION IN THE CLASSROOM AND BEYOND

its  players  strongly 

called in, as the remote areas involving backcountry skiing 
means there is often no wireless or cellular network access, 
and thus no access to social media or virtual communities. 
All the teamwork has to be performed on site, with only the 
people who are present as rescuers, with only the equipment 
immediately  available,  and  within  a  short  period  of  time. 
Even if people can communicate to the outside world, the 
arrival of additional parties is often far later than the critical 
time required for finding and unburying the victim alive. 
Communities of practice and situated learning 
Most  high-risk  recreational  activities  occur  in  a  social 
context,  where 
identify  with  a 
community  of  like-minded  people.  Formal  and  informal 
clubs  are common, specialized social media sites develop, 
open  invitation  social  gatherings  abound,  and  courses  are 
offered by both professional and lay people [4]. Similarly, 
training is often part of a social event. 
This  social  structure  is  captured  by  the  concept  of 
communities  of  practice  as  developed  by  anthropologists 
Jean Lave and Etienne Wenger [24,43]. These communities 
refer to groups of people who share a passion, a craft, or a 
profession. Central to these communities is how learning is 
situated in the social, where practitioners share knowledge 
and experience of their field of the practice, and thus learn 
from  each  other  [23].  Communities  of  practice  display  a 
shared repertoire of experience, stories, best practices, and 
equipment  and  tools,  all  which  help  inform  its  members. 
The act of learning is further situated in the real world [24], 
as  it  often  occurs  as  they  perform  their  shared  practice. 
Wenger [43] argues that it is by being part of a community 
of practice and by practicing alongside ‘old timers’ (people 
with considerable experience) that newcomers can learn the 
skills,  techniques,  values  and  norms  of  a  community  of 
experts. This process takes time and ‘repeated and enduring 
exposure’ is necessary for learning to happen [25]. 
In  the  case  of  backcountry  skiing  recreationists,  some 
aspects  of  the  practice  are  passed  on  via  this  situated 
learning  as  they  are  performing  the  activity.  Examples 
include  the selection  and  review  of  appropriate  equipment 
by  members  at  the  start  of  the  activity,  route  finding  and 
terrain choice discussion while travelling, and even critique 
and  fine-tuning  of  skiing  techniques.  The  practice  of 
avalanche  companion  rescue  does  not  benefit  as  much  in 
situated  learning.  Since  avalanches  are  rare  but  serious 
occurrences, learning must happen  in  different ways, such 
as through reading and instructional videos, and by taking 
formal  courses.  While  simulations  can  occur  in  the  field 
(e.g., by one member of a group burying a transceiver while 
others try to find it), they are rarely and often hastily done: 
people would rather ski.  
We  are 
the  notion  of 
communities  of  practice,  where  we  see  it  as  one  way  to 
better understand the use of technological training grounds 
by  outdoor 
recreationists,  both 
skill 
development and team coordination. 

thus  particularly  sensitive 

terms  of 

to 

in 

874

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

OUR STUDY 
Our  study  took  place  in  a  dedicated  area  at  Mount  Baker 
Ski  Area  in  Washington,  U.S.A.  Our  study  comprised  2 
parts: an observational study with interviews of participants 
using the beacon park, and a reflection on our own practice 
of installing and modifying the beacon park in response to 
what we observed. As the two parts of the study happened 
simultaneously and influenced each other, we continuously 
evolved  and  refined  our  research  questions.  Two  of  the 
authors,  a  CSCW  researcher  (also  newly  a  backcountry 
skier)  and  a  professional  avalanche  education  specialist 
were on site to install, maintain a wireless beacon park, and 
conduct  the  study  for  4  weekends,  one  day  per  weekend. 
The education specialist served a dual role, where he acted 
as  both  as  an  observer  and  as  a  facilitator  for  those 
requiring or asking for help.  
Before  we  go  further,  we  provide  necessary  background 
information  on  backcountry  skiing,  companion  rescue  and 
the  functioning  of  avalanche  beacon  training  parks.  A 
detailed  description  of  the  avalanche  rescue  protocol 
written for a CSCW audience can be found in [13].  
Backcountry Skiing, Avalanches & Companion Rescue 
Backcountry  skiing  (and  snowboarding)  is  a  popular 
activity.  Skiers  travel  under  their  own  power  (both  uphill 
and  down)  outside  of  ski  resorts  in  mountains.  Rewards 
include breath-taking views, vigorous exercise, challenging 
and rewarding ski lines, and pristine untouched snow. The 
risk  is  an  avalanche,  a  large  volume  of  loose  snow  that 
rapidly slides down a slope [12], which can bury and injure 
skiers, and that can have fatal consequences. When caught 
and  buried  in  an  avalanche,  victims  rely  on  teams  of 
rescuers,  often  their  traveling  companions,  to  save  them 
through  a  process  called  avalanche  companion  rescue. 
Companion  rescue  is  challenging,  stressful,  complex,  and 
time  sensitive  as 
the  chance  of  survival  decreases 
significantly after 15 minutes in a complete burial [16].  
Most backcountry skiers carry tools to perform companion 
avalanche  rescue.  Avalanche  transceivers  (also  called 
beacons)  are  portable  electronic  devices  that  transmit  a 
locatable signal. Each skier wears one turned on as a matter 
of  routine.  Rescuers  can  use  the  same  beacon  on  receive 
mode to search for the victim, where rescuers try to locate 
the snowpack surface directly above or nearby the victim. 
In addition, collapsible probes (long poles several meters in 
length)  are  used  to  physically  probe  the  snowpack  area  to 
locate  a  victim.  Avalanche  shovels  –  collapsible  for 
transport – are used to dig out the victim. While other safety 
tools  are  available  on  the  market,  the  trio  of  transceiver-
probe-shovel 
the  most  commonly  used  amongst 
recreationists. Transceivers are the technological tools used 
to find the most buried victims (as per the last two decades 
statistics in the U.S.A. [2]). 
Companion rescue with an avalanche transceiver follows a 
well-defined  protocol.  Avalanche  rescue  educators  and 
researchers  have  developed  and  improved  this  protocol 

is 

since the 1970s. It is taught in rescue literature, avalanche 
rescue  classes,  and  workshops  (e.g.  [12,41]).  While  slight 
variations  in  advance  techniques  exist,  the  main  steps 
remain  the  same  [18].  It  begins  with  initial  coordination. 
Rescuers  (the  victim’s  or  victims’  companions  who  have 
witnessed  the  avalanche)  quickly  coordinate  themselves. 
They  discuss  further  risks  for  themselves  as  rescuers  (e.g. 
potential future avalanches, or dangerous terrain like cliffs), 
and  gather  information  concerning  who  saw  what.  They 
rapidly discuss what needs to be done, where each assumes 
an initial role with particular duties (e.g., leader, searcher, 
prober). While taking a minute or two, initial coordination 
leads to better overall efficiency, better safety management, 
and makes sure that no time is wasted [13].  
The next step is the signal search. Here, searchers travel on 
skis  on  the  avalanche  path  and  the  avalanche  debris 
(generally settled hard chunks of snow and ice) in a pattern 
that  covers  the  whole  area  that  could  contain  the  buried 
victim. They use their beacons on search mode to find the 
signal emitted by the victim’s beacon under the snow. Once 
a signal is found, usually at a range of less than 60 meters, 
the  rescuer  starts  the  coarse  search  and  follows  the 
indications  on  the  beacon  (a  visual  distance  and  direction 
cue, and an audible cue) to get closer to the victim. When 
close to the victim, the rescuer removes his skis, kneels and 
starts  the  fine  search  of  the  strongest  signal  (called 
bracketing)  to  further  narrow  down  the  victim’s  location. 
Depending on the depth of the burial and other factors, this 
location  may  still  not  be  exactly  over  the  victim.  To 
pinpoint the location of the victim, the searcher calls in the 
probers who start probing – repeatedly pushing the probes 
through the snow in a regular pattern around that region – 
where they try to strike (and thus locate) the victim. Next is 
shoveling the snow out of the way, first to bring an airway 
to the victim, and then to extract the victim from the snow. 
As shoveling through a settled snow pack is non-trivial and 
exhausting  work,  there  is  even  a  protocol  that  dictates 
efficient  methods  for  team  shoveling.  When  the  victim  is 
uncovered, first aid begins. The last step is to transport the 
victim out of the backcountry as needed.   
While  this  protocol  sounds  straightforward,  much  can  go 
wrong. For the search portion, beacon signals can be lost or 
confused, with searchers backtracking or even going around 
in circles. Rescuers may fixate on one victim’s signal, at the 
cost of another victim. If a party member had accidentally 
left  their  transceiver  on  ‘transmit’  mode,  that  signal  could 
mislead  other  searchers.  Probers  and  searchers  doing  the 
fine  search  work  atop  the  same  small  area:  probers  may 
miss  areas  that  should  be  covered,  or  think  they  have  a 
‘strike’  when  they  do  not,  and  searchers  may  miss  the 
strongest signal. All leads to confusion. Shoveling through 
avalanche  debris  must  be  done  efficiently  (via  a  well-
defined method) as it is otherwise extremely difficult, tiring 
and  time-consuming.  These  all  matter  greatly,  as  even  the 
loss  of  a  few  minutes  in  the  process  may  mean  the 
difference between life and death.  

875

SESSION: EDUCATION IN THE CLASSROOM AND BEYOND

 

the  above,  best  practices  demand 
learn  and  regularly  practice  with 

an  event.  Beacon  parks  include  a  control  box  (Fig  1b) 
controlling the operation of the practice beacons.  
To  use  the  beacon  park,  recreationists  arrive  on  site  with 
their  own  beacons.  They  turn  on  one  or  more  practice 
beacons  through  the  control  box.  They  use  their  personal 
beacons to do the coarse and fine search towards one signal 
at  a  time  and  then  use  their  probes  to  detect  the  plywood 
holding the practice beacon through the snow. The practice 
stops  there.  Unfortunately,  while  an  important  skill  to 
practice,  digging  is  generally  not  done  within  the  beacon 
park for different reasons: the heavily-trodden snow is often 
frozen into place and makes digging unrealistic; it keeps the 
terrain as smooth as possible to eliminate hints for others; it 
keeps the snow depth deep which simulates deep burials.  
Research Questions  
We focus specifically on avalanche beacon training parks as 
an illustrative case study of a technological training ground. 
We ask: 
•  How  do  recreationists  use  beacon  parks  for  both  skill 

    Figure 1. a) Practice beacon in waterproof case on plywood. b) Beacon park control box. c) Beacon park area. 
Because  of 
that 
recreationists 
their 
equipment,  understand  the  protocol  for  finding  a  victim, 
and  know  the  procedures  for  working  as  a  companion 
rescue  team  [1].  They  must  also  be  ready  to  work  with 
strangers. They must be ready to improvise and readjust the 
protocol depending on who is doing the rescue, how many 
people are available, and to accommodate everyone’s skill 
levels.  Recreationists  are  highly  encouraged 
take 
professional  avalanche  courses,  where  an  instructor  offers 
the basics of avalanche safety, and additionally encouraged 
to  practice  their  skills  on  their  own  (individually  or  as  a 
team), at least once every ski season [13]. Another option is 
to  train  in  an  avalanche  beacon  training  park  (or  beacon 
park  for  short).  Unfortunately,  there  are  no  data  available 
that can inform us on the number of recreationists that take 
classes, how they practice, how many use beacon parks, etc. 
What is known is that there is a huge diversity of training. 
While  many  recreationists  take  training  very  seriously, 
there  are  many  backcountry  users  with  little  training.  
Concerted efforts have been made to improve this situation 
by  providing  more  avalanche  training  such  as  avalanche 
awareness courses to high-risk groups (e.g. high school and 
university students who have recently taken up backcountry 
boarding  or  skiing,  and  snow-mobilers  who  have 
traditionally  eschewed  avalanche  courses).  However, 
avalanche awareness courses are insufficient by themselves: 
their  goal  is  to  have  its  attendees  recognize  the  risk  of 
avalanches, and to persuade them to take proper avalanche 
courses  (e.g.  see  www.avalanche.ca/training#overview). 
The second effort to increase avalanche training is through 
the provision of avalanche beacon training parks 
Avalanche Beacon Training Parks 
An  avalanche  beacon  training  park  is  a  practice  field 
containing  pre-installed  avalanche  beacons  [10].  They  are 
usually located at ski hills or at road heads in backcountry 
areas, and their locations are advertised and signed (Fig 1c). 
A beacon park typically comprises 8 to 16 practice beacons 
that  emit  the  same  radio  signal  (457  Hz)  as  normal 
avalanche  beacons.  Beacons  are  protected  in  a  waterproof 
case, and screwed to a 50 cm2 plywood sheet (Fig 1a) that 
simulates the victim’s surface area when probing. Beacons 
are  buried  under  the  snow  at  the  beginning  of  the  season, 
with  their  depth  varying  over  time  with  the  snowpack.  A 
beacon  park  can  also  be  installed  temporarily,  such  as  for 

The  domain  of  avalanche  rescue 
largely  one  of 
practitioners  and  practitioner  expertise.  While  there  are 
conferences on all aspects of avalanche  (e.g. International 
Snow  Science  Workshop),  the  topic  of  companion  rescue 
and its associated risks does not lend itself to the kinds of 
academic 
typical 
academic  CSCW  research.  Thus  our  methodology  is  not 
purely objective. We add a subjective component, where we 
provide our own insights into issues of transceiver use and 
avalanche risks, and in interpreting what participants do in 
beacon parks. We stress that our views are not unusual, but 
they echo views commonly held by avalanche professionals 
and recreationists. Finally, as we will describe shortly, our 
methodology  is  observational  by  default,  but  moves  to 
interventionist  both  to  be  helpful  to  the  participants  (who 
are using the beacon park for a real purpose) and to see how 
that intervention helps.  
Part I: Observational study and interviews  
Part  I  of  the  study  focused  on  our  first  research  question. 
Observational  data  was  gathered  with 
the  goal  of 
constructing  a  detailed  portrait  of  how  recreationists  used 

•  How can we design beacon parks to better fit the needs 

of the recreational community of backcountry skiers? 

treatment 

that  we  could  expect 

in 

development and team coordination? 

is 

to 

876

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

the Mount Baker beacon park somewhat ‘in the wild’: they 
were  allowed  to  pursue  their  own  activities,  but  had  the 
option of using an on-site expert as a resource. 
Participants.  We  recruited  participants  by  advertising  the 
opportunity  to  practice  avalanche  companion  rescue  in  a 
beacon park, with the option of participating in a study. We 
advertised  on  online  sports-related  forums,  through  sports 
equipment shops’ social media, with print ads in the local 
community, and on the Mount Baker ski area’s website. We 
had 22 participants (5 female, 17 male). 12 were related to 
the Mount Baker ski area and 10 from the general public. 
We had 10 participants that came individually, 3 teams of 2, 
and 2 teams of 3. 10 had never used a beacon park, while 
the  rest  had  used  them  at  other  ski  resorts.  There  was  a 
broad  range  of  backcountry  ski  experience,  from  no 
experience  to  16  years  of  experience.  All  had  at  least 
several  years  of  resort  skiing  experience.  We  note  that 
downhill skiing expertise did not necessarily correlate with 
backcountry experience or companion rescue expertise. For 
example, several volunteer ski patrollers participating in the 
study  did  not  routinely  go  backcountry  skiing,  and  had 
limited companion rescue training (if at all).  
We  recognize  that  our  participant  sample  is  broad  and 
varied,  and  may  seem  ‘at  odds’  with  a  formal  study.  The 
benefit  is  that  this  variety  is  representative  of  people  who 
actually  use  beacon  parks  ‘in 
the  wild’.  This  was 
intentional.  Rather  than  select  a  narrow  slice  of  potential 
beacon park users, we wanted to have enough diversity to 
observe a range of the ways people went through scenarios. 
This in turn provides rich and detailed qualitative data. We 
should  also  add  that  this  participant  diversity  matches  our 
own personal experiences in seeing who uses beacon parks.  
Tasks.  Participants  came  to  the  tent  (Fig  1c),  where  we 
introduced  a  particular  avalanche  rescue  scenario.  They 
would  then  do  a  scenario,  usually  returning  to  the  tent 
afterwards for the next scenario. The facilitator would offer 
his  expertise  to  participants  (perhaps  after  observing 
participants  or  on  participants’  request),  where  he  would 
offer tips, comments and even help them through particular 
scenarios. Otherwise, we let the participants use the beacon 
park in the way they wanted to keep the ecological validity 
of  the  study.  We  invited  participants  to  perform  as  many 
rescues as they wanted. If participants had come alone, we 
let them use it by themselves. If they had come as a group, 
we suggested that they perform practices as a team.  
Data Collection. We conducted a pre-activity questionnaire 
to  gather  information  about  each  participant’s  motivation 
for  using  the  beacon  park,  and  their  level  of  expertise  in 
skiing, companion rescue, and beacon parks.  
As the participants used the beacon park, we observed them 
with the shadowing technique. We asked them to describe 
what  they  were  thinking  as  they  were  doing  their  practice 
rescues.  One  researcher  followed  them  and  took  hand 
written notes. We also filmed the participants for the length 

 
Figure 2. Aerial view of day 3’s beacon park. Red circles show 
the  simulated  avalanche  debris  zones;  numbers  indicate  the 
buried beacons. Yellow dotted lines and arrows indicate each 
scenario’s  starting  gate  and  direction  of  the  simulated 
avalanche.  (From  Google  Maps:  during  the  study,  snow 
covered the whole area) 

conducted  post-activity 

of the search with a GoPro camera. We wrote a report for 
each participant summarizing our observations on how they 
performed the rescues, how they used the beacon, how they 
collaborated  with  others,  and  how  they  modified  their 
strategies of search from one scenario to another. 
semi-structured 
Finally,  we 
interviews  with  those  participants  who  were  willing  (9  in 
total).  The  interview  questions  focused  on  participants’ 
experience  of  the  beacon  park  (including  positive  and 
challenging  aspects  of  practice,  the  development  of  skills, 
and  the  practice  of  coordination)  and  on  beacons  and 
beacon parks could be designed in the future. 
Part II: Reflections on maintaining a beacon park 
Part II of the study focused on our second research question 
where  we  reflected  on  the  design  strategies  we  used  to 
install  and  maintain  the  beacon  park,  and  the  changes  we 
made to our installation over the course of the study based 
on our observations in Part I. 
Installing and Maintaining the Beacon Park. For each day 
that we were on site, we created a series of scenarios. For 
each,  we  positioned  and  buried  each  practice  beacon  to 
create a variety of scenarios for participants. Each scenario 
used  bamboo  poles  to  indicate  the  start  and  end  of  the 
simulated  avalanche  path.  Scenarios  ranged  in  expected 
difficulty.  The  simplest  were  those  simulating  a  single 
burial.  More  difficult  scenarios  simulated  two  victims 
located  at  various  distances  from  one  another.  Multiple 
burials  make  it  more  difficult  to  locate  a  signal  (due  to 
multiple  beacon  signals),  coordination  complexity,  and 
added  stress  due  to  the  greater  number  of  victims  for  the 
same  survivable  amount  of  time.  For  each  day,  we  used 
insights gathered from the previous study day to modify the 
beacon park setup.  
Data  Collection.  The  two  on-site  authors  debriefed  each 
other at the end of each study day. Through a written report, 
they  recorded  what  they  had  observed  in  relation  to  the 
organization  of  the  beacon  park,  the  way  the  scenes  were 
installed,  the  way  information  was  communicated  to 

877

participants,  and  impressions  for  what  worked  well  and 
what  needed  adjustment.  We  took  photos  of  the  training 
scenes and our installation. We also produced an aerial map 
of the beacon park locating each scenario (as in Fig. 2). 
Data analysis 
We  conducted  a  thematic  analysis  [5]  with  all  the  data 
collected  from  both  parts  I  and  II,  i.e.,  we  identified  and 
recorded  patterns  of  phenomenon  that  emerged  across  the 
observations,  interviews,  and  reports  that  comprise  our 
primary data. We identified various themes, discussed next.  

starting  with  an 

RESULTS 
Our results are presented in five themes as reflected in our 
data analysis, each with a variety of sub-themes.  Dominant 
themes  include:  1)  individual  skill  development  with  the 
technology  in  context;  2)  team  coordination  training 
including communication, role distribution, and team rescue 
strategies;  3)  the  false  sense  of  confidence;  4)  the  beacon 
park as technological training ground, and 5) the role of the 
facilitator.  
Individual skill development in context 
The  beacon  park  allowed  for  participants  to  practice 
individual  skills  with  their  beacons  and  advance  team 
strategies  for  more  efficient  rescues.  We  observed  a 
necessary  progression 
individual’s 
familiarization with the technological tool and its functions, 
learning how to use that tool in the context of the simulated 
search, and then to a mastery of particular rescue skills.   
From familiarization to a mastery of skills in context  
All participants used the beacon park to develop and master 
particular  skills,  from  beginners  learning  how  to  use  a 
beacon  to  advanced  practitioners  focusing  on  sharpening 
their skills in complex multiple burial scenarios.  
For some participants (e.g. P1, P13, P15b)1, the beacon park 
was  their  first  experience  with  a  beacon  and  with  the 
avalanche  companion  rescue  protocol.  Their 
learning 
largely  revolved  around  the  basics  of  the  avalanche 
transceiver technology: how to turn the beacon on, how to 
switch  between  transmit  and  receive  modes,  and  how  to 
read  the  signals  as  one  moved  over  the  terrain.  Even 
experienced  people  practiced  with  their  technology.  For 
example, the beacon park was seen as a good place to get to 
know new equipment, as functions and modes often differ 
between beacons. As P10b said, her motivation for coming 
to the beacon park was to “get used to my new beacon and 
practice avalanche rescue”. The beacon park also served as 
a catalyst for participants to become aware of technical or 
logistical  issues  with  their  equipment  such  as  the  lack  of 
recharged batteries for example (P4).  

                                                             
1  Participants  who  came  to  the  beacon  park  by  themselves  are 
referred to as P#. Participants who came as a group are referred to 
as P#a, P#b and P#c, with same #. 

878

SESSION: EDUCATION IN THE CLASSROOM AND BEYOND

Beyond  familiarization  with  the  beacon,  participants  used 
the  beacon  park  to  master  certain  skills.  For  example, 
couple P11a and P11b pushed each other to get the fastest 
times  on  the  single  burial  scenarios.  While  one  was 
performing  the  rescue,  the  other  timed  the  rescue.  This 
additional  stress  augmented  the  level  of  psychological 
fidelity  [3]  as  well  as  provided  a  baseline  for  comparing 
results and progress for those participants. 
In addition to focusing on the technology (at least initially), 
participants  were  also  interested  in  acquiring  skills  about 
using that technology within the context of an actual search.  
As P3c said: “It’s not just about turning the beacon on, but 
about  the  way  to  do  the  rescue  too”.  For  instance, 
participants  P3b,  P5  and  P10c  all  mentioned  that  they 
wanted  to  use  the  beacon  park  specifically  as  a  way  to 
become  more  proficient  in  the  context  of  multiple  burial 
scenarios.  In  their  case,  they  used  the  simpler  scenarios 
(single burials) as a warm up exercise before engaging with 
the scenarios they wanted to gain more experience with.  
The beacon park – more than an individual training tool 
It was interesting to note that almost half of our participants 
came alone to the beacon park. Participants came on their 
own for a multitude of reasons: they are new to backcountry 
skiing and are looking for a group to go with (e.g. P1), they 
had  some  free  time  between  ski  runs  by  themselves  (e.g. 
P8), or they wanted to focus practice on their device (e.g. 
P13). Some of them were aware of the potential to practice 
as a group while others were not. But in any case, all found 
great  value  in  using  the  beacon  park  and  in  practicing 
individual skill development with the built in scenarios.  
Team coordination training 
Our  second  study  theme  was  how  the  beacon  park 
supported  team  coordination  training.  While  we  saw  that 
the beacon park can provide a fruitful setting for individual 
skill  development,  we  also  see  its  immense  potential  for 
practicing 
important,  as 
coordination  is  a  critical  component  of  a  successful 
companion  rescue  that  also  needs  practice.  In  addition, 
when  participants  came  alone  to  the  beacon  park,  they 
missed opportunities to learn from each other and to further 
deepen  their  relationships  with  other  members  of  their 
community  of  practice.  Some  of 
them  also  missed 
opportunities to learn from an expert (if available), such as 
our own on-site facilitator. 
As  we  described  previously,  coordination  is  one  of  the 
hardest  aspects  of  avalanche  companion  rescue,  and 
therefore  one  of  the  areas  with  the  most  opportunities  for 
improvement.  In  our  discussions  with  participants,  they 
were enthusiastic at the idea of practicing as part of a team:  
“I think that a group setting is more effective, and more fun 
than training alone. It is rare, or at least unwise, to travel 
in  the  backcountry  alone,  so  training  with  other  people 
seems  to  make  sense.  Also,  from  personal  experience, 
communication 
in  emergency 

team  coordination.  This 

is 

is  absolutely  crucial 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

situations,  and  it’s  something  that  is  often  overlooked,  so 
working  it  with  other  forms  of  practice,  or  training  is  a 
good idea.” (P13) 
Although  most  participants  agreed  that  coordination  and 
communication  were  highly  important  for  the  success  of 
companion  rescue,  only  6  out  of  22  reported  to  have 
practiced team coordination in the last year. In addition, as 
we will show below, practicing coordination did not come 
intuitively to various participants. 
Coordination: beyond the beacon 
One of the main challenges we observed in the beacon park 
was to move beyond understanding the beacon technology, 
to  gain  a  larger  perspective  of  the  situation.  When  teams 
arrived  on  scene,  we  seldom  saw  overt  discussions  about 
roles  or  strategies  for  the  rescue  they  were  about  to 
perform.  Instead,  we  saw  teams  going  in  a  scenario  and 
focusing each on their beacons to look for signals. That is, 
participants  focused  on  the  technology  rather  than  team 
coordination, and on the details of their search rather than 
the  big  picture  of  what  was  going  on.  This  lack  of 
communication often continued the rest of the search.  
For  example,  the  team  of  P3a,  P3b  and  P3c  began  their 
search by finding the first signal and focusing on it. As the 
three  participants  started  to  do  a  fine  search  on  the  first 
signal, they were too close together. P3a and P3b were in 
the way of P3c who was trying to narrow the probing area. 
Not only was this sub-optimal, but it also meant that no one 
was searching for the second victim. This could have easily 
been  prevented  by  simple  and  short  communication 
between the participants, e.g. ‘I’ll finish this search, P3b get 
your  probe  out,  and  P3c  start  the  coarse  search  for  the 
second victim’. Similarly, had a leader been selected, their 
role would have included identifying and remedying issues 
such as these.  
After observing the above situation, the facilitator debriefed 
these  points  with  the  participants.  The  participants  then 
moved  to  the  second  multiple  burial  scenario  and  were 
encouraged to work more closely as a team and specifically 
to  communicate  better.  They  agreed  that  communication 
was important and that they should plan differently for the 
next  scenario.  However,  in  practice,  and  even  with  the 
proper  intentions  of  the  participants,  communication  was 
lacking  and  participants  still  showed  signs  of  working 
individually instead of as a team. In fact, it seemed that the 
participants were still very much focused on understanding 
their own beacons and that most of their attention remained 
on  the  technology  rather  than  the  teamwork.  This  finding 
reveals that coordination and communication may not come 
easily, and that considerable practice is required to achieve 
a  level  of  team  coordination  proficiency.  In  summary, 
participants  in  teams  that  lacked  communication  unduly 
focused their attention on the beacon. They did not maintain 
a  broader  perspective  of  the  situation,  which  resulted  in  a 
loss of situational awareness. This is similar to the finding 
described in [13] and critiqued as a flaw in beacon designs.  

As a contrasting example to the previous case, the team of 
P10a, P10b, and P10c (who had never performed a rescue 
together) had much better communication and were able to 
coordinate  on  the  scene.  At  the  entrance  of  the  scenario, 
P10c proposed to his teammates to split the avalanche path 
into  search  paths  for  each  of  them.  As  they  walked  down 
the  hill,  P10c  reached  the  first  victim.  P10a  and  P10b  got 
closer  to  him  as  well,  as  their  beacons  also  indicated  that 
direction.  While  P10b  got  ready  to  help  P10c  by  probing, 
P10a recognized that he was not needed there and walked 
past them to search and find the second victim. In this case, 
the  team  was  able  to  monitor  each  other’s  actions  and 
fluidly  take  the  roles  that  were  the  best  for  the  team’s 
success (rapidly deciding to be a prober, or to leave the first 
victim  and  start  the  search  of  the  second).  This  finding 
illustrates  what  Faraj  and  Xiao  [17]  describe  as  Plug-and-
Play  teaming,  where  team  members  can  take  on  different 
roles,  as  long  as  the  requisite  expertise  is  adequate  and 
situation  awareness  is  maintained.  The  teams  that  are 
flexible enough to subdivide and reconstitute themselves in 
an  ad  hoc  manner  are  more  successful  in  emergency 
situations [17]. 
Mastering specialized roles  
Our results also show another strategy for teams practicing 
together:  mastering  specialized  roles  as  part  of  a  team.  In 
some cases, participants, often teams of 2, would each lean 
towards  a  role  that  they  would  keep  from  scenario  to 
scenario. For example, P11a acted as the prober while P11b 
did the fine search and the bracketing: 
“The  most  challenging  parts  were  probably  working  out 
how to best work efficiently as a team. After several tries, 
we realized that it was best if as soon as one of us got a 
signal, the other one immediately started getting out their 
probe.  Since  it  is  relatively  quick  to  follow  a  signal  and 
relatively  time-consuming  to  get  out  a  probe,  it  almost 
always still worked out that the person following the signal 
was  bracketing  the  site  by  the  time  the  person  with  the 
probe was ready to start trying to get strikes”. (P11a) 
Their  strategy  led  to  very  efficient  practice  rescues. 
However, the challenge with this strategy is in the lack of 
flexibility  between  the  roles.  In  a  real  accident,  one  never 
knows who might be a victim and thus not able to perform 
their  role  as  rescuer.  Similarly,  the  person  with  that 
expertise  may  be  downslope,  where 
take 
considerable  time  to  return  uphill  to  the  avalanche  site. 
Hence, it is as important to practice other roles to be more 
versatile.  This  strategy  can  be  a  stepping  stone  before 
practicing  a  more  fluid  exchange  of  roles  in  the  practice. 
P11a  and  P11b  eventually  recognized  this  as  a  problem, 
where  they  exchanged  roles  during  their  last  scenario  in 
order  to  get  a  feel  for  each  other’s  role.  This  example 
exemplifies  one  of  the  types  of  cross  training  [42]: 
positional  rotation,  a  strategy  where  each  team  member 
learns about each others’ tasks and roles by doing them first 
hand [8]. In addition, this strategy was reported to lead to 

it  would 

879

inter-positional  knowledge  which  is  crucial  to  “team 
functioning  because  it  allows  team  members  to  anticipate 
the  task  needs  of  fellow  team  members,  thus  allowing 
enhanced  coordination  with  a  minimal  communication 
requirement”  [42:88].  Moreover,  it  is  central  to  avalanche 
companion  rescue  practice  since  it  is  impossible  for 
rescuers  to  predict  what  role  they  will  need  to  take 
depending on the situation. 

Breaking the false sense of confidence 
In previous research, it was pointed out that practice that is 
too  simple  or  too  easy  can  lead  to  a  false  sense  of 
confidence  for  backcountry  recreationists  [13].  In  this 
study, we found that the way the scenarios were organized 
in  the  beacon  park  and  the  variety  of  their  expected 
difficulty could help break that false sense of confidence for 
participants.  This  allowed  them  to  realize  the  complexity 
and  challenges  that  are  part  of  some  avalanche  accidents 
and served as a confirmation that practicing is important for 
avalanche preparedness.  
We often observed the following pattern. Participants who 
began  with  a  sequence  of  single  burial  scenarios  became 
faster and more efficient at finding the single victim. This 
boosted  their  sense  of  confidence  about  their  ability  to 
perform  successful  rescues.  When  participants  moved  to 
more  challenging  scenarios,  such  as  a  coarse  search  on  a 
multiple burial scene, difficulty increased significantly, for 
example because they encountered confusing indications on 
beacon  signals,  and  because  more  team  coordination  was 
required. In these cases, we saw some participants able to 
find  a  first  victim  but  not  the  second  one.  In  other  cases, 
participants could find both victims but took a much longer 
time  relative  to  the  single  burial  scenarios.  In  most  cases, 
the harder scenarios shook the participants’ confidence and 
trust in their beacon.  
One issue appears to be that participants – particularly those 
with  less  experience  –  had  an  incorrect  view  of  the 
accuracy,  precision  and  robustness  of  the  technology  they 
were  using.  Beacons  have  significant  problems  with  the 
multiple signals received in a multiple burial scenario. They 
do  not  always  display  competing 
in  an 
understandable  manner.  For  example,  some  beacons 
alternate distance numbers between the two victims, which 
some found confusing (e.g. P1), while others fix onto one 
signal while hiding the other. Beacons sometimes lose the 
signal  due  to  the  rapid  movements  of  a  searcher. In  other 
beacons, the screen can even go black. Some beacons try to 
simplify  searching  by  allowing  the  search  to  hide  a 
particular  signal  (called  ‘marking’),  yet  this  is  considered 
an  advanced  feature  and  introduces  further  problems.  A 
beacon  may  even  have  to  be  turned  off  and  on  again  to 
reacquire a lost signal (e.g. P5). These events are, of course, 
stressful (as reported by various participants) as this is often 
the first time they have seen their beacon act like this. Their 
confidence  is  shaken,  and  their  mental  model  of  the 
technology is broken. It is only through practice, repetition 

signals 

880

SESSION: EDUCATION IN THE CLASSROOM AND BEYOND

and mentoring that participants were able to make sense of 
the nuances of their beacon and of those signals, where they 
could eventually perform rescues more successfully.  
A sequence of progressively more difficult scenarios helps 
mitigate this loss of confidence. Although harder scenarios 
were  more  challenging,  participants  appreciated 
the 
opportunity  to  sharpen  their  skills.  For  example,  P15a 
suggested: “Keep the progression of difficulty going. Maybe 
also add a 3 person burial scenario, something even more 
complex”.  Our  decision  to  seed  the  beacon  park  with 
multiple scenarios representing different levels of difficulty 
thus proved important. Scenarios of similar difficulty allow 
people to return and practice their skills; advancing to the 
next  level  gives  them  opportunity  to  tackle  more  complex 
situations, which forced them to acquire a higher skill level 
(which they appreciated) and increased confidence. 
Designing  beacon  parks  as  technological  training 
grounds 
An  important  component  of  how  a  beacon  park  is 
experienced relies on its set up on the terrain and how it is 
presented  to  recreationists.  In  this  work,  we  evolved  the 
beacon  park  over  our  study  period.  Based  on  our 
observations  and  self-reflections  about  our  practices,  we 
now  share  the  varied  decisions  we  made  about  this 
technological  training  ground,  and  how  it  influenced 
participants’ ability to practice and develop their skills and 
team coordination practices.  
Physical constraints in the beacon park  
The  beacon  park  is  a  technology-augmented  context  for 
training,  where  it  should  be  designed  to  mimic  real-life 
threat situations. This implies a combination of two things: 
real  life  elements  as  reflected  in  the  terrain;  and  the 
technology itself. 
Ideally,  we  wanted  terrain  that  was  on  a  steep  slope 
resembling an avalanche slope. However, this desire had to 
be balanced against how accessible the beacon park would 
be  for  participants,  and  the  constraints  imposed  by  the 
terrain  the  ski  resort  management  provided  for  us  to  use. 
The  somewhat  flat  terrain  we  used  (which  is  true  of  most 
beacon parks) did not match a typical avalanche slope. As 
well,  the  snow  quality  differed  from  the  varied  snow  that 
could result from an avalanche, as P3c critiqued:  
“The beacon park is generally in a flat area, on snow that is 
easy to access and walk on. In a real avalanche, the terrain 
would be much steeper and walking in avalanche debris is 
more  like  walking  on  boulders.  So  this  is  not  exactly 
realistic.” (P3c) 
In addition, the trampled ground of a beacon park does not 
visually  resemble  a  real  avalanche,  which  rescuers  would 
normally  scan  for  visual  cues  to  determine  the  avalanche 
path and the debris zone.  
The  technological  factors  are  the  number  of  practice 
beacons  and  how  they  were  located  and  buried  across  the 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

that 

require 

(P10a).  Factors 

area  at  various  depths.  This  greatly  influences  scenario 
difficulty. Deeper burials are more difficult to pinpoint, and 
particular combinations and distances of activated beacons 
alters how searchers see signals. Yet the terrain constrains 
the  burial  depth  (e.g.,  due  to  the  current  snow  depth)  and 
how far apart one can place the beacons (due to site size). 
Thus our terrain choice and where to position each beacon 
had  an  important  impact  on  the  range  and  degree  of  a 
scenario’s simulated avalanche accident fidelity.  
Scenarios require explicit communication of their details 
Because there is no real avalanche, details of scenarios have 
to  be  explicitly  communicated  to  the  participants.  This 
includes where the scenarios are located and the number of 
victims. In our study, the facilitator verbally explained each 
scenario to the participants, and bamboo poles marking the 
top  and  bottom  of  the  imagined  avalanche  zone  served  as 
visual  cues.  Although  participants  were  generally  able  to 
imagine  the  avalanche  path  and  the  debris  zone,  others 
found that more challenging. For example, P10a mentioned: 
“The run out zone (or where the debris would be) requires 
a  lot  of  imagination  on  my  part,  maybe  this  could  be 
improved.” 
explicit 
communication  affect 
learning  because  psychological 
fidelity is undermined. 
Beacon park flexibility 
While  we  had  to  adjust  to  the  physical  constraints  of  the 
terrain,  the  beacon  park  system  is  very  simple—a  set  of 
buried beacon signals that can individually be turned on or 
off—which  makes  it  highly  configurable  and  flexible  in 
terms  of  constructing  scenarios  for  different  learning 
situations,  e.g.,  how  people  navigated  through  the  park, 
how they configured it for single or multiple burials, how 
different skills could be practiced, and how more structured 
teaching can be layered atop of it.  
Through  our  observations,  we  saw  how  the  beacon  park 
was  sometimes  seen  as  this  flexible  platform  supporting  a 
variety of learning activities. We observed various teaching 
strategies both between the facilitator and participants, and 
between  participants.  More  experienced  participants  in  a 
group  would  teach  the  less  experienced  participant  basic 
skills.  For  example,  P16a  (who  had  companion  rescue 
experience)  used  the  beacon  park  as  a  place  to  show  his 
girlfriend  (P16b)  the  basic  search  movements  during  the 
coarse and fine search, including how one should respond 
to the signal seen in the beacon. In the example of P11a and 
P11b timing each other, we see how certain exercises could 
be created ad hoc in the technological setting of the beacon 
park without the need of external facilitation or suggestion. 

The role of the facilitator  
A good facilitator is someone recognized as an ‘old timer’ 
[24]  in  the  practice  of  backcountry  skiing  and  avalanche 
companion  rescue,  and  one  who  is  able  to  pass  on  their 
skills  and  knowledge  to  others.  However,  most  beacon 
parks do not operate with a facilitator. Thus if a team uses 

881

from 

feedback 

the  beacon  park,  its  members  often  rely  on  a  more 
experienced  team  member  to  mentor  them  (although  that 
person may not necessarily have appropriate training).   
In  our  study,  many  of  our  participants  were  novices  and 
needed  some  orientation  for  how  to  use  the  beacon  park. 
The first role of our facilitator was to introduce the park and 
how to best use it, including what scenarios to do, in what 
order,  and  where  scenarios  are  physically  located.  As 
participants  pursued  scenarios,  the  facilitator  answered 
many  questions,  ranging  from  specific  questions  about 
advanced functions on beacons to deeper understanding of 
that  participants 
rescue  strategies.  Finally,  we  found 
appreciated  debrief  sessions  or 
the 
facilitator.  Once  a  scenario  was  completed,  the  facilitator 
summarized  his  observations  and  asked  participants  to 
describe what they saw, how they felt and how they think 
things could have been better. Through this discussion, the 
facilitator  encouraged  the  participants  to  realize  what  they 
could  do  differently.  Those  conversations  often  led  to 
improvement in the next scenario performed. For example, 
with the couple P11a and P11b, the facilitator explained a 
specific  strategy  for  probing  that  is  particularly  efficient 
with 
tried  and  found 
successful in the next scenario. Participants recognized the 
value of the facilitator: “Having [the beacon park] staffed 
also really helped, because when you have someone teach 
you, this makes a large difference.” (P10c) 
In  our  view,  the  presence  of  an  ‘old  timer’  was  very 
significant  for  an  effective  use  of  the  park.  However, 
staffed  beacon  parks  are  not  the  norm.  Without  the 
facilitator,  people  could  easily  develop  poor  practices  that 
could  jeopardize  how  they  performed  companion  rescue 
during a real avalanche.  

two  rescuers;  a  strategy 

they 

DISCUSSION 
Our results provide insights into particular changes that can 
make beacon parks more efficient, more inviting and more 
tailored  to  the  training  of  backcountry  recreationists.  In 
addition,  our  work  also  has  particular  ramifications  for 
CSCW.  Specifically,  the  advent  of  mobile  computing 
means 
that  non-expert  collaborators  are  now  using 
sophisticated  technology  while  on  the  move  and  within 
specific contexts. Unlike desktop computers that people can 
learn  while  at  home  or  in  the  office,  training  in  the  field 
becomes  increasingly  important.  For  this  reason,  in  this 
discussion,  we  focus  on  high-level  strategies  that  can  be 
applied to technological training grounds beyond avalanche 
companion  rescue.  These  include  training  and  simulation 
systems  for  non-experts  in  many  fields,  including  but  not 
limited to extreme sports. 
The value of progressive scales of difficulty 
We  saw  significant  value  in  using  progressive  scales  of 
difficulty 
in  beacon  park  scenarios.  As  previously 
described, the facilitator encouraged participants to follow a 
progression, where he suggested to do simple single burial 

[26]). 

In  spite  of 

scenarios  first  until  they  mastered  their  basic  skills,  and 
only  then  to  make  their  way  to  the  complex  multiple 
burials.  While  solidifying  basic  skills  increased  self-
assurance, the complexity progression of the scenarios also 
helped  break  the  false  sense  of  confidence.  We  saw  how 
more complex scenarios provided a space to ask questions, 
reflect  on  more  difficult  situations,  understand  device  and 
personal  limitations,  and  overall  provide  a  sense  for  how 
hard companion rescue could be. Learning is influenced by 
the progression of scenarios, by practicing in context even 
if  simulated,  and  (sometimes)  by  team  mentoring.  This 
follows  the  theory  of  situated  learning  [24]  where  the 
physical  and  social  situation  constructs  a  context  for 
participants  to  make  sense  of  some  functions  or  errors  of 
their beacons as they pursue their practice.   
The idea of progressive learning and learning by mastering 
is,  of  course,  not  new.  Indeed,  many  formal  learning 
environments  are  structured  so  that  students  must  achieve 
proficiency  at  a  given  difficulty  level  before  they  are 
allowed  to  continue  to  the  next  level  (for  an  example  in 
computational  games,  see 
this, 
technological  training  grounds  are  not  structured  in  this 
manner;  instead,  they  are  offered  as  environments  where 
people  attempt  to  learn  on  their  own  and  in  an  ad-hoc 
manner. We believe these training grounds can be improved 
dramatically  by  offering  scenarios  of  increasing  difficulty 
(as  we  did),  by  explicitly  describing  skills  that  should  be 
mastered at that level, and by offering a way for learners to 
‘grade’  themselves  in  terms  of  mastering  a  scenario  level. 
Based on our findings, we also suggest that this information 
should be communicated to recreationists in ways that are 
appropriate  to  the  activity  and  the  physical  context.  For 
example,  in  outdoor  training  grounds,  using  weather 
resistant  posters 
scenarios,  potentially 
augmented  by  digital  material  (accessible  via  a  mobile 
device)  to  describe  best  practices  and  learning  goals. 
Beyond  extreme  sports  training,  this  strategy  can  also  be 
applied to train volunteers and citizens who are helping in 
disaster  relief  and  emergency  situations.  In  the  cases  of 
volunteer  work  and  citizen-to-citizen  communication  [34], 
short training sessions can also include a progressive scale 
of  difficulty 
to  help  build  assurance  but  not  over-
confidence.  
A variety of levels of fidelity 
The  beacon  park  is  a  technological  training  ground  that 
includes  a  variety  of  levels  of  fidelity  along  the  three 
aspects  of  environment,  equipment  and  psychological  [3] 
(as described in our related works section). Throughout our 
results we have articulated how certain aspects could reach 
a higher level of fidelity while others could not. For beacon 
parks,  the  level  of  environmental  fidelity  is  difficult  to 
manage,  for  it  is  heavily  constrained  by  the  terrain 
available.  If  varied  terrain  is  available,  areas  should  be 
chosen  to  match  the  scenario  conditions  (e.g.  steepness  of 
the slope, the presence of terrain traps, etc.).  However, the 
level of fidelity for equipment is under our control. As we 

to  describe 

882

SESSION: EDUCATION IN THE CLASSROOM AND BEYOND

in 

the 

to 

areas 

environment 

saw, signals from buried beacons are indistinguishable from 
real beacons, and we expect learners to bring in their own 
personal  equipment  including  their  personal  beacons.  This 
situation  might  be  similar  to  how  other  researchers  are 
aiming  at  training  with  new  wearable  technologies  where 
the environmental aspect cannot be adapted, but where the 
technology is “real” and not simulated (e.g. [9,22]). 
The  low  level  of  environmental  fidelity  can  be  partially 
remedied  by  manipulating  the  psychological  level  of 
fidelity,  i.e.,  the  ways  participants  construct  believable 
stories  for  themselves  about  the  rescue  situation.  This  is 
especially  important  for  practicing  team  collaboration  [3]. 
In  our  study,  this  was  done  by  constructing  scenarios  that 
included  a  story  of  how  the  avalanche  happened,  using 
buried  beacons  to  represent  victims,  and  by  visually 
marking 
simulate 
environmental  conditions  (e.g.,  bamboo  poles  indicating 
avalanche  boundaries).  We  saw  that  participants  were 
largely able to construct the story in their minds and reach a 
higher level of psychological fidelity. This strategy echoes 
what  Klann  describes  in  his  work  with  fire  fighters  [22], 
where he argues that it is through ‘playing out’ a scene that 
firemen  best  expressed  their  skills  and  experiences.  The 
novelty  of  each  scenario  added  to  their  believability  since 
others  created 
the  scenarios.  In  addition,  we  could 
manipulate  people’s  stress  (e.g.,  by  observing,  timing  and 
critiquing  people’s  rescue  performance),  which  proved 
effective in increasing the level of psychological fidelity. 
More  generally,  technological  training  grounds  should 
follow similar practices. When environmental high fidelity 
is  rarely  possible,  which  is  often  the  case  with  natural 
disasters  and  emergency  situations,  they  should  offer  a 
story  behind  each  scenario  (again,  through  on-site  posters 
and  visual  markers,  and/or  through  digital  media).  At  its 
best, the technological training ground should offer a ‘full 
mission’ context for practice (in the words of Beaubien and 
Baker  [3])  while  still  operating  within  the  constraints  of 
multiple ranges of fidelity.  
Balancing skill development and coordination training 
We  saw  a  large  number  of  participants  focus  on  learning 
individual  skills  at 
the  cost  of  communication  and 
coordination  training.  This  likely  occurs  because,  at  the 
surface  level,  the  beacon  park  emphasizes  the  technology 
itself (beacon search), whereas the need for communication 
and  coordination 
thus  easily 
overlooked.  This  very 
likely  happens  with  other 
technological training grounds, particularly in activities that 
require  a  personal  digital  device  while  in  a  group  setting 
(e.g. with wearable devices [9,22]). More specifically, there 
is  relatively  little  research  that  looks  at  how  non-experts 
familiarize  themselves  with  a  new  mobile  device  before 
focusing on communication and coordination.  
The  solution  is,  in  part,  to  make  communication  and 
coordination learning an explicit activity. Toups et al. [40] 
argued  for  focusing  solely  on  distributed  cognition  and 

tacit  and 

learning 

is 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

team  coordination 
training  for  firefighters,  both  for 
economical  and  focus  reasons.  They  proposed  a  ‘zero-
fidelity’ computational simulation that removes the realistic 
elements found in higher fidelity simulations to keep only 
the bare essentials for learning team coordination (such as 
eliminating fire and smoke visualizations but keeping time 
pressure for example). In outdoor physical training grounds, 
the simulation takes place in a real world setting and offers 
the opportunity to focus solely on the coordination practices 
if  desired.  The  scenarios  and 
learning  descriptions 
mentioned earlier should include these not only as goals to 
incrementally master, but should describe the steps on how 
to  achieve  them.  If  individuals  (rather  than  teams)  appear 
on  site,  the  usage  descriptions  of  the  area  should  highly 
encourage them to find other like-minded people to do the 
exercises together. Perhaps meeting times can be advertised 
as a way for ad hoc groups to gather opportunistically. This 
solution,  of  course,  will  show  better  results  if  participants 
are  familiar  with  the  technology  required  before  and  can 
focus  on  the  coordination  training  rather  than  mastering 
their own device.  
Supporting the community of practice 
As  we  have  presented  earlier,  we  see  backcountry 
recreationists as a community of practice. However, we also 
observed  that  learning  from  others  within  beacon  parks  is 
not as common as it could be. As with communication and 
coordination, this is also likely due to the emphasis on the 
technology,  which  seemingly 
individual  skill 
development  over  team  learning.  This  also  likely  occurs 
with other technological training grounds. 
A  partial  solution  is  to  recast  the  technological  training 
ground in a way that encourages mentorship and facilitation 
within the community of practice. Since the scenarios can 
be structured and ready to use, members of the community 
can go straight to the heart of the topic without spending a 
whole  day  preparing  the  site,  which  was  identified  as  a 
challenge  in  previous  research  on  avalanche  companion 
rescue  [10].  Importantly,  technological  training  grounds 
such as beacon parks can be designed as a common space 
where  members  of  the  community  can  group  and  build 
relationships 
create 
opportunities for more knowledge exchanges.  
For  example,  technological  training  grounds  could  be 
presented  and  advertised  as  an  area  inviting  people  with 
more skills to teach novices particular skills. For instance, 
when a person has mastered a particular scenario difficulty 
and skill, they could be encouraged to mentor others going 
through simpler scenarios. The payback is that people often 
gain even more mastery by teaching. In addition, a training 
ground can advertise particular times as a ‘meet and greet’ 
event  for  like-minded  people  to  learn,  socialize,  and  meet 
potential  activity  partners  (for  example  ski  partners  in  the 
case of the beacon park). Moreover, a training ground can 
leverage  existing  social  organizations,  such  as  clubs, 
schools  and  groups.  Communities  of  practice  often  have 

other,  which 

between 

favors 

each 

competition 

(e.g.,  mountain  bike 

structured  clubs  where  its  members  gladly  teach  others 
through courses, or act as facilitators to share their expertise 
and support discussion amongst all participants (similarly to 
the role our facilitator played on site). Finally, many high-
risk  communities  of  practice  encourage  skill  development 
through 
racing, 
competitive  rock  climbing).  The  training  ground  can  be 
offered  as  a  place  for  holding  competitions,  where  teams 
‘race’ against each other.  
Overall, we found that it is important to create opportunities 
for  recreationists  to  meet  with  others  and  to  exchange 
knowledge. The strategies proposed above can be applied in 
cases  where  unacquainted  people  engage  in  real  life 
exercises to train for a variety of situations. For example, in 
emergency response, teams of on-site workers or volunteers 
would  benefit  from  learning  from  each  other  as  part  of  a 
community  of  practice,  even  if  they  are  supported  by 
coordinators who are in a remote command center [9]. The 
ability 
team 
coordination and situational awareness and hence take away 
some of the strain on the link between the command center 
and the disaster scene.  

together  on  site  can 

to  work 

increase 

LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY 
The study we presented in this paper has some limitations 
(which we see as great starting points for future research). 
The  study  was  conducted  on  a  short  period  of  time  (4 
observation  days)  and  would  benefit  from  an  extended 
observation period to see if more practice patterns emerge 
and also to try other strategies in maintaining and designing 
the practice scenarios. On the positive side, the study results 
we  saw  are  very  much  in  keeping  with  our  own  previous 
experiences in beacon parks, where what we saw appears to 
be  a  representative  sample.  Of  course,  further  participants 
could  also  lead  to  a  more  detailed  understanding  of  the 
experience and nuances of using the beacon park. 
Our  results  are  qualitative,  where  they  helped  us  identify 
particular 
the  beacon  park 
training ground.  A next step is to collect performance data 
after  completing  various  learning  stages  to  evaluate  the 
efficiency  of 
in  making 
recreationists faster at companion rescue.  

learning  strategies  within 

strategies 

learning 

these 

team 

grounds 

training 
and 

can 
coordination 

CONCLUSION 
In  this  paper,  we  have  looked  at  the  specific  case  of 
avalanche beacon training parks as a way to illustrate how 
skill 
technological 
development 
for 
recreationists.  With  regards  to  the  design  of  technological 
training  grounds  beyond  avalanche  training  parks,  our 
findings  point  to  the  importance  of  progressive  scales  of 
difficulty;  the  management  of  different  levels  of  fidelity; 
the  balance  between 
team 
coordination  training;  and  strategies  for  supporting  a 
community of practice. These findings not only point to the 
future  design  of  technological  training  parks  for  multiple 

skill  development  and 

support 
training 

883

communities  of  practice,  but  also  build  on  and  expand 
beyond  previous  work  in  CSCW  about  team  training,  ad 
hoc and volunteer teams and emergency coordination.  
We reiterate that one of the distinctive aspects of this work 
is  our  focus  on  recreationists  ad  hoc  teams  rather  than 
professionals.  We  also  believe  our  findings  can  apply  to 
other  non-expert  teams  in  non-extreme  situations.  For 
example,  Dunlap  et.  al.  [15]  explored 
the  role  of 
technological  training  grounds  for  learning  by  citizen 
scientists  who  may  have  little  background  in  the  area. 
While  the  authors  initially  focused  on  skill  acquisition 
(which  also  involved  a  mobile  device),  feedback  from 
citizen  science  experts  suggested  that  they  should  also 
consider  citizen  science  as  a  community  of  practice,  i.e., 
where  citizen  scientists  should  be  expected  to  learn  and 
perform  the  activity  together,  including  self-coordination. 
While  their  context  and  methodology  differs  significantly 
from ours, the fact that their results are similar to our own 
suggests  that  these  results  are  likely  generalizable  to 
technological 
supporting  different 
communities of practice in a variety of domains.  

training  grounds 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We  thank  BCA  for  providing  the  beacon  park  equipment, 
Mount  Baker  Ski  Area,  and  all  our  participants.  This 
research  was  funded  in  part  by  SSHRC,  the  NSERC 
Discovery  Grant  and  by  the  NSERC  /  AITF  /  Smart 
Industrial Chair in Interactive Technologies. 

REFERENCES 
1.  Dale Atkins. 1999. Companion rescue and avalanche 

transceivers: the US experience. AAAP Avalanche 
Review. 

2.  Dale Atkins. 2010. Avalanche Rescue: The United 

3. 

States Experience, 1999/00 to 2008/09. 2010 
International Snow Science Workshop: 289–295. 
J. M. Beaubien and D. P. Baker. 2004. The use of 
simulation for training teamwork skills in health care: 
how low can you go? Quality and Safety in Health 
Care 13, suppl 1: i51–i56. 
http://doi.org/10.1136/qshc.2004.009845 

4.  Simon Bell. 2008. Design for Outdoor Recreation. 

Taylor & Francis. 

5.  Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using 

thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research 
in Psychology 3, 2: 77–101. 
http://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa 

6.  Ralf Buckley. 2012. Rush as a key motivation in 

skilled adventure tourism: Resolving the risk recreation 
paradox. Tourism Management 33, 4: 961–970. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.tourman.2011.10.002 

7.  Bill Buxton. 2007. Sketching User Experiences: 
Getting the Design Right and the Right Design. 
Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA. 

884

SESSION: EDUCATION IN THE CLASSROOM AND BEYOND

8. 

Janis A. Cannon-Bowers, Eduardo Salas, Elizabeth 
Blickensderfer, and Clint A. Bowers. 1998. The Impact 
of Cross-Training and Workload on Team Functioning: 
A Replication and Extension of Initial Findings. 
Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors 
and Ergonomics Society 40, 1: 92–101. 
http://doi.org/10.1518/001872098779480550 

9.  Daniel Cernea, Simone Mora, Alfredo Perez, et al. 

2012. Tangible and Wearable User Interfaces for 
Supporting Collaboration among Emergency Workers. 
In Collaboration and Technology, Valeria Herskovic, 
H. Ulrich Hoppe, Marc Jansen and Jürgen Ziegler 
(eds.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 192–199. Retrieved 
August 25, 2015 from 
http://link.springer.com.proxy.lib.sfu.ca/chapter/10.100
7/978-3-642-33284-5_18 

10.  Steve Christie. 2004. Transceiver Training Parks: 

Shortening the Beacon Learning Curve. Proceedings of 
the 2004 International Snow Science Workshop, 
Jackson Hole, Wyoming: 351–354. 

11.  Stéphane Conversy, Hélène Gaspard-Boulinc, Stéphane 

Chatty, Stéphane Valès, Carole Dupré, and Claire 
Ollagnon. 2011. Supporting Air Traffic Control 
Collaboration with a TableTop System. Proceedings of 
the ACM 2011 Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work, ACM, 425–434. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1958824.1958891 

12.  Tony Daffern. 2009. Backcountry Avalanche Safety: 

Skiers, Climbers, Boarders, Snowshoers. Rocky 
Mountain Books Ltd. 

13.  Audrey Desjardins, Carman Neustaedter, Saul 

Greenberg, and Ron Wakkary. 2014. Collaboration 
Surrounding Beacon Use During Companion 
Avalanche Rescue. Proceedings of the 17th ACM 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
& Social Computing, ACM, 877–887. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2531602.2531684 

14.  Alain Duclos and Thierry Vallée. 2013. New 

Technologies: What Roles in the Education and 
Training? Feedback and Examples. International Snow 
Science Workshop Grenoble – Chamonix Mont-Blanc - 
October 07-11, 2013: 453–455. 

15.  Matthew A. Dunlap, Anthony Hoi Tin Tang, and Saul 
Greenberg. 2015. Applying geocaching principles to 
site-based citizen science and eliciting reactions via a 
technology probe. Personal and Ubiquitous 
Computing: 1–17. http://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-015-
0837-0 

16.  Markus Falk, Hermann Brugger, and Liselotte Adler-

Kastner. 1994. Avalanche survival chances. 368, 6466: 
21–21. http://doi.org/10.1038/368021a0 

17.  Samer Faraj and Yan Xiao. 2006. Coordination in Fast-

Response Organizations. Management Science 52, 8: 
1155–1169. http://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1060.0526 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

18.  Manuel Genswein and Ragnhild Eide. 2008. The 
Efficiency of Companion Rescuers with Minimal 
Training. Proceedings Whistler 2008 International 
Snow Science Workshop September 21-27, 2008: 581. 

19.  Joseph M. Hellerstein and David L. Tennenhouse. 

2011. Searching for Jim Gray: A Technical Overview. 
Commun. ACM 54, 7: 77–87. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1965724.1965744 

20.  Sergio Herranz, Paloma Díaz, David Díez, and Ignacio 

Aedo. 2013. Studying Social Technologies and 
Communities of Volunteers in Emergency 
Management. Proceedings of the 6th International 
Conference on Communities and Technologies, ACM, 
140–148. http://doi.org/10.1145/2482991.2483009 
21.  Xiaodong Jiang, Nicholas Y. Chen, Jason I. Hong, 

Kevin Wang, Leila Takayama, and James A. Landay. 
2004. Siren: Context-aware Computing for 
Firefighting. In Pervasive Computing, Alois Ferscha 
and Friedemann Mattern (eds.). Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, 87–105. Retrieved February 18, 2013 from 
http://link.springer.com.proxy.lib.sfu.ca/chapter/10.100
7/978-3-540-24646-6_6 

22.  Markus Klann. 2007. Playing with Fire: User-Centered 

Design of Wearable Computing for Emergency 
Response. In Mobile Response, Jobst Löffler and 
Markus Klann (eds.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 116–
125. Retrieved August 31, 2015 from 
http://link.springer.com.proxy.lib.sfu.ca/chapter/10.100
7/978-3-540-75668-2_13 

23.  Jean Lave. 1991. Situating learning in communities of 
practice. In Perspectives on socially shared cognition 
2. 63–82. 

24.  Jean Lave and Etienne Wenger. 1991. Situated 
Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. 
Cambridge University Press. 

25.  Charlotte P. Lee and Drew Paine. 2015. From The 

Matrix to a Model of Coordinated Action (MoCA): A 
Conceptual Framework of and for CSCW. Proceedings 
of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work & Social Computing, ACM, 179–
194. http://doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675161 

26.  Conor Linehan, George Bellord, Ben Kirman, Zachary 
H. Morford, and Bryan Roche. 2014. Learning Curves: 
Analysing Pace and Challenge in Four Successful 
Puzzle Games. Proceedings of the First ACM SIGCHI 
Annual Symposium on Computer-human Interaction in 
Play, ACM, 181–190. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2658537.2658695 

27.  Conor Linehan, Shaun Lawson, Mark Doughty, and 
Ben Kirman. 2009. Developing a Serious Game to 
Evaluate and Train Group Decision Making Skills. 
Proceedings of the 13th International MindTrek 
Conference: Everyday Life in the Ubiquitous Era, 

885

ACM, 106–113. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1621841.1621861 

28.  Ke Liu, Xiaojun Shen, Nicolas D. Georganas, 

Abdulmotaleb El Saddik, and Azzedine Boukerche. 
2007. SimSITE: The HLA/RTI Based Emergency 
Preparedness and Response Training Simulation. 
Proceedings of the 11th IEEE International Symposium 
on Distributed Simulation and Real-Time Applications, 
IEEE Computer Society, 59–63. 
http://doi.org/10.1109/DS-RT.2007.40 

29.  Jean MacMillan, Elliot E. Entin, and Daniel Serfaty. 
2004. Communication overhead: The hidden cost of 
team cognition. Team cognition: Process and 
performance at the interand intra-individual level. 
American Psychological Association, Washington, DC. 
Available at http://www. aptima. 
com/publications/2004_MacMillan_EntinEE_Serfaty. 
pdf. Retrieved May 21, 2013 from 
http://www.aptima.biz/publications/2004_MacMillan_
EntinEE_Serfaty.pdf 

30.  Michelle A. Marks, Mark J. Sabella, C. Shawn Burke, 

and Stephen J. Zaccaro. 2002. The Impact of Cross-
Training on Team Effectiveness. Journal of Applied 
Psychology 87, 1: 3–13. 

31.  Janet Marsden. 2013. Stigmergic self-organization and 

the improvisation of Ushahidi. Cognitive Systems 
Research 21: 52–64. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogsys.2012.06.005 

32.  John E. Mathieu, Gerald F. Goodwin, Tonia S. Heffner, 

Eduardo Salas, and Janis A. Cannon-Bowers. 2000. 
The Influence of Shared Mental Models on Team 
Process and Performance. Journal of Applied 
Psychology 85, 2: 273–283. 

33.  Leysia Palen, Kenneth M. Anderson, Gloria Mark, et 
al. 2010. A Vision for Technology-mediated Support 
for Public Participation & Assistance in Mass 
Emergencies & Disasters. Proceedings of the 2010 
ACM-BCS Visions of Computer Science Conference, 
British Computer Society, 8:1–8:12. Retrieved July 6, 
2015 from 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1811182.1811194 

34.  Leysia Palen and Sophia B. Liu. 2007. Citizen 

Communications in Crisis: Anticipating a Future of 
ICT-supported Public Participation. Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, ACM, 727–736. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1240624.1240736 

35.  L. Reder and R. L. Klatzky. 1994. Transfer: Training 

for performance. In Learning, Remembering, 
Believing: Enhancing Human Performance. National 
Academies Press, 25–56. 

36.  Eduardo Salas, Nancy J. Cooke, and Michael A. Rosen. 

2008. On Teams, Teamwork, and Team Performance: 
Discoveries and Developments. Human Factors: The 

Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 
50, 3: 540–547. 
http://doi.org/10.1518/001872008X288457 

37.  Margrete Skår, Alf Odden, and Odd Inge Vistad. 2008. 

Motivation for mountain biking in Norway: Change 
and stability in late-modern outdoor recreation. Norsk 
Geografisk Tidsskrift - Norwegian Journal of 
Geography 62, 1: 36–45. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/00291950701865101 

38.  Gwyneth Sutherlin. 2013. A voice in the crowd: 

Broader implications for crowdsourcing translation 
during crisis. Journal of Information Science: 
0165551512471593. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/0165551512471593 

39.  Zachary O. Toups and Andruid Kerne. 2007. Implicit 

coordination in firefighting practice: design 
implications for teaching fire emergency responders. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, 707–716. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1240624.1240734 

 

SESSION: EDUCATION IN THE CLASSROOM AND BEYOND

40.  Zachary O. Toups, Andruid Kerne, William A. 

Hamilton, and Nabeel Shahzad. 2011. Zero-fidelity 
Simulation of Fire Emergency Response: Improving 
Team Coordination Learning. Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, ACM, 1959–1968. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979226 

41.  Bruce Tremper. 2013. Avalanche Essentials: A Step-
by-Step System for Safety and Survival. Mountaineers 
Books. 

42.  Catherine E. Volpe, Janis A. Cannon-Bowers, Eduardo 
Salas, and Paul E. Spector. 1996. The Impact of Cross-
Training on Team Functioning: An Empirical 
Investigation. Human Factors: The Journal of the 
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 38, 1: 87–100. 
http://doi.org/10.1518/001872096778940741 

43.  Etienne Wenger. 1999. Communities of practice: 

learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge. 

886

